THE CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF FLOWERY BRANCH, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2010 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FLOWERY BRANCH, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Diane Hirling 
Mayor 
____________ 
Tara Richards 
Mike Miller 
Kris Yardley 
Chris Fetterman 
Craig Lutz 
City Council 
____________ 
Bill Andrew 
City Manager 
____________ 
James Riker 
City Planner 
____________ 
Ron Bennett 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Melissa McCain 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the City Council through Ordinance No. 424, adopted August 19, 2009. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Jim Jenkins, Code Attorney, and Howard George, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Melissa McCain, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 2010. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 431 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CODE OF THE CITY OF FLOWERY BRANCH, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; PROVIDING FOR AN AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 20, BUSINESSES, ARTICLE III. REGISTRATIONAND OCCUPATIONAL TAX; PROVIDING FOR AN AMENDMENT TO CHAPTER 32, LAW ENFORCEMENT, ARTICLE II, POLICE DEPARTMENT; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FLOWERY BRANCH, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 50, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 19, 2009, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1000.00 or imprisonment for 6 months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now, or hereafter provided by law. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 19, 2009 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. There is added to the Code § 32-23 to be entitled "Positions of the department," which shall read as follows: 
The Police Department of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia is authorized to have the positions of employment as provided hereinafter in this section. The positions of employment of the Police Department of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia are as follows: 
(a)  Chief of Police. The Chief of Police for the Police Department of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia shall be responsible for administrating and supervising the Police Department and its police officers. The Police Chief's duties may be further defined by the City Manager. 
(b)  Officer Next in the Chain of Command. This officer shall be next in the chain of command of the Police Department of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia and shall perform the duties of the Chief of Police when the Chief of Police is unavailable for any reason or incapable for any reason of performing the Chief's duties. This officer shall hold the rank assigned to the officer by the Police Chief, in the Chief's discretion, and may be any rank including but not limited to Assistant Chief of Police, Police Captain, Police Lieutenant, or Police Sergeant. This officer shall also perform such administrative duties as assigned to him by the Chief of Police and/or the City Manager, or the Mayor, or the City Council (following the Chain of Command established by proper administrative policy), or any combination thereof. 
(c)  Police Officers. The Police Department of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia shall also have two or more police officers (the exact number of which shall be set by the City Manager (in consultation with the Police Chief) and who shall be held to the standards set forth in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-8, et seq. The police officer's general duties include: 
(1)  Acting to prevent, detect and investigate violations of the criminal laws of Georgia and violations of the ordinances of the City committed within the City and apprehend and arrest those persons who violate such criminal laws and ordinances; patrol the public roads and highways of the City, and to safeguard the lives and property of the citizens of the City; conduct accident investigation and traffic enforcement; to serve and execute warrants; to apprehend and arrest any person who is a fugitive from justice; and to suppress riots and maintain public order within the City; 
(2)  Acting as an active peace officer having the powers of arrest, and participating in the law enforcement duties required of police officers of the Police Department of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, including but not limited to the patrolling of the City, investigation of crimes, protection of the citizens and property of the City; interviewing of witnesses; participation in the prosecution of alleged perpetrators of criminal offenses; and the related duties of being an active peace officer held to the standards set forth in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-8, et seq.; 
(3)  Following policies set by the Police Chief and/or the City Manager regarding the administration of the Police Department. 
(4)  Any other law enforcement duty as set by the police chief and/or the City Manager. 
(d)  Other Personnel. The Police Department of the City of Flowery Branch shall have one or more civilian clerical/ support staff (the exact number of which shall be set by the City Manager in consultation with the police chief). Clerical/support staff shall follow policies set by the Police Chief and/or the City Manager regarding the administration of the Police Department. 
Section 8. Code § 20-57 (a)(1) is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
(a)  On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city: 
(1)  The occupation tax is due within 30 days of June 1 of each year or within 30 days following commencement of a new business whichever first occurs. 
Section 9. This ordinance shall become effective March 4, 2010. 
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 4th day of March, 2010. 
_____ Diane C. Hirling, Mayor 
ATTEST: 
_____ Melissa McCain, City Clerk 
Approved as to form: 
_____ E. Ronald Bennett, Jr., City Attorney 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
To create a new charter for the City of Flowery Branch; to repeal the existing charter of said city and all amendments thereto; to provide for corporate boundaries; to provide for officials, officers and employees of the city and their powers, duties and authority; to provide for elections; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the administrative affairs of the city; to create a mayor's court and provide for the jurisdiction, practice, procedure and personnel thereof; to provide for bonds; to provide for the sale of city property; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for the continuation of the present mayor and councilmen; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for severability; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
Be it enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Charter of the city, as adopted by 1979 Ga. Laws (Act No. 132), page 3404. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Any provisions regarding the title, publication date, approval date, notice to introduce legislation, and jurat have been omitted. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - CREATION, INCORPORATION, POWERS 

Sec. 1.1. - Name. 
This Act shall constitute the charter of the City of Flowery Branch. The city and the inhabitants thereof, are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style of City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1.2. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The corporate limits of the City of Flowery Branch shall be those existing on February 15, 2006, as further described by the following Hall County, Georgia Geographic Information System (GIS) parcel numbers: 
[List of Hall County, Georgia Geographic Information System (GIS) parcel numbers] 
(b)  The city council may provide for changes by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. 
(2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 486), § 1, p. 3669) 
Editor's note— The Hall County, Georgia Geographic Information System (GIS) parcel numbers referred to by this Act were omitted from this printing at the discretion of the editor, and may be found at 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 486), pp. 3669—3679 and the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1.3. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  The city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this State as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific enumeration or failure to enumerate particular powers shall not be construed as limiting or restricting the powers of the city. 
Sec. 1.4. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be executed in accordance with the provisions of this charter, ordinances of the city, and pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.1. - City council creation; composition; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five council members. The mayor and council members shall be elected in the manner provided by Article V of this charter. 
Sec. 2.2. - City council terms and qualification for office. 
No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or council member unless he shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council; each shall continue to reside therein during his period of service; and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the city. 
Sec. 2.3. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I. 
Sec. 2.4. - The mayor; powers and duties. 
The mayor shall be the chief elected officer of the city and as such shall have the following powers and duties: 
(a)  To preside at all meetings of the city council and be recognized as the official head and spokesperson of the city for service of process and ceremonial purposes; 
(b)  To vote on matters before the city council only in case of a tie, or if his or her vote is necessary to constitute a sufficient number to transact business; 
(c)  To sign, for and on behalf of the city, all contracts, ordinances, instruments, and other documents authorized by the city council and which are required to be in writing, unless otherwise directed or authorized by the city council; and 
(d)  To fulfill such other duties as authorized by the city council. 
(2005 Ga. Laws, p. 4274; 2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 489), § 1, p. 3684; Ord. No. 317, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2.5. - Mayor pro tem. 
At the organization meeting the city council shall elect by majority vote from among its members a mayor pro tem who shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon declaration by the city council of the mayor's disability or absence. 
Sec. 2.6. - Acting mayor. 
In the event of the absence, disability or disqualification of both the mayor and mayor pro tem, the remaining members of the city council shall elect an acting mayor from their number, to preside and who shall have all the powers of the mayor during the absence, disability or disqualification of the mayor and mayor pro tem. 
Sec. 2.7. - Salary, compensation and expenses. 
(a)  Compensation . 
(1)  The salary for Mayor of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia shall be set at $500.00 per month for each month of the calendar year that the Mayor serves. The salary for each Councilmember of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia shall be set at $400.00 per month for each month that the Councilmember serves. 
(2)  For attending each scheduled, special, called or a meeting officially representing the Flowery Branch City Council (except for meetings of the Flowery Branch City Council), the Mayor and each Councilmember shall receive as additional compensation $50.00 per diem, payable monthly, not to exceed five (5) meetings per month. 
(b)  The mayor and each member of the council shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the duties of their office. 
(c)  The mayor and council is hereby authorized to fix the salary, compensation and expenses of the mayor and each member of the council in accordance with the provisions of an Act known as "The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965," approved March 26, 1965 (Ga. Laws 1965, p. 298), as now or hereafter amended. 
(1995 Ga. Laws (Ex. Sess.), p. 372; Ord. No. 110, § 1, 4-3-1995; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 5-18-2013 ) 
Sec. 2.8. - Organization meeting. 
The city council shall meet for organization at the first regular meeting following each municipal general election. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor or council member as the case may be) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Sec. 2.9. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least forty-eight hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to council members shall not be required if the mayor and all council members are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or two council members and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services, or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within thirty days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least two council members shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed thirty days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this Section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this Section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
Sec. 2.10. - Rules of procedure. 
The city council shall adopt rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
Sec. 2.11. - Quorum; voting. 
The mayor, or the mayor pro tem, or the acting mayor, and three council members shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be taken by voice vote and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote. The affirmative vote of three council members shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
Sec. 2.12. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Flowery Branch hereby ordains . . ." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any council member and read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in Section 2.9(c). Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor and to each council member before the same is adopted and at the same time shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2.13. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
In addition to other acts required by general State law or by specific provisions of this charter to be done by ordinance, acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be done by ordinance. 
Sec. 2.14. - Codes of technical regulations. 
The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that (1) the requirements of Section 2.12(b) for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.15. 
Sec. 2.15. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as the "Code of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Sec. 2.16. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and, for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.1. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(b)  In addition to their elective duties, individual council members may be charged with such administrative duties as the city council may prescribe by ordinance or resolution, provided such duties do not conflict with general State law. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall fix the compensation of all appointed officers and directors of departments of the city. 
Sec. 3.2. - Boards, commissions, authorities. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter or general State law, the city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, authorities, and other bodies to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the council shall prescribe. The council shall prescribe the composition, period of existence, duties, powers, compensation, structure, and all other matters in connection with the operations of such boards, commissions and authorities. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.1. - Creation of mayor's court; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the "Mayor's Court of the City of Flowery Branch" [Municipal Court]. 
Sec. 4.2. - Mayor or mayor pro tem; court personnel. 
(a)  The mayor or mayor pro tem shall be authorized to hold mayor's court in said city for the trial and punishment of violators of the ordinances of said city. The mayor pro tem shall be authorized to act in the absence or in the event of the disqualification of the mayor. 
(b)  The city clerk shall perform the duties of clerk of the mayor's court, and, when required, the city attorney shall serve as prosecutor in said court. The city council shall provide by ordinance for such other personnel as may be required to efficiently administer the business of the court. 
Sec. 4.3. - Terms; jurisdictions; powers. 
(a)  The mayor's court shall convene at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  The mayor's court shall try and punish for violations of all city ordinances. 
(c)  The mayor's court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $25.00 or ten days in jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(d)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000 or imprisonment for 6 months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now, or hereafter provided by law. 
(e)  The mayor's court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of State law. 
(f)  The mayor's court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the mayor presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial the cash so deposited shall be on order of the mayor declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(g)  The mayor's court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a State law has been violated. 
(h)  The mayor's court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(i)  The mayor's court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by general State law. 
(j)  The mayor's court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the city granted by general State laws to mayor's, recorder's and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(1983 Ga. Laws (Act No. 48), § 1, p. 3693; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 9-3-2008) 
Sec. 4.4. - Appeal; certiorari. 
Any person convicted in recorder's court shall have the right to apply for a writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Hall County in accordance with the provisions of Code Title 19, relating to certiorari, as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 4.5. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the mayor shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the mayor's court; provided, however, the city council may adopt in part or in to the rules and regulations for procedure in the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in mayor's court proceedings at least forty-eight hours prior to said proceedings. 
Sec. 4.6. - Appointment of counsel for indigent. 
The city council shall provide by ordinance for appointment of counsel for indigents, or others, as now or hereafter required by law, and shall by such ordinance provide for compensation to be paid to counsel so appointed. The mayor shall appoint counsel in such cases from among the attorneys at law residing in the county and those counties adjoining the county, or from among those attorneys at law who have previously consented to serve as appointed counsel in such court. 
Sec. 4.7. - Appointment of judge of the mayor's court by mayor and council. 
The mayor and council may appoint an individual to serve as judge of the mayor's court and delegate to him all duties and authority of that office as provided in this Article. In the event of the appointment of a judge of the mayor's court, as provided herein, the compensation of such judge shall be as determined by the mayor and council. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.1. - Applicability of general law. 
[Section 5.1 has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. II, §§ I—III and the "Georgia Election Code" O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
Sec. 5.2. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
[Section 5.2 has been superseded and made obsolete by the provisions of Ga. Const. art. II, §§ I—III and the "Georgia Election Code" O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
(1980 Ga. Laws (Act No. 1032), § 1, p. 3646) 
Sec. 5.3. - Vacancies. 
In the event the office of mayor or of any one or more council members becomes vacant for any reason for cause, the council or those remaining shall call a special election, and the person so elected shall serve for the unexpired term and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
Sec. 5.4. - Removal of officers. 
The mayor, council members, or others provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)  incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)  conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(c)  failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(d)  knowingly violate any express prohibition of this charter; 
(e)  abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof which shall include repeated failure to regularly attend council meetings without cause; or 
(f)  failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by State law. 
Sec. 5.5. - Procedure for removal. 
Removal of an above described officer may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)  By the vote of two-thirds of the remaining council members after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the superior court of the county. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(b)  By information filed in the superior court of the county as provided by State law. 
Sec. 5.6. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall prescribe, by ordinance, such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia of 1933 (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 885) [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended. 
ARTICLE VI. - REVENUE AND FINANCE 

Sec. 6.1. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the State and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government; providing governmental services; for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations; and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6.2. - Millage rate, due dates, payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax; a due date; and in what length of time these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Sec. 6.3. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by general State law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to the extent such persons become lawfully taxable by the city. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.9. 
Sec. 6.4. - Franchises. 
The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of the city's streets and alleys, for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book to be kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6.5. - License; permits; fees. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in the city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general State law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and if unpaid shall be collected as provided in Section 6.9. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates. 
Sec. 6.6. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer, sanitary, health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.9. 
Sec. 6.7. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.9. 
Sec. 6.8. - Construction; other taxes. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by State law and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this Article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 6.9. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.1 through 6.8 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by general State law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi fas; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; allowing exceptions for hardship; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Sec. 6.10. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the State. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6.11. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as State law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6.12. - Short-term notes. 
The city must obtain and repay any short-term loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year or as is otherwise provided by present or future State law. 
Sec. 6.13. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned by the city for governmental or other purposes in accordance with the provisions of Code Section 69-318, relating to the sale of municipal property, as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon adoption of a resolution, finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under Code Title 36 [O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.], relating to eminent domain, as now or hereafter amended, or any other applicable laws presently in effect or enacted in the future. 
Sec. 7.2. - Official bonds. 
The officers and employees of the city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require or as may be required by State law. 
Sec. 7.3. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter, are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Sec. 7.4. - Present mayor and council. 
The mayor and councilmen in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue in office as mayor and council members under this Act until the expiration of their terms of office and the election and qualification of their successors as provided for in this Act. 
Sec. 7.5. - Severability. 
If any article, Section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, Section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
Sec. 7.6. - Specific repealer. 
An Act incorporating the Town of Flowery Branch (now City of Flowery Branch) in Hall County, Georgia, approved March 30, 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 1877), as amended by an Act approved March 3, 1962 (Ga. Laws 1962, p. 2960), an Act approved April 9, 1963 (Ga. Laws 1963, p. 3118) and an Act approved March 23, 1977 (Ga. Laws 1977, p. 3247), is hereby repealed in its entirety. 
Sec. 7.7. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE VIII. - APPOINTED OFFICERS 

Sec. 8.1. - City manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and is responsible for the implementation of all policies, programs, contracts, ordinances, and resolutions as approved and directed by the city council. 
(a)  The city manager shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council. 
(b)  The city manager shall satisfy all qualifications prescribed by the city council. 
(c)  No person holding an elective office in the City of Flowery Branch shall be eligible for appointment during the term of office for which he or she was elected or within three years after the expiration of his or her term of office. 
(d)  Whenever the office of city manager is vacant, an acting city manager may be appointed by majority vote of the city council. 
(e)  The city manager or acting city manager shall be an employee at will and may be removed by a majority vote of the city council. 
(f)  The city council shall fix the city manager's compensation. 
(g)  The city manager shall be responsible for: 
(1)  The management and coordination of the operations and activities of the various departments of the city; 
(2)  The appointment, discipline, and removal of department heads; 
(3)  The preparation of the proposed annual budget with the assistance of all department heads for the adoption by the city council; 
(4)  Keeping the city council fully advised at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city; 
(5)  Conducting studies and investigations and making reports thereon to the city council concerning the operations of the departments, offices, and agencies of the city; 
(6)  Requiring any department, board, commission, or agency under the city manager's supervision to submit written reports and to provide other information deemed necessary; 
(7)  Prescribing, requiring, publishing, and implementing standards of administrative management, and operating practices and procedures to be followed and adhered to by all offices, departments, boards, commissions, authorities, and other agencies of the city which are subject to the city manager's supervision; 
(8)  Acting as the purchasing agent of the city; and 
(9)  Such responsibilities as may be from time to time required by the city council which are not inconsistent with state laws, city ordinances, or this charter. 
(h)  Except for the purpose of inquiry and investigation, the mayor and council members shall deal with city employees who are subject to the supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager and shall not give orders or directions to any such employee, either publicly or privately, directly or indirectly. 
(2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 489), § 2, p. 3684) 
Sec. 8.2. - City clerk. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Keeping and preserving the city seal and all records of the operations and activities of the city; 
(2)  Attending meetings of the city council and preparing minutes of its proceedings at such meetings; 
(3)  Attesting the mayor's signature on deeds, contracts, agreements, ordinances, and resolutions; 
(4)  Preparing and certifying copies of official records in his or her office, for which fees may be prescribed by state law or city ordinance; 
(5)  Providing administrative support to the mayor, council members, and city manager; and 
(6)  Performing such other duties as may be directed by the city council. 
(2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 489), § 2, p. 3684) 
Sec. 8.3. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city attorney shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council. 
(b)  The city attorney shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing and shall satisfy any other qualifications prescribed by the city council. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the mayor, council members, other officers, and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney or as may be prescribed by the city council. 
(2006 Ga. Laws (Act No. 489), § 2, p. 3684) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipality to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Flowery Branch City Code." 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "the city" means the City of Flowery Branch in the County of Hall and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the mayor and city council members of Flowery Branch. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted, and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Hall, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the city council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Flowery Branch" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard, or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Hall County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Titles of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Flowery Branch" were added thereto. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code, printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances and resolutions not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or fixing the salaries, benefits, or policies and procedures for municipal officers or employees not otherwise enumerated in this Code; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation or budget ordinance; 
(8)  Any ordinance or resolution which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(9)  Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing zoning districts and/or zoning regulations; 
(11)  Any ordinance or resolution rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map; 
(12)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or designating historic districts and properties; 
(13)  Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(14)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or amending a comprehensive plan; 
(15)  Any ordinance or resolution describing or altering the boundaries of the city; 
(16)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(17)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code; 
(18)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; 
(19)  Any ordinance or regulation prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations concerning through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones not in conflict or inconsistent with this Code; 
(20)  Any ordinance or resolution of agreement with another political subdivision; 
(21)  Any ordinance or resolution establishing or imposing any municipal rates, charges or fees for the city that are not otherwise enumerated in this Code; or 
(22)  Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as continuing in effect: 
a.  That is temporary, although general in effect; 
b.  That is special, although permanent in effect; or 
c.  The purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(b)  No such ordinance or resolution shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of this Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in this Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into this Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - Rates, charges, and fees established. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided for, all rates, charges, or fees necessary for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this Code shall be as currently established or as hereafter adopted by resolution or ordinance of the city council, from time to time. Any rates, charges, or fees established by the city pursuant to the regulations or requirements established herein may be changed from time to time by the city council, and such changes shall both be considered an amendment to this Code. 
(b)  Whenever any provision of this Code provides that a rate, charge, or fee shall be established by the city council from time to time and the amount of such rate, charge, deposit, or fee is not expressed in this Code in any dollar amount, then the amount of such rate, charge, or fee shall be the most recent and latest amount established, set or fixed by the city council by ordinance, resolution or motion. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
Unless a higher penalty is otherwise specified, whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law; and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Maximum sentences and fines which may be imposed for violation of municipal ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY 

Sec. 2-19. - Regular meetings of the city council. 
The regular work session and voting session meetings of the city council shall be held at city hall at such time as established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 303-D, § 1, 2-20-2008) 
Sec. 2-20. - Public hearings. 
Public hearings before the city council shall be held at city hall at such times as established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 303-D, § 2, 2-20-2008) 
Secs. 2-21—2-43. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-44. - Intent. 
(a)  It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the city that: 
(1)  The members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; 
(2)  Public office not be used for private gain; and 
(3)  There be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. 
(b)  The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that it protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-45. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any councilmember and any member appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit which is not a remote interest held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided in this article; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 2, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-46. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his official position for his or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Use his official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
(7)  Use his position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
d.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(9)  Use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself or persons having an interest. 
(b)  The prohibition in subsection (a)(2) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
(4)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law. 
(c)  The prohibition in subsection (a)(5) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-47 are made to the board or commission chairperson 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 3, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-47. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he has at the time such matter is presented to the city council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he has an interest. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 4, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-48. - Disqualification. 
A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he has an interest when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 5, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-49. - Prohibited contracts. 
The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
(2)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
(3)  Contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6; 
(4)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
(5)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 6, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-50. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person who has been, within the preceding 12-month period, a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 7, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-51. - Complaints. 
Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor or, in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor or, in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall appoint three members of the city council who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided in section 2-52. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 8, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-52. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The composition of the board of ethics shall be as follows: 
(1)  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (a)(2) and (a)(3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
(2)  Each member of the city council shall designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of 12 individuals who have consented to serve as members of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years, to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
(3)  The city manager shall maintain a listing of these 12 qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the city council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairperson. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To hold a hearing within 60 days after the receipt of complaint; failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this article and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 9, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-53. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
The board of ethics as appointed as set forth in section 2-52 shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within 60 days after the filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the city council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 10, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-54. - Penalty; member rights. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 11, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 2-55. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. No. 318, § 12, 1-27-2005) 
Chapter 5 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1. 

Sec. 5-1. - Authority. 
Pursuant to the city's Charter section 1.3, the city has all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of the state. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3, the city is authorized to adopt reasonable ordinances, resolutions or regulations relating to its property, affairs and local government. In particular, the city is authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3 to enact ordinances which shall have the effect of restricting the operation of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses to areas zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, which is a proper exercise of the city's police powers. However, nothing in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3 shall be construed so as to prohibit the adoption by the city council of restrictions relating to the location of adult bookstores, explicit media outlets, and adult movie houses which are more stringent than the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 1, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-2. - Findings. 
(a)  Based on the experiences of other cities and counties, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas, and Garden Grove, California, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced in Flowery Branch, Georgia, and based on documentary evidence submitted to the city council, the city council takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within the United States of America. 
(b)  The city council also relies on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002); and Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, Florida, 490 F.3d 860 (2007), including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Adult entertainment establishments lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the operators of the establishments. Further, there is no mechanism other than the regulations in this chapter to make the owners of these establishments responsible for the activities that occur on their premises. 
(2)  Certain employees of adult entertainment establishments engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit sexual behavior than employees of other establishments. 
(3)  Sexual acts, including masturbation and oral and anal sex, occur at adult entertainment establishments, especially those which provide private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos, or live sex shows. 
(4)  Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(5)  Persons frequent certain adult entertainment establishments for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such adult entertainment establishments. 
(6)  At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in adult entertainment establishments, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, hepatitis non-A, hepatitis non-B, amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections. 
(7)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(8)  A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the adult entertainment establishment. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the operators to see that the adult entertainment establishment is run in a manner consistent with the health, safety, and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of the adult entertainment establishment, fully in possession and control of the premises and activities occurring therein. 
(9)  Requiring licensees of adult entertainment establishments to keep information regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or suspects and by preventing minors from working in such establishments. 
(10)  The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
(c)  It is the finding of the city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in establishments offering live nude entertainment or adult entertainment (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
(d)  Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are the depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of an expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this subsection. The city council finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city, as well. 
(e)  Furthermore, the city council finds that other forms of adult entertainment, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
(f)  The city council finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on the city are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells videotapes depicting sexual activities. 
(g)  The city council finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, churches, schools, residential areas, children's day care facilities and public parks to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the city council finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. Licensing is a legitimate and reasonable means of accountability to ensure that operators of adult entertainment establishments comply with reasonable regulations and to ensure that operators do not knowingly allow their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or solicitation. The city council finds that the regulations in this chapter promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including, but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions, and further finds and intends that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. 
(h)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable laws which provide any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated by this chapter shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his specified anatomical areas, as defined in this section. For purpose of this chapter, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or featuring of specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment. 
(1)  The term "adult entertainment establishment" shall be defined to include the following types of businesses: 
a.  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity, in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas; 
b.  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his specified anatomical areas or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities, as defined in this section; 
c.  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) of this definition; 
d.  Any commercial establishment having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space devoted to the sale of books, magazines or other periodicals, or other publications which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale of such material; 
e.  Any commercial establishment having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space devoted to the sale or rental of video tapes, movies or other reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or which derives five percent or more of its net sales and/or rental income from the sale and/or rental of such material; 
f.  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein; 
g.  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined in this section. 
(2)  The term "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances and showings. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency-operated, coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade videotapes, movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or for rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section comprising ten square feet or more devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives five percent or more of its net sales and/or rental income from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Children's day care facility means a structure or portion of a structure wherein care and supervision of children is provided away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. 
Good moral character means a person who within the past five years has not been convicted of, pled guilty to or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, any crime involving dishonesty or making a false statement, any sexual offense punishable as a misdemeanor, or any offense included in the definition of a criminal offense against a victim who is a minor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12. 
Minor means any person who is not at least 18 years old. 
Obscene means any material or performance which, after applying contemporary community standards, is found to predominantly appeal to prurient interest in sex, to be, as a whole, a depiction or description of sexual conduct which is patently offensive to the average person in the community and, when taken as a whole, is found to lack serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building, wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Public place of worship means any church, synagogue, mosque or other place of public religious worship. 
Religious institution means an incorporated or unincorporated organization organized and operated for religious purposes. 
School building means any building in which are taught subjects which are commonly taught in the schools and colleges in the state. This term applies to public and private school buildings. 
Specified anatomical areas means and includes the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship including sadomasochistic abuse, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 3, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-4. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, operate, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the corporate limits of the city, any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without first procuring an annual license to do so, except as provided in section 5-10 when the city clerk fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days as required by this chapter. 
(b)  No annual license issued hereunder shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the city, county, state or United States. 
(c)  No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell distilled spirits or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. 
(d)  There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the city clerk within ten days after the city clerk approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. 
(e)  All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(f)  Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. The city clerk shall renew a license for an adult entertainment establishment upon payment of the required renewal fee and confirmation that all requirements of this chapter continue to be met. Renewal applications shall be submitted to the city clerk by November 15 of each year. Any licensee submitting a renewal application after November 15 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application, and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, application fees as set forth in this chapter will be assessed. 
(g)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1 shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 4, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-5. - License transfer, sale or assignment. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 5, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-6. - Application for license. 
Any person or business entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk. Prior to or along with submitting such application, a nonrefundable regulatory fee of $500.00 shall be paid to the city clerk. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such fee has been paid. The person submitting the application shall also be required to pay occupational taxes in accordance with all applicable ordinances of the city at the time the application is granted or in accordance with said ordinances. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 6, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-7. - License application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator and the owner. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator and the owner. 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator and the owner, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application, and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator and the owner are at least 18 years of age. 
(5)  The operator's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator at least two by two inches taken within the last six months. 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator and the owner for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license or permit, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension. 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. The corporation applying for a license shall attach a copy of its articles of incorporation. The corporation applying for a license shall designate one of its officers to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(10)  If the application is made on behalf of a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address, dates of birth and percentage of ownership of each partner. If the application is made on behalf of a limited liability partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited liability partnership filed with the county clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, partnership or a limited liability company, the provisions of the subsections pertaining to corporations, partnerships and limited liability companies shall apply. The partnership, regardless of form, applying for a license shall designate one of its partners to act as its responsible managing partner. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  If the application is made on behalf of a limited liability company, the name of the company shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of organization, together with the place and date of organization and the names and addresses of each of its current members and their percentage of ownership. The company applying for a license shall designate one of its members to act as its responsible managing member. If one or more of the members of a company is a corporation, partnership or limited liability company, the provisions of the subsections pertaining to corporations, partnerships and limited liability companies shall apply. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(12)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf an application for a license is doing business under a trade name, the applicant shall attach a copy of the registration statement, verified by affidavit, filed with the county clerk. 
(13)  With respect to the applicant, operator, owner, officers, directors, partners and members, all convictions within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of his criminal records to the city. 
(14)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and operator. 
(15)  At least three objective character references for the applicant, operator, owner, officers, directors, partners and members from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant, operator, owner, officers, directors, partners and members and who will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The city shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(16)  Address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on. 
(17)  A statement as to whether the premises are owned or rented and if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, and copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
(18)  The name and address of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
(19)  Each application for a license hereunder for which there is no existing license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment then in effect shall include a copy of a plat by a registered engineer or registered surveyor showing the proposed location (property lines) and all real properties of the type for which distance limitations are specified by this chapter and which fall within said distance requirements, together with the zoning district classifications and present uses of all real property within 1,000 feet of the proposed property location. After issuance of any adult entertainment establishment license, no change in the property boundary of an adult entertainment establishment shall be made which would affect compliance with any distance requirement of this chapter. 
(20)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath of the licensee to be true and correct: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, by the individual; 
b.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
c.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
d.  If a company, by the managing member; or 
e.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 7, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-8. - Applicant to appear. 
The applicant shall personally appear before the city clerk and produce proof that the nonrefundable license application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in section 5-7. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 8, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-9. - Application and investigation. 
The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant. The city clerk shall stamp the date of actual receipt on each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The city clerk shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment license shall be granted if the city clerk finds: 
(1)  The required application fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application meets all the requirements contained in this chapter; 
(3)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  Neither the applicant, operator, owner, officers, directors nor members has been convicted of, pled guilty to or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, to any crime involving dishonesty or making a false statement, any sexual offense punishable as a misdemeanor or any offense included in the definition of a criminal offense against a victim who is a minor as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within the past five years; 
(5)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by any local government jurisdiction located in or out of the state prior to actual receipt of the application; 
(6)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable ordinances and/or laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(7)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(8)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator, as defined in section 5-3, on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(9)  The proposed location of the adult entertainment establishment will comply with the location restrictions set forth in section 5-11; 
(10)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any ordinance or regulation of the city, county, state or United States. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 9, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-10. - Denial. 
A license may be denied to persons that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of this chapter. Within 30 days of the actual receipt of a complete application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the city clerk shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the city clerk's decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the complete application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, the license application shall be deemed approved, and the expressive conduct may begin immediately, notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The city clerk shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the city clerk of the fact that a complete application has been submitted but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days from actual receipt and a complete application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this section shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations, the city clerk shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event the city clerk denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents pursuant to this chapter may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading, including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20 through 9-6-28, in the superior court of the county or any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 10, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-11. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within any zoning category other than manufacturing and industrial (M-1) and manufacturing and industrial (M-2) as established in article 9 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance and shown on the official zoning map; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land that falls within any of the following zoning districts established in Article 6 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance and the official zoning map of the city: R-1, R-2, and R-3; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a place of worship, school building, college campus, religious institution, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by a government, library, civic center, hospital, public park, or children's day care center is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined in this chapter is located. 
(b)  In determining the distance requirements provided for in this section, the measurement shall be by airline measurement along the shortest possible straight-line distance (i.e., as the crow flies) from the closest points from one property line to another property line regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 11, 12-18-2007; Ord. No. 450, § 2, 9-1-2011 ) 
Sec. 5-12. - Change of name, premises or location. 
(a)  No licensee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(b)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit unless application is made for a new license in accordance with the requirements of this chapter for the new location. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 12, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-13. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. The licensee shall maintain at all times with the city clerk a written record of the name, address and phone number of all operators. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 13, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-14. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. 
(b)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all employees. 
(c)  No employee shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 5-9(4) within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any employee who is convicted of any such crimes while employed shall not thereafter work on any premises requiring licenses under this chapter for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment, regardless of the location where the work is done or the services are performed. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, independent contractors shall be considered as employees, regardless of the business relationship with any adult entertainment establishment licensee. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 14, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-15. - Regulated activities. 
(a)  Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment shall be closed between 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. each day. 
(b)  Display of license. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this chapter. 
(c)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers within an adult entertainment establishment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(d)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. The term "fully lighted" shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(e)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment establishments licensed hereunder shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 15, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-16. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without a license. No person shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Employment of minors. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as an adult entertainer any person under 18 years old or who does not meet the requirements of section 5-14. 
(c)  Admission of minors. No person under 18 years old shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  Sales to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give to or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter. 
(e)  Contact between patrons and employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than six feet to any patron. No patron shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer, and no employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any patron. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(f)  Engaging in specified sexual activities. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity, as defined in section 5-3, on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(g)  Public indecency. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(h)  Alcoholic beverages. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage, malt beverage, wine, distilled spirits, or controlled substance or any combination thereof upon the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 16, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-17. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall: 
1.  Be separated from adjacent booths, rooms or cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall; 
2.  Have at least one side totally open to the public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
b.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
c.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 17, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-18. - Conditions of establishment. 
(a)  Licensed adult entertainment establishment premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the operator. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises, but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(b)  The city's police department and/or code enforcement officer shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 18, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-19. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence any action, proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in a manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 20, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-20. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
(1)  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
(2)  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this chapter; or 
(3)  With respect to the applicant, operator and owner, conviction or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license under section 5-9(4). 
(b)  Whenever the city clerk finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the city clerk shall schedule a hearing before the city council to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefor. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The city council shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
(c)  An appeal from the decision of the city council shall be as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 21, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 5-21. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any adult entertainment establishment license holder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized shall, after the said three-month period, automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 360, § 22, 12-18-2007) 
Chapter 8 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 504A , Exh. A, adopted May 18, 2017, amended Ch. 8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8, §§ 8-1—8-222, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 504, § 1 (Exh. A), 12-4-2014; Ord. No. 476A, § 1, 2-18-2016; Ord. No. 504A, 5-18-2017. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; authority to adopt rules and regulations relating to manufacture, sale and distribution of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-1. - Sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be manufactured or sold within the incorporated areas of the City of Flowery Branch under a license granted by the city council as governed by the terms and conditions hereafter provided. 
(b)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the City of Flowery Branch and State of Georgia law. 
(c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "THIS LICENSE IS A MERE PRIVILEGE SUBJECT TO BEING REVOKED AND ANNULLED AND IS SUBJECT TO ANY FUTURE ORDINANCES WHICH MAY BE ENACTED." 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued hereunder shall apply for and obtain any necessary alcoholic beverage license from the State of Georgia before any manufacture or sales commence. 
(e)  In addition to the rules and regulations set out in this chapter, each licensee under this chapter shall comply with all statutory laws of the State of Georgia, all federal statutory laws, and all rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the manufacture and sale of malt beverages, distilled spirits and/or wine in Georgia; and any violation of same shall subject said licensee to suspension or revocation of his license and also may subject said licensee to criminal prosecution by the proper authority as provided by law and the ordinances of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
The definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 ("Alcoholic Beverages—General Provisions—Definitions"), shall be effective as definitions of the words, terms and phrases used in this chapter. All words, terms and phrases used herein, other than those specifically defined elsewhere in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, and shall have the same scope and effect that the same words, terms and phrases have where used in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Agent means the person designated by the licensee in his application for permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Amenity permit means an authorization granted by the city for a non-eating establishment to offer alcoholic beverages as an act of hospitality, where it is clearly a secondary function of the business. 
Authorized catered function means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this section. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brew pub means an eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. 
Building code means and includes all building, plumbing and electrical codes and any other similar technical code of the city. 
City clerk means the clerk of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia or his designee. 
Church means any permanent, primary building set apart for the regular assembly of religious worship. 
College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Distance means the measurement in linear feet from the front entrance of the proposed structure to the nearest structural wall of the private residence, church, school college classroom or alcohol treatment center along the nearest practical street route. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wine and including all porter, brown, stout, lager beer, shall beer and strong beer. 
Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen, prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of distilled spirits. 
Election day means that period of time beginning with the opening of polls and ending with the closing of polls. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. 
Gender, for convenience in construction, the masculine pronouns "he" or "his" may be sometimes used; however, such usage shall, where appropriate, imply the feminine gender and may be construed as "she," "hers" or any other feminine usage as may be necessary. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Flowery Branch. 
Growler means a bottle made of glass or other material customary to the industry provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with a screw cap and then sealed with a plastic collar over the screw for the purpose of complying with open container laws. 
Hotel or motel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guest whether transient permanent or residential. Hotels and motels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant in their premises and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel thereunder. 
Indoor commercial recreational establishment is limited to an establishment regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen, prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least 70 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and recreation activities; and wherein the sale of food and alcoholic beverages is incidental to its primary enterprise and activity on the premises. The primary activity on the premises of the indoor commercial recreational establishment shall be family-oriented in nature, generally meaning a use that attracts a range of individuals from all age groups. Uses may specifically include, but are not limited to, dinner theaters, bowling centers, and other similar uses. Outdoor commercial recreation is not included, nor shall concession sales of alcoholic beverages be permitted in an outdoor commercial recreational establishment. Bingo parlors, dance halls, nightclubs, taverns, billiard parlors, video arcades, adult entertainment and/or sexually related entertainment activities, and similar uses are specifically excluded from this definition of indoor commercial recreational establishments. 
License means the authorization by the city to engage in the service or sale of alcoholic beverages as described in this chapter. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or in the case of a partnership, corporation or limited liability company, all partners, officers, directors and members of said partnership, corporation or company. 
Liter means a metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant as defined herein with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 20. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. Manufacturer also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits; and 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
Minor means any person below the age at which alcoholic beverages may be legally purchased in Georgia. 
Package means any bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. Retail package alcoholic beverages shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private or quasi-public. 
Pouring permit means an authorization granted by the city to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages in establishments licensed as a retail consumption dealer. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purposes of operating under the license; except that in the case of hotels and motels, "premises" shall include only the portion of the property where alcoholic beverages are sold; except further, that in the case of private clubs, "premises" shall include any swimming pool which is in the immediate vicinity of the main building of the private club and which is open to members only and their guests and not the general public. Said swimming pool must have a minimum of 2,500 square feet of water surface and with required lifeguards. Premises is further defined as one physically identifiable place of business consisting of one room, or two or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name, ownership, or management; provided nothing herein shall require additional licenses for service bars, or portable bars used exclusively for the purpose of mixing or preparing drinks when such bars are accessible only to employees of the licensed establishment and from which drinks are prepared to be served in the licensed premises. 
Private club means any non-profit association organized under the laws of the State of Georgia complying with Internal Revenue Code section 501; and 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to its filing of an application for a license to be issued according to this article; 
(2)  Has a least 75 regular dues paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building is equipped with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guest; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than three families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, a boarding house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, or any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of an application. 
Registered agent means a natural person residing in the City of Flowery Branch or Hall County who is empowered to act for and represent the licensee in all matters with the City of Flowery Branch relating to an establishment licensed or making application for a license to sell alcohol upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article may be served. The registered agent may be the licensee if the qualifications set forth in this chapter are met. 
Residence means the act or fact of living or regularly staying at or in some place for the discharge of a duty or the enjoyment of a benefit or the place where one actually lives as distinguished from his domicile or place of temporary sojourn. 
Resident means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of Hall County, Georgia. 
Restaurant shall mean any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment, air conditioned, with employees there in a sufficient number and kind to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests. At least one meal per day shall be served at least six days per week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of remodeling and the serving of meals shall be the principal business conducted (deriving at least 40 percent of its annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food), with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall provide at least 55 seats for customers. 
Retail means retail sales packaged to go and not for consumption on the premises. 
School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools of this state and shall not include private schools providing primarily daycare or where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverage, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-3. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, may upon conviction, be punished as set forth in section 1-12, unless a different penalty is set forth in this chapter. No such penalty shall prevent the city from suspending or revoking any license issued under this chapter, and any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter may, in addition to the other penalties and liabilities provided for herein, have his license or permit revoked as provided for herein. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-4—8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-21. - Unauthorized sale or delivery prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to serve, manufacture, sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverages where the person does not have a license or permit from the city to serve, manufacture, sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or to manufacture, sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-22. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  No person, knowingly and intentionally, may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds or college campus; 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus or college campus; 
(3)  Any alcoholic beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the State of Georgia or any county or municipal government therein; 
(4)  Any alcoholic beverages within 100 yards of any housing authority property. 
(b)  As used in this section, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the State of Georgia and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by the Housing Authorities Law of the State of Georgia. 
(d)  No person, knowingly and intentionally, may sell or offer to sell any packaged distilled spirits within a distance of 2,600 feet of any business licensed to sell package distilled spirits unless other such business is a hotel. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the front door of the church building, or to the nearest portion of the school grounds, whichever is applicable. 
(f)  No location which is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be denied continued operation under an existing license, or denied any renewal of such license, nor shall any new owner of said location be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. 
(g)  As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements herein are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and operation of a church or school within the distance prohibited herein shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. However, notwithstanding any other provisions of this section and chapter, said use shall not be reestablished after discontinuance of 12 months, unless it shall meet the requirements of subsection (a). 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-23. - Separate license. 
A separate application must be made for each license location sought by the applicant. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-24. - Application for new license in existing license location. 
An application for a new license in an existing license location shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this chapter for granting of a new license. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-25—8-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPLICATION 

Sec. 8-41. - Contents; guidelines. 
(a)  All persons desiring to serve, manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on a form prescribed by the city clerk. 
(b)  In the case of a limited liability company, the applicant(s) shall be the member(s) who own(s) at least 20 percent of the company or if no member owns 20 percent of the company, then the managing member or the member with the greatest ownership shall be the applicant. 
(c)  In the case of a partnership, the applicant(s) shall be the partner(s) who own at least 20 percent of the partnership or if no partner owns 20 percent of the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership shall be the applicant. 
(d)  In the case of a corporation, the manager of the proposed licensed premises shall be the applicant. 
(e)  The application shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, address and length of residency of the applicant; 
(2)  The proposed business to be carried on; 
(3)  If a limited liability company, the name and address of the member(s) and the name and address of any person owning 20 percent of the company; if no member of the company owns 20 percent, the name and address of the member with the greatest ownership; 
(4)  If a partnership, the name and address of the partners and the name and address of any person owning 20 percent of the partnership; if no partner owns 20 percent, then the partner with the greatest ownership; 
(5)  If a corporation, the name and address of the manager(s), and the name of all shareholders holding more than 20 percent of any class of corporate stock; 
(6)  The name and address of the registered agent; 
(7)  The name and address of the manager; 
(8)  A statement of the applicant's financial condition; 
(9)  Evidence of ownership of the building, a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building, a copy of a purchase contract if the applicant is in the process of purchasing the building, or a copy of a contract demonstrating the applicant has exclusive control over the premises from which the alcoholic beverages will be manufactured or sold; and 
(10)  Detailed plans of the building and outside premises where the business will be located. 
(f)  All applicants shall furnish such additional data, fingerprints, financial responsibility, survey, survey affidavit, scaled drawings, business records and other information as required by the city clerk or his designee, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any other provisions of state or local law. Fingerprinting required hereunder shall be by a participating Georgia Application Processing Service, which shall forward said fingerprints to the GBI/GCIC or any other designated agent of the city for a background check to be performed. Surveys or survey affidavits must be prepared by a registered land surveyor. Failure to furnish any of the information as requested hereunder shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(g)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial, suspension or revocation of such license. 
(h)  All applications shall be accompanied either by lawful money of the U.S., or by a certified check or cashier's check, payable to the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, for the proper amount of the license fee. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-42. - Notice of intention to secure a retail dealer license. 
(a)  No application for a retail dealer license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be acted upon until after the applicant has published in the newspaper which publishes the legal advertisements for the city a notice of his intention to secure a retail dealer license. Such notice shall be published at least once during the 30 days immediately preceding the application for a license. Such notice shall be in large bold face type and state: 
(1)  The type of license for which application has been filed; 
(2)  The exact location of the place of business for which a license is sought; 
(3)  The names and addresses of each owner of the business; 
(4)  If the applicant is a company, the names and titles of all members; 
(5)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and titles of all partners; and 
(6)  If the applicant, member or partner is a corporation, the names and titles of all corporate officers. 
(b)  Proof of publication of the notice required by this section shall be attached to an application for a license for a retail dealer license. 
(c)  An applicant for a renewal license shall not be subject to the notice requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-43. - Withdrawal of application; partial refund. 
Any application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the applicant withdraws the application before a license is issued, 95 percent of the license fees deposited will be refunded. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-44. - Denial. 
(a)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this chapter. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  In all instances in which an application has been denied, the applicant will be refunded 95 percent of the license fees deposited. 
(c)  Any applicant denied a license shall be prohibited from applying for another license for a period of one year from the filing date set forth on the application. Any partnership, limited liability company, corporation, trust or other entity in which an individual applicant is a member, shareholder, director or officer, or in which such entity acts as a surrogate for such applicant, shall also be subject to the prohibition contained in this subsection. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-45—8-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LICENSING QUALIFICATIONS 

Sec. 8-51. - Age, citizenship and residency requirements. 
No license to serve, manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person, partnership or limited liability company unless the person or all partners or members shall be at least 21 years of age, a resident of the United States or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence, and a resident of the State of Georgia. In the event a corporation should be an applicant, said corporation shall be a Georgia corporation or registered to do business in the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-52. - Limited liability company, partnership or corporation. 
(a)  If the applicant is a limited liability company, partnership or corporation, the provisions of this division shall be applicable to all its members, partners, officers, and majority stockholders. The city clerk may decline to issue a business license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of the place of business or control over the place of business does not meet the same character requirements set forth in this article. 
(b)  In the case of a limited liability company, the license will be issued to all members owning at least 20 percent of the company or if no member owns 20 percent of the company, then the managing member or the member with the greatest ownership will be licensed. 
(c)  In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to all partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership or if no partner owns 20 percent of the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. 
(d)  In the case of a corporation, the manager of the proposed licensed premises must be qualified to obtain a license and must make a sworn statement of these qualifications. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-53. - Prohibited interests. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold an alcoholic beverage license who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic beverage license to accept or receive financial aid or assistance from the holder of any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's or wholesale dealer's license. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-54. - Prior criminal record. 
(a)  No person, limited liability company, partnership or corporation shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the city clerk that such person, members, partners, or officers and directors of the corporation have not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere, and have been released from parole or probation, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, driving while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs within a period of five years immediately prior to such application, any tax law violation, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. At the time an application is submitted for any alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that the applicant, nor any of the other owners of the establishment, have been convicted or has pleaded guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere and have been released from parole or probation to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, driving while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs within a period of five years immediately prior to such application, any tax law violation, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. Should any applicant, member, partner, or officer instrumental in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverage, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, driving while under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs within a period of five years immediately prior to such application, any tax law violation, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime, the license shall be immediately revoked and cancelled. 
(b)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-55. - Previous revocation or denial. 
Each applicant shall not have had a license to sell alcoholic beverages revoked by any jurisdiction for violation of its laws or its rules within a period of five years immediately preceding the filing of such application. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-56. - Adequate participation. 
A license may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-57. - Character; reputation. 
All applicants for any alcoholic beverage license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks or other employees shall be of like character. Limited liability company, partnership or corporate applicants shall be of good business reputation. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-58. - Full disclosure of participation. 
(a)  No person shall have, own or enjoy any ownership, interest in, share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the business of any alcoholic beverage licensee in the city unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished the city clerk at the time such interest arose. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the city clerk, within five days, any change in any interest in such licensee's business including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Any division of the profits; 
(2)  Any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
(3)  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
(4)  Any change in the ownership of any lease of building or land used in such business; 
(5)  Any change in the ownership of any limited liability company, partnership, or corporation that has any interest in such business or the change of management of such limited liability company, partnership or corporation. 
(b)  After receipt of such notice, the city clerk shall notify such person within a reasonable time of any objection to the ownership or interest set forth therein, and it shall then be incumbent upon such person to dispose of such interest within 30 days after the mailing of the notice to do so by the city clerk to such person at his address as shown on such notice of interest. 
(c)  The report required by this section shall be in a form required by the city and shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application on file with the city and as such shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-59. - Payment of taxes and other debts to the city. 
No license shall be issued to any person, limited liability company, partnership or corporation that owes any tax, fee, assessment, charge or other such monies to the city until all such monies are paid in full. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-60. - Completed building. 
No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is completed and an occupancy permit for this premise to be licensed has been issued by the city. The completed building and land use shall comply with the Code of the City of Flowery Branch, the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Subdivision Ordinance, and the regulations of the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-61. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
If the building in which an applicant for a license proposes to operate under the provisions of this chapter is not, at the time of application for the license, in existence, or not yet completed, a license may be issued for the location provided the plans and specifications for the proposed building are filed with the city clerk, and show clearly a compliance with the provisions of this article and other applicable provisions of this code. No sales of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed in the establishment until the building has been completed in accordance with the plans and specifications and in conformity with all other provisions of this code, as well as appropriate building codes, and a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the building. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-62. - License fees. 
(a)  Before a license shall be issued, each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the scale fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Any person who is doing business or begins to do business at any time after the first day of January and before the first day of April shall pay the full license fee. Any person who begins to do business on or after the first day of April and before the first day of July will pay three-quarters of the license fee. Any person who begins business on or after the first day of July and before the first day of October shall pay one-half the license fee. Any person who begins doing business the first day of October and before the first day of the year shall pay one quarter of the license fee. 
(c)  No license fee or any portion thereof will be refunded after a license has been issued. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-63—8-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LICENSE 

Sec. 8-81. - License to be exhibited. 
The city issued alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view, to the public, at the place of business for which the same was issued. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-82. - Posting of signs. 
All holders of a city issued alcoholic beverage license shall post signs in a conspicuous location in their place of business which read as follows: 
"It is against the law for a person under the age of 21 to have in his or her possession or under his or her control any alcoholic beverage. It is also a violation of the law for such a person to misrepresent his or her age in any manner for the purpose of obtaining any alcoholic beverages. Any person who conspires, aids, abets or assists any other person under the age of 21 to obtain an alcoholic beverage shall be guilty of violating these provisions." (O.C.G.A., § 3-3-24.2) 
"Warning: Drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy can cause birth defects." 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-83. - Transferability. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license may be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of any person owning a license, the license may be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if such heirs make application and meet all of the other qualifications contained in this chapter. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete execution of the estate and dispose of the license or interest therein, but in no event beyond the expiration of the license, unless renewed in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  In the event of the bankruptcy or in the event that any applicant shall have a receiver appointed by any court of competent jurisdiction, such license shall be transferable to such receiver or trustee in bankruptcy for such period of time as may be granted by the city clerk for the proper liquidation of such assets and stock and goods of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the members of a limited liability company or the partners of a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the limited liability company or partnership and to assign his interest in such limited liability company or partnership to one or more of the members or partners who were members or partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the limited liability company or partnership. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock to persons who held more than ten percent of any class of stock in the corporate ownership at the time of issuance of the license. 
(f)  A change of location with no change in ownership shall be allowed for any license under this article provided the licensee files with the city clerk the following information on the new location: 
(1)  Proof of planning and zoning compliance; 
(2)  Proof of building code compliance; 
(3)  A legal description of the property upon which the new premises is located; 
(4)  An affidavit from a registered surveyor stating that the establishment complies with any distance or location requirements contained in this chapter; and 
(5)  Proof or ownership, or control, of the premises of the new location in accordance with this chapter. 
(g)  Should a transfer of location be approved the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(h)  Any change of location allowed under this section may be denied or revoked on the same basis as for an application for license. 
(i)  In the event of the total sale of a business which holds a valid license pursuant to this chapter, the purchaser of said business may continue to operate said business pursuant to this article so long as the purchaser completes the application process described herein prior to assuming responsibility for operating said business. No additional licensing fee shall be due from purchaser until the expiration of the license in existence at the time of the sale of said business. 
(j)  At the time a transfer application is filed, a transfer fee shall be paid in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-84. - Term; renewal. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. 
(b)  No licensee shall have any vested right to renewal of any city issued license. A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must submit to the city clerk a complete renewal application for such year on or before December 1 of the preceding year. 
(c)  All applications for the renewal of licenses shall be treated as applications for new licenses, except that applicants for a retail dealer license for the sale of distilled spirits need not publish notice of intent. 
(d)  All applicants who fail to submit an application for renewal as required by this section must pay a penalty equal to ten percent of all license fees prior to the issuance of a renewed license. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-85. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  Failure to open for business within six months immediately following the issuance of an alcoholic beverage license shall result in the automatic forfeiture of the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(b)  Failure to operate the business authorized by a license under this chapter for a period of three consecutive months after the business has begun operating, shall result in the automatic forfeiture of the license without the necessity of any further action. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-86. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Whenever the state revokes any permit or license to manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages, the city issued license shall thereupon be immediately revoked. 
(b)  The city clerk shall revoke any license where: 
(1)  Any licensed establishment is in violation of section 8-115 of this code; 
(2)  The license of any licensee has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive 12-month period; 
(3)  Alcoholic beverages have been manufactured, sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(c)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke any license where: 
(1)  The licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information on the license application; 
(2)  The licensee fails to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  The city clerk learns the licensee did not meet or no longer meets the licensing qualifications; 
(4)  Any act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the licensed establishment, agent or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or any provision of this chapter regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; 
(5)  The licensee no longer maintains adequate financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(6)  The licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city. 
(d)  Whenever the city clerk is granted discretion to suspend or revoke a city issued license, he shall exercise such discretion within the following guidelines: 
(1)  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license. 
(2)  The following factors shall be considered regarding any suspension or revocation: 
a.  Consistency of penalties; 
b.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing; 
c.  Impact of the offense on the public welfare, safety, health; 
d.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by the licensee; and 
e.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
(e)  When a license is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of any business tax or license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. 
(f)  When a license is revoked, the former licensee is not permitted to make application for a new license under this chapter for one year after the date of revocation. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-87. - Hearing. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter provided. This section does not apply to employee pouring permits. 
(b)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to any applicant or licensee of his decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial, suspension or revocation, and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision of the city clerk may have a review thereof by appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the decision of the city clerk. 
(c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 30 days of the date of filing with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(d)  Within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the city clerk shall notify the appellant in writing of the city council's decision with the reasons therefore stated. 
(e)  The decision of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of said decision by certiorari the Hall County Superior Court. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-88—8-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-101. - Copy of ordinance. 
The holder of every alcoholic beverage license hereunder shall have available in his place of business at all times a copy of this article and shall be responsible for compliance herewith by persons on the premises. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-102. - Registered agent. 
All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Hall County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter may be served. This person must be a resident of Hall County. The licensee shall file such forms as required by the city clerk to provide the name and address of the registered agent and consent of such agent to serve in said capacity. The registered agent shall submit a release permitting the Flowery Branch Police Department to perform an investigation to verify his residency. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-103. - Service of notice generally. 
For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered three days after the date of deposit to the United States Post Office by certified mail. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-104. - Lighting. 
Each building in which the business is to be located shall contained sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all time form the front on the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside of the premises of the building. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-105. - Management and operation. 
The licensee shall be responsible for the management and operation of the business for which the license is granted and shall be responsible for all violations of this chapter by the licensee's agents and employees. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-106. - Advertising. 
All advertising for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises is hereby prohibited except as provided for in the following: 
(1)  Licensees shall not advertise, directly or indirectly, the sale of alcoholic beverages other than in the principal building for which the license is issued, on a website owned by the licensee or on a social media account owned by the licensee. Advertising displayed within the principal buildings shall not be displayed within view of the general public from the doors or windows of such principal building. 
(2)  Wholesale and consumption on the premises licensees shall be permitted to advertise by means of radio, T.V. or newspaper provided that prices and brand names of alcoholic beverages shall not be used. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, no trade name, corporate name, or name of a business shall be allowed to use the words "Beer," "Wine," or "Beer and Wine" in such name. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-107. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. 
(b)  The city clerk or his designee may request, from time to time, information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(c)  Amenity permits are exempt from this section. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-108. - Inventory of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverages shall be stored only on the premises for which the license is issued. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation not holding an alcoholic beverage license granted by the city to store any alcoholic beverages on the grounds of any retail establishment excluding alcoholic beverages for personal consumption in accordance with all applicable provisions of law. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-109. - Adding to containers prohibited. 
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage container or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-110. - Malt beverage and wine tastings. 
(a)  An ancillary license is required for any malt beverage or wine tasting where samples are offered to the public as a promotion for the sale of malt beverage or wine at retail for consumption on the premises or in closed packages for consumption off the premises. 
(b)  A request by a licensee to conduct a malt beverage or wine tasting may be approved by the city manager when such request is made in writing on an application furnished by city clerk at least ten days prior to the event and under the following conditions: 
(1)  A malt beverage or wine tasting must comply with all local and state laws and regulations pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state and the city; 
(2)  All malt beverages or wines secured for a wine tasting must be obtained through a wholesale dealer or brew pub possessing a valid current license to distribute malt beverage or wine issued by the city; 
(3)  Samples shall not exceed six ounces nor shall any individual be offered more than four samples within a calendar day; 
(4)  A bona fide nonprofit charitable or civic organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 3-9-3, 3-9-4, and 3-9-5 and must make application at least ten business days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the city clerk; the city manager may waive a portion of such waiting period and/or permit fee upon good cause being shown; 
(5)  A for-profit organization that seeks to conduct a malt beverage tasting and is not licensed shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-20 and must make application ten business days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the city clerk; 
(6)  A for-profit organization that seeks to conduct a wine tasting and is not licensed shall comply with all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-20 and must make application ten business days prior to the proposed event on forms supplied by the city clerk; 
(7)  A nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council will be charged for the processing of an application for a malt beverage or wine tasting. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-111. - Minors; exemptions. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly, directly or through another person, furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any minor. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any minor to purchase or knowingly possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining illegally any alcoholic beverage. 
(e)  The prohibition contained in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverages is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, or driver's license. "Proper identification" shall not include any traffic citation, complaint form, birth certificate, or Social Security card. 
(f)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and to be furnished with proper identification as provided for in subsection (e) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so knowingly. 
(g)  Any attempt to commit any act made unlawful by this section shall be itself unlawful and subject to punishment in the municipal court. 
(h)  Violation of any provisions of this section shall constitute an offense hereunder and shall be punishable in the municipal court; provided, violation of this section by persons who have not yet reached the age of 17 years shall be handled as provided by the juvenile court system. 
(i)  The sale, purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption to minors shall be allowed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the home with parental consent. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-112. - Employment of minors. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit any minor from: 
(1)  Dispensing, serving, selling or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
(2)  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; 
(3)  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment; or 
(4)  Purchasing, drinking or possessing any alcoholic or malt beverage or wine if such person is at the time acting for and on behalf of law enforcement agencies conducting bona fide investigations of license holders and/or their employees. 
(b)  Except, no person shall allow or require a person in their employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenient stores, breweries, manufacturing facilities or drug stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off premises. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-113. - Prohibited sales. 
(a)  No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any malt beverage and/or wine to any person who is confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional facility, prison camp, penitentiary or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or the agent or employee. 
(b)  No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall sell any alcoholic beverage through or by means of a drive-in window. 
(c)  No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages by use of vending machines. 
(d)  No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall sell, offer for sale possess or permit the consumption on the licensed premises of any kind of alcoholic beverages the sale, possession or consumption of which is not authorized under his license. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the drink beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply to the consumption hereunder by the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-114. - Consumption in public; possession or consumption on city property; exemption. 
(a)  No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage from any open container while in or upon any area open to the public, whether public or private. 
(b)  This section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  The city manager, or his designee, may allow consumption of alcoholic beverages during special events that are open to the public or are on city property by approval of a written application made to the city manager or his designee upon forms provided by the city under the following conditions: 
a.  One drink limit . No person shall hold in his possession more than one alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup. 
b.  Size limited to 16 fluid ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispenses shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in his possession any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
c.  Drinking from a can, bottle or glass is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle or glass vessel or to possess in an open can, bottle or glass vessel any alcoholic beverage. 
d.  All alcoholic beverages shall only be served by a licensed caterer or eating establishment. 
(2)  For a downtown dining district, as defined by this chapter: 
a.  For the purposes of this chapter only, a downtown dining district is defined as follows: A specifically authorized and pedestrian oriented area of the city as established by resolution of mayor and council that allows those establishments located in the downtown dining district with valid consumption on the premises licenses, growler licenses, or amenity permits to dispense and/or serve an alcoholic beverage for carry out purposes, provided all other laws, rules and ordinances are followed. 
b.  Within a downtown dining district, any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a plastic cup; provided, however, that no person shall remove more than one such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises at a time. 
c.  Within a downtown dining district, no unsealed container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed shall not exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in their possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within a downtown dining district any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
d.  It shall be unlawful within a downtown dining district for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass, or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and/or parking lots, whether public or private. 
e.  No alcoholic beverage may be consumed outside of the downtown dining district, or upon any private property, without the express consent of the private property owners. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-115. - Restrictions on entertainment and attire. 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are not permitted upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages or upon any premises licensed under the business ordinances of the city in which alcoholic beverages are consumed, allowed or dispensed on the premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals; 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in this section, or where any person performs acts of or acts which simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; or 
(3)  The showing of any film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting any of other acts described in this section; or 
(4)  The holding, promotion or allowance of any conduct, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the above-prohibited conduct. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the premises of any mainstream performance house, museum or theater that derives less than 20 percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(6)  The findings and statement of purpose from the Flowery Branch Adult Entertainment Ordinance are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein as the purpose for this section and all amendments hereto. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-116. - Gambling prohibited. 
There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance of any kind, punch-boards, slot machines, or the operation of any scheme for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any place, or any room adjoining the same, leased or controlled by a licensee. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-117. - Inspections. 
Any establishment holding a license issued under this article shall at all times, during the period allowable by law for operation of the business, be open to inspection by any officer of the police department, any license inspector of the city, or to any person designated by the chief of police or the city manager. In addition, if the premises are being used after hours by employees or the owners or their agents, the premises may be inspected at this time by the designated persons in this section. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-118. - Emergency closure of licensed premises. 
The city clerk or the Flowery Branch Police Department may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of an emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-119. - Audits; records. 
(a)  In the event the city clerk deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, he shall so notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The city clerk or his designee shall perform any audit authorized in this chapter. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license(s) issued hereunder. 
(b)  All licensees must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Monthly income or operating statements; 
(2)  Invoices showing the quantity of alcoholic beverages purchased from or sold to a wholesaler; 
(3)  Daily sales receipts showing distilled spirits, beer, wine and food sales separately (this subsection does not apply to wholesalers or retail package licensees); 
(4)  Daily cash register receipts such as Z tapes or guest tickets (this subsection does not apply to wholesalers); 
(5)  Monthly Georgia sales and use tax reports; and 
(6)  Federal income tax return with all Form 1099s. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-120—8-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETAIL SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 8-131. - Consumption license exclusive of wholesale business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold an alcoholic license for consumption who also has any direct financial interest in any wholesale alcoholic beverage business. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any alcoholic beverage license for consumption to accept or receive financial aid or assistance from the holder of any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's or wholesale dealer's license. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-132. - Consumption-only sales. 
Persons holding a license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell any alcoholic beverage by the package or bottle for consumption off premises. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-133. - Sales off premises for catered functions. 
(a)  Licensed malt beverage, wine or distilled spirits consumption on the premises locations eligible for off-premise catering licenses shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage locations that possess a valid license from the city or another jurisdiction which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued an off-premise catering license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink off the premises and in connection with an authorized catered function within the city limits of Flowery Branch; 
(2)  Any licensed alcoholic beverage locations that possess a valid license from another jurisdiction which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises shall make application for an off-premise catering license in accordance with this chapter, and shall pay to the city an annual license fee for operation for one calendar year in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Event permits will be issued for all catered functions located within the city limits of Flowery Branch. In order to distribute or sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits for consumption off the premises at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall be required to: 
(1)  Possess a valid current malt beverage, wine or distilled spirits consumption off the premises catering license from the city which authorizes the licensee to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink; 
(2)  Provide satisfactory reports to the city clerk on forms provided by the city stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the licensee's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as required by the city clerk; and maintain original local event permits and documents required by the city in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered function at all times; 
(3)  Pay a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council for the processing of an application for an event permit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for an alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person under 21 years of age who, in the course of employment, would dispense serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  There is hereby levied excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the corporate limits of the city from another jurisdiction by an alcoholic beverage caterer in accordance with article II of this chapter. Said excise taxes shall be paid within 30 days of the event. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-134. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits for consumption on the premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(b)  The hours of sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits for consumption on the premises are: 
(1)  On election days, whether primary or general election, the hours of legal sale shall be the same as any other such day of the week, except that no such alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises in city within 250 feet of any polling place or within 250 feet of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established. 
(2)  On Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(3)  On Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 12:00 midnight so long as the establishment derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-135. - Clearing service areas. 
All licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall remove, or cause to be removed, from the area of the premises utilized by customers or patrons all alcoholic beverages within 45 minutes after the closing time for the sale of said alcoholic beverages. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-136. - Poured alcohol to be transported by employees. 
Poured alcoholic beverages will be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by permitted employees only. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-137. - Delivery. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and provided further that this prohibition shall not apply to private clubs hereunder, nor to the sale for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel or motel in their designated rooms. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-138. - Brown bagging prohibited; exemption. 
(a)  It is prohibited for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) above, eating establishments that possess corkage licenses may permit customers to bring, possess and consume bottles of wine or malt beverage growler that are owned by the customers pursuant to the conditions set forth in this division. 
(c)  As used in this subsection, the term "art shop" means a retail business devoted exclusively to providing art education that is limited to instruction in painting, sculpture and similar crafts; or selling and displaying portraits, paintings, sculptures, art supplies and similar art work and crafts. An art shop shall not allow activities that would cause the business to be an "adult entertainment establishment" as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  The prohibition in subsection (a) shall not apply to an art shop as defined in subsection (c). Licensed art shops are subject to the specific provisions governing the operation of an art shop: 
(1)  An art shop established under this section may allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and/or beer to be consumed on the premises between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(2)  Any wine and/or beer served on the premises shall only be served by an employee of the art shop holding a valid pouring permit. 
(3)  The customer must remove any unconsumed wine and/or beer from the premises before leaving the premises. 
(4)  The brown bagging of wine and/or beer in an art shop shall be subject to this section, the City of Flowery Branch's Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance and to state law; including but not limited to, the prohibition of consumption by anyone who is under 21 years of age or intoxicated. 
(5)  An art shop may serve food provided it meets all federal, state and local requirements. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-139. - Corkage services. 
(a)  An eating establishment that possesses a license for the retail sale of wine or malt beverage growler for consumption on the premises and a corkage license may permit customers to bring, possess and consume bottles of wine or malt beverage growler that are owned by the customer and brought onto the premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  Licensee has made application as provided in this chapter for a corkage license, has been granted a corkage license by the city clerk, and has paid the corkage license fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  No more than 750 milliliters of wine, per customer over the age of 21 per meal, shall be permitted to be uncorked. 
(3)  No more than 32 ounces of malt beverage, per customer over the age of 21 per meal, shall be permitted to be opened. 
(4)  Only customers seated at tables or booths shall be permitted to consume wine or malt beverages that have been provided by the customer. 
(5)  Wine and malt beverages may only be consumed by individuals who order and are served a meal by the licensee. 
(6)  Every bottle of wine or malt beverage growler brought onto the premises by a customer must be opened by permitted employees only. 
(7)  A customer may remove an uncorked bottle of wine or malt beverage growler from the premises only if the requirements of section 8-140 are met. 
(b)  An eating establishment may at its discretion charge corkage fees. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-140. - Removal of a partially consumed bottle of wine or malt beverage growler. 
(a)  Any eating establishment which is licensed to sell wine or malt beverages for consumption on the premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine or malt beverage growler per customer for consumption off premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  The customer has purchased a meal from the eating establishment and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises or has been brought onto the premises by the customer pursuant to section 8-139 or malt beverage growler that has been brought onto the premises pursuant to section 8-139. 
(2)  The partially consumed bottle of wine or malt beverage growler that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee or its permitted employees before removal from the premises. 
(3)  The partially consumed bottle of wine or malt beverage growler shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently tampered with or opened. 
(4)  A dated receipt for the meal and the purchase of the bottle of wine or corkage fee shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(b)  If transported in a motor vehicle, the container with the resealed bottle of wine or malt beverage growler shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-141. - Amenity license. 
A non-eating establishment that offers alcoholic beverages as an act of hospitality, where it is clearly a secondary function of the business, shall be eligible to apply for an alcoholic beverage amenity license. Eating establishments shall not be eligible for an alcoholic beverage amenity permit. 
(a)  An amenity license shall allow the license holder to offer alcoholic beverages as an act of hospitality and shall not be part of the core operations of such establishments. 
(b)  Any alcoholic beverage served on the premises shall only be served by an employee of the business holding a valid pouring permit. 
(c)  The amenity license will be renewed annually on the calendar year and the city may revoke or suspend such amenity license and/or impose such conditions on its operation at the city's discretion for violations of this chapter or in furtherance of the health, safety, and welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(d)  The amenity license application shall include an annual background check. A $100.00 administrative fee shall be charged to cover this administrative process. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-142. - Food sale requirement. 
(a)  Consumption on the premises licensees shall maintain more than 40 percent of their gross sales from the sale of food; and for the purposes of this section, food shall be defined as any product intended for human consumption, except those containing alcohol, or those sold as over the counter medicines. The 40 percent ratio shall be determined on a calendar quarter basis on the monthly reports submitted by each licensee. In the event food sales fall below 40 percent of the gross sales for any quarter, then the licensee shall be placed on probation for the next succeeding quarter. At the end of the next succeeding quarter, if food sales have not attained more than 40 percent of gross sales then the city clerk may suspend or revoke such license in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Section 8-142(a) shall not apply to bars or taverns located in the downtown dining district. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-143. - Employee regulations. 
(a)  The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, mix alcoholic beverages, or in any managerial position, by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person: 
a.  Demonstrates he is a certified alcohol awareness server having completed Servsafe, "Training for Intervention Procedures for Servers of Alcohol" (TIPS) or any other comparable program as approved by the city clerk; and 
b.  Such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the Flowery Branch Police Department, indicating that the person is eligible for such permit. 
(2)  No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the Flowery Branch Police Department that such person has not been convicted or plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, or illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors in a manner contrary to law, driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs within a period of five years immediately prior to such application, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexual related crime within a period of five years of the date of conviction and has been released from parole or probation. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an alcohol pouring permit. 
(3)  No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state, or local law for any felony within five years of the date of conviction and has not been released from parole or probation prior to the filing for application for such permit. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, a conviction or plea of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which defendants were allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (O.C.G.A. title 42, ch. 8, art. 3, O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq.). Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentence in court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the Flowery Branch Police Department and upon paying a fee which shall be established by resolution of the city council and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. Said application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(c)  The Flowery Branch Police Department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. In the event there is no record of a violation of this chapter, the Flowery Branch Police Department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the Flowery Branch Police Department shall notify the employer that this person is not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and their right to appeal. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license to serve or sell alcoholic beverages to file with the city clerk the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers quarterly, on or before April 1, on or before July 1, on or before October 1 and with the December 1 annual renewal. 
(e)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the Flowery Branch Police Department. 
(f)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy, cook or dishwasher. 
(g)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(h)  In the event that any permit holder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the Flowery Branch Police Department. 
(i)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the city clerk or Flowery Branch Police Department. 
(j)  Separate permits shall be required by the city clerk for each employee working in more than one establishment serving alcoholic beverages. 
(k)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person knowingly and willfully falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick, or scheme while making application for an alcoholic beverage pouring permit under this section. 
(l)  This applies only to establishments holding a consumption on the premises license as outlined in this chapter: 
(1)  Each licensed establishment is required to have all servers be certified as "alcohol awareness servers." Each server's certificate will be kept on site for review by any police officer, code enforcement officer or city clerk posted in plain view to the public along with the license to operate the establishment. 
(2)  Each establishment will provide the city clerk of the city a list of all servers that are employed and the certificate number of each "alcohol awareness server." This list is to be received no later than 60 days from receipt of license to operate and in conjunction with the renewal application. 
(m)  An alcohol pouring permit shall be issued for a period of one calendar year from the date of the original application. Once received the alcohol awareness server certification is valid for three years from the date listed on the certificate. The alcohol pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment. This permit must be in the possession of the employee while the pouring permit holder is working and available for inspection by the city clerk or his designee. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-144. - Underage loitering. 
No person who holds an alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises shall allow any person less than 18 years of age to be in, frequent, or loiter in any lounge located within the licensed premises unless such person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-145—8-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RETAIL PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 8-161. - Hours and days of sale for malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell malt beverages and wine for consumption off the premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(b)  The hours of sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption off the premises are between 7:00 a.m. and 12:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and between 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-162. - Hours and days of sale for distilled spirits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell distilled spirits for consumption off the premises on any day or at any time when such sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(b)  The exterior entrances of package stores must be locked not later than 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday, and not later than 11:30 p.m. on Sunday. Package stores shall not engage in the sale of distilled spirits except on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight and on Sunday between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-163. - On-premises consumption unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. It shall be unlawful for any retail package licensee to open or break the package of any alcoholic beverages for a purchaser or to permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. This section shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Tastings pursuant to a malt beverage or wine tasting license; 
(2)  Malt beverage tastings pursuant to section 8-164(5); 
(3)  Sales pursuant to a license for consumption. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-164. - Growlers. 
Package malt beverage licensees, who are not also licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package, may fill growlers with draft beer at the licensed location subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Either at least 90 percent of the licensee's total gross sales are from the packaged sale of malt beverages and/or wine or the licensee's premises have a minimum of 400 square feet of floor space dedicated to the display of malt beverages offered for sale. 
(2)  A growler shall not exceed 64 ounces. 
(3)  Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(4)  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. 
(5)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. 
(6)  Consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited. However, samples of tap beers may be made available without a malt beverage tasting license, but shall not exceed six ounces nor shall any one individual be offered more than four samples within a calendar day. Any samples served on the premises shall only be served by an employee holding a valid pouring permit. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-165. - Restrictions on other mercantile establishments. 
A licensee of a retail establishment permitted to sell spirituous liquors under this chapter shall not operate such business in connection with any other mercantile establishment, except a retail store selling package malt beverages and wine and then only if such package malt beverages and wine store sells only malt beverages, wine and items of convenience normally associated with the retail sale of package malt beverages, and then only if such package malt beverages and wine is sold only for carry out purposes. No such retailer shall sell, offer for sale, display or keep stocked in his or her place of business where package spirituous liquors are offered for sale any other product or commodity except: 
(1)  Wine (if licensed); 
(2)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(3)  Tobacco products; 
(4)  Malt beverages and beer (if licensed); and 
(5)  Package ice, snacks, supplies, and accessories (including, but not limited to, containers and/or serving devices) as permitted by law. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-166. - Applicability of article to those businesses operating both the retail sale of spirituous liquors and package malt beverages and wine. 
For licensees who wish to operate a business which conducts both the retail sale of spirituous liquors and package malt beverages and wine, in the case of conflict, the provisions of this article regulating the sale of spirituous liquors shall prevail, and compliance with these provisions, rather than those provisions applicable to the license permitting the sale of package malt beverages and wine, is required. The applicant shall be required to meet all licensee qualifications and requirements under both this article and the article governing the licensing and sales of package malt beverages and wine. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-167—8-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WHOLESALERS 

Sec. 8-168. - Hours and days of sale. 
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-169. - Prohibited sales. 
No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
DIVISION 5. - BREW PUBS 

Sec. 8-170. - Brew pubs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, a limited exception to section 8-131 shall exist for owners and operators of brew pubs provided that: 
(1)  No individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brew pub without first obtaining a proper brew pub license from the city council. Each brew pub license holder shall comply with all other applicable state and local license requirements. A brew pub license authorizes the holder of such license to (i) manufacture on the licensed premises not more than 5,000 barrels of beer in a calendar year solely for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form; and (ii) operate a restaurant that shall be the sole retail outlet for such beer and may offer for sale any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer for consumption on the premises only and, provided further, in addition to draft beer manufactured on the premises, each brew pub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer. 
(2)  Possession of a brew pub license shall not prevent the holder of such license from obtaining any other license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(3)  A brew pub license does not authorize the holder of such license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(4)  A brew pub licensee shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesale dealers. 
(5)  Except as set forth in this section, a brew pub license holder shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-171—8-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCISE TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-181. - Unlawful retail sales. 
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to sell at retail within the city alcoholic beverages on which the taxes provided for in this article have not been paid. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-182. - Reports. 
In administration of the provisions of this article, the city may require the filing of reports by any person having in such person's possession or custody information relating to alcoholic beverage sales which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by the city and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase and such other information as the city may require. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-183. - Misstatements or concealment of facts in reports. 
Any misstatement or concealment of fact in reports required by this article shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of the license issued and shall make the licensee liable to prosecution for perjury under the laws of the state. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-184. - Failure to timely pay taxes; penalties and interest. 
In the event the tax due hereunder is not paid within the time required, the licensee shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the unpaid tax plus interest at a rate of one percent per month on the unpaid tax. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-185. - Deficiency determination; penalties and interest. 
(a)  If the city has cause to believe that the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person is not proper, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is within or may come into its possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for any monthly period. 
(b)  The city or its designated representatives shall give to the licensee written notice of its determination by certified mail. Notice shall be deemed delivered three days after the date of deposit to the United States Post Office by certified mail. 
(c)  Deficiencies must be paid to the city no later than five days after delivery of the deficiency notice. Any licensee who fails to pay such deficiency within the time required shall pay a penalty of 15 percent of the deficiency amount plus interest at a rate of one percent per month of the unpaid deficiency. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-186. - Failure to make a return; penalties and interest. 
(a)  If any licensee fails to make a return for the tax levied under this article, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or as the case may be; of the amount of the total sales in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate, the city clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to 15 percent thereof. One or more determinations maybe made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  In making a determination, the city clerk may offset overpayments for a period or penalties and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or any fraction of a month from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(d)  If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this subdivision or rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the amount required to be paid by the person, exclusive of penalties, shall be added thereto in addition to the 15 percent penalty. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-187. - Collection. 
At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in the courts of this state, any other state or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorneys' fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-188. - Successors and assigns liable. 
(a)  If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells or terminates the business, the licensee's successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk, showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by the purchaser to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the city clerk shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event shall last occur. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-189. - Taxes paid more than once or erroneously collected. 
Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously collected or received by the city under this article, it may be offset. If the licensee believes it has overpaid or paid more than once, then it will have three years from date of payment to file claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts due and payable from the licensee by whom it was paid or such person's successors or assigns. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-190—8-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WHOLESALERS AND BREW PUBS 

Sec. 8-201. - Levy of malt beverage excise tax. 
There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer and brew pub selling malt beverages and wine within the City of Flowery Branch an excise tax in the following amounts: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-202. - Levy of wine and distilled spirits excise tax; exemptions. 
(a)  There is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling wine and distilled spirits within the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, an excise tax in the amount of $.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 3-6-70 and 3-6-71, no tax shall be levied under this section with respect to: 
(1)  Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only; 
(2)  Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)  Wine sold to persons outside this state for resale or consumption outside this state; or 
(4)  Wines which contain less than one-half of one percent alcohol by volume. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-203. - Collection. 
The taxes levied in this division are hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city and it is the intent of this division to so levy this tax but require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery by the retailer to the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-204. - Unlawful deliveries. 
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any wholesale dealer or distributor to deliver any alcoholic beverages spirits to any retail dealer in the city without at the time of such delivery collecting the excise taxes provided for in this division. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-205. - Reports and remittance. 
On or before the 20th day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city, which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of all alcoholic beverages to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of the report. The report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this division, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. The report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on the report. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-206. - Noncompliance by wholesale dealer; distributor. 
If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes, penalties and interest are not remitted within five days from the date of delivery of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Secs. 8-207—8-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PER DRINK 

Sec. 8-221. - Levy and collection of excise tax. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchaser of alcoholic beverages by the drink within this city a tax in an amount equal to three percent of the purchase price charged to the purchaser for such drink. 
(b)  Every licensee or his agent is hereby authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed herein from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the city to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(c)  In all cases where the collection of food and drinks is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee is liable at the time of and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The city shall have authority to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for collection and payment of the tax. 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Sec. 8-222. - Reports and remittance. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this division shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any mixed drink in this city. All amounts of such taxes collected by the licensees shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period for which the tax is imposed; provided, however, that upon a proper showing that the tax imposed will not be collected until after a regular billing period of the collecting agent then the collection of the tax may be deferred by the city for an additional period not exceeding 30 days. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city in such form as the city may prescribe by every licensee liable for the payment of tax hereunder. All returns shall show the gross receipt of the sale of distilled spirits by the drink and the amount of tax collected on such drinks. 
(c)  Copies of the "summary of sales" showing delivery by each supplier to consumption on the premises licensees shall be furnished to the city clerk with each monthly payment. 
(d)  Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951, as now or hereafter amended (O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 504A, Exh. A, 5-18-2017 ) 
Chapter 11 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power of local governments to license, regulate and tax billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be titled and known as the Amusement Machine Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 2, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement machine means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, plate, disc, slug, ticket, or other similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Pusher machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football, or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard games; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skeeball machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Rolldown machines; 
(18)  Pool tables or billiard tables; and 
(19)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in the state. 
Amusement ride means any mechanical device, other than those regulated by the Consumer Product Safety Commission, which carries or conveys passengers along, around, or over a fixed or restricted route or course or within a defined area for the purpose of giving its passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills, or excitement. The term "amusement ride" shall not include any such device which is not permanently fixed to a site. 
Area of operation means the territory located within the corporate limits of the city. 
Billiard room means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment. One billiard table may cause the operator to be considered as operating a billiard room. 
Billiards means any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the game known as carom billiards, pocket billiards, and English billiards. 
Distances means the area between the premises where amusement machines, amusement rides, billiards, music amusement machines, or video poker amusement machines, or any combination thereof, are operated and any school, college, church, or funeral chapel; provided, however, any other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, such distances from churches and funeral chapels shall be measured between the church or funeral chapel and the structure on the premises, or the part of the structure on the premises, where amusement machines, amusement rides, billiards, music amusement machines, or video poker amusement machines, or any combination thereof, are operated. 
Exempt machines means every machine of any kind or character that is not included within the definition of an amusement machine and shall include, but is not expressly limited to, the following: 
(1)  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which dispense products or services for payment of money; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin-operated scales; 
(8)  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
(9)  Coin-operated parking meters; 
(10)  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)  Coin-operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in the state. 
Gambling device means any contrivance which, for a consideration, affords the player an opportunity to obtain money or other thing of value, the award of which is determined by chance even though accompanied by some skill, whether or not the prize is automatically paid by the contrivance (but not including those machines which afford an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35). 
Minor means any person younger than 18 years of age. 
Music amusement machine means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, plate, disc, slug, ticket, or other similar object. Examples of music amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, jukeboxes or other similar types of music amusement machines. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, association, trust, unincorporated organization, or other entity and shall include any other person that has a substantive interest in or effectively controls such person as well as the individual officers, directors, general partners, trustees, or other individuals in control of the activities of such person. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by any person and used by said person for the purposes of operating amusement machines, billiards, video poker amusement machines, amusement rides, or musical amusement machines, or any combination thereof. The term "premises" may also include one physically identifiable place of business consisting of one room or two or more contiguous rooms operating under the same trade name, ownership, or management. 
Video poker amusement machine means every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, plate, disc, slug, ticket, or other similar object and the result of whose operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law, and which by way of a videotape, videocassette, video disc, prerecorded video display or visual depiction simulates the play of a poker card game. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 3, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-3. - Regulation of the operation of amusement machines. 
Every person operating amusement machines within the corporate limits of the city, including music amusement machines, billiards, video poker amusement machines, and amusement rides, but not including exempt machines, shall only operate said machines in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The regulation as set out in this chapter is necessitated by the potential abuse of minors due to their fascination with said machines and also by the easy use of said machines as gambling devices. Therefore, said machines shall only be operated within the corporate limits of the city in accordance with this chapter. In assessing the need for proper regulations, the city council has determined that these proper public concerns, except as for billiards and video poker amusement machines, do not require as much regulatory oversight when only one amusement machine or one music amusement machine is in operation on a premises. The city council finds that the operation of more than one amusement machine on one premises or the operation of a gameroom, or both, holds a special attraction for minors who are not as capable of exercising good judgment as adults and, therefore, necessitate regulation by the city. Further, the city council finds that billiards and video poker amusement machines are extremely susceptible to being used as gambling devices and also require regulation by the city. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 4, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-4. - License required. 
Every person operating an amusement machine, a music amusement machine, a billiard room, a video poker amusement machine, or an amusement ride, or any combination thereof, shall be required to obtain a regulatory license from the city for the operation of said machine (including, but not limited to, a billiard table) within the corporate limits of the city. Application for such regulatory license shall be made to the city council upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 5, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-5. - Qualifications for regulatory license. 
(a)  Initial application. Every person that applies for said regulatory license as required by section 11-4 shall be at least 21 years of age and shall make application on forms furnished by the city clerk or other properly designated agent of the city council, and in connection therewith shall, under oath, answer all questions, supply all information, and furnish all certificates, affidavits, bonds, and other supporting data as required thereby. In all cases where the person operating the amusement machines, music amusement machines, billiard room, video poker amusement machines, or amusement rides, or any combination thereof, is a resident individual, the application shall be made in the resident's name. Where the operator of said machines (including, but not limited to, a billiard table) is a corporation, partnership, association, or nonresident, the application shall be made in the name of an officer, partner, or associate who owns a substantial interest in the business or in the name of the principal managing officer or agent and the application shall show that the license is for the use of the person operating said machines, and the person shall be named. The written application for the license shall be a permanent record which the licensee must maintain current as required by subsection (a)(1) of this section. Failure to maintain a current license application as required by this section shall be grounds for revocation of same. The following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No person shall have, own, or enjoy any ownership or interest in, or share in the profits from, or otherwise participate in the operation of amusement machines, billiard rooms, music amusement machines, video poker amusement machines, or amusement rides, or any combination thereof, within the corporate limits unless a full description of such interest shall have been furnished to the city council at the time such interest arose. It shall be the duty of the licensee to report to the city council within five days any change in any interest in such licensee's business including, but not limited to: 
a.  Any division of the profits; 
b.  Any division of net or gross sales for any purpose whatsoever; 
c.  Any change in the payment of rents or leases; 
d.  Any change in the ownership of any lease or building or land used in such business; 
e.  Any change in the ownership of any corporation that has any interest in such business or the change of management of such corporation. 
(2)  After receipt of such notice, the city council shall notify such person within a reasonable time of any objection to the ownership or interest set forth therein, and it shall then be incumbent upon such person to dispose of such interest within 30 days after the mailing of notice to do so by the city council to such person at his address as shown on such notice of interest. In the event such interest is not disposed of within 30 days after the mailing of notice by the city council, or in the event no objections are filed within said 30-day period, or in the event such person fails to notify the city council of the transfer of any such interest within 20 days after the acquisition thereof, the license as provided for herein may be revoked by the city council until disposition of the interest has been made or notice given to the city council of the transfer. 
(3)  The report required by subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be in the form required by the city council and shall be an amendment to the licensee's permanent license application on file with the city council and, as such, shall be under oath and verified as otherwise required of license applications. 
(b)  Renewal application. The city regulatory license issued shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon. A licensee that desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a renewal application for such year on or before November 15 of the preceding year. All applications for the renewal of licenses shall be treated as applications for new licenses, except that they need not be advertised (where required). Payment of license fees for renewal of licenses may be made at the time of application or by December 31 and, upon approval of renewal by the city council and payment of the regulatory fee, the license will be issued or resurveyed. The following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  No city regulatory license may be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another without permission and approval of the city council upon written application made. Approval as to any change shall be at the discretion of the city council. 
(2)  Each application for transfer of a license shall have attached thereto a completed copy of any notice of change of interest required by the state revenue commissioner. After receipt of such application, the city council shall notify such applicant within 20 days of any objection to the transfer as set forth in the application. Said license shall remain in effect pending approval of the transfer. Upon proper application, the city council may permit the license to be transferred upon payment of the regulatory license fees required under section 11-8. Upon the death of any license holder, his personal representatives or his heirs may continue to operate under said license for the balance of the year without the payment of any fee, if otherwise qualified as license holders, or the license may be transferred to a qualified transferee within 30 days after condition of the estate of the deceased licensee will permit, upon payment of the transfer fee. 
(3)  Any licensee desiring to discontinue business at one location and commence business at some other location must make a complete new application for such location. 
(c)  Denial of application. When contrary to the public interest and welfare, no license to operate amusement machines, music amusement machines, amusement rides, billiard rooms, billiards tables, or video poker amusement machines, or any combination thereof, shall be issued by the city council to or for: 
(1)  Any person, as determined by the city council by reason of such person's business experience, financial standing, trade associations, personal associations, record of arrest, or reputation in any community in which he has resided, who is not likely to maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state or local laws, rules and regulations; 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any felony involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted under any federal, state, or local law of any felony not involving moral turpitude within ten years immediately preceding the filing of application of such license; 
(4)  Any person convicted under any federal, state, or local law of a misdemeanor, particularly, but not limited to, those involving misuse of amusement machines, misuse of video poker amusement machines, misuse of billiard tables, gambling devices, alcoholic beverages, gambling, or tax law violations, if such conviction tends to indicate that the applicant will not maintain the operation for which he is seeking a license in conformity with federal, state, or local laws, rules and regulations; 
(5)  A location at which the operation of the proposed business would be in violation of the zoning ordinances of the city; 
(6)  A location at which a previous regulatory license has been revoked or suspended and where, in the judgment of the city council, the problems which have arisen from the operation of a license at such location indicate that it is not in the interest of public health, safety, welfare, or morals that said machines or billiards, or any combination thereof, be operated at such location; 
(7)  Which the granting of such license would constitute a violation of state law or regulations. 
(d)  Written notice of denial. Before the city council shall deny any application for a license or for the transfer of any license, or shall revoke any existing license, the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, shall be given notice in writing from the city clerk to show cause before the city council at a time and place specified not less than three days nor more than ten days from the date of service of the notice why said application for license or for transfer of license should not be denied or why said license should not be revoked, as the case may be, stating the grounds therefor, and at the appointed time and place the applicant or licensee shall have an opportunity to show cause, if any exists, why said application should not be denied or said license revoked, after which the city council shall take such action as it, in its judgment and discretion, shall deem warranted under the facts. The hearing herein provided for need not be at a regular meeting of the city council but may be at such time and place as shall be fixed in said notice. All decisions denying, approving, suspending, or revoking any regulatory license or application shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and mailed or delivered to the applicant or licensee, as the case may be. In addition, at any hearing as provided herein, the party afforded the hearing shall have the opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 6, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-6. - License applications; contents and terms. 
(a)  Contents. All applications for said regulatory licenses shall be made in person by the applicant to the city clerk or any other properly designated agent of the city, in writing on forms furnished by the city. The applications shall be signed by the applicant and shall contain, but not be restricted to, the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age, address, telephone number, and length of residency of applicant. 
(2)  The name, location and description of the premises of place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(3)  A statement of whether the applicant, or any person with an interest in the application, has made application at any previous time for a regulatory license from the city or any other governmental entity for the operation of amusement machines, music amusement machines, video poker amusement machines, billiards, or amusement rides, or any combination thereof, and the disposition of such application. 
(4)  Whether the applicant, or any person with an interest in the application, has ever been convicted of a crime, other than traffic violations. 
(5)  A description of each machine (including a billiard table) to be covered by the regulatory license, the mechanical features of said machine, the name of the manufacturer of said machine, and the serial number of said machine. 
(6)  Whether a previous license of any type issued to the applicant, or any person with an interest in the application, has been revoked by any state or subdivision thereof or by the federal government, and the reason therefor. 
(7)  Whether any other person is to be interested directly or indirectly in the profits or losses, or both, of the proposed business. 
(8)  No regulatory license for an amusement machine, a music amusement machine, billiards, video poker amusement machines, or amusement rides, or any combination thereof, shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete; detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application; and an occupancy permit for these premises to be licensed has been approved and issued by the proper agent by and for the city. The completed building shall comply with the building code of the city and any regulations of the state. Each building in which the business is to be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front on the street on which the building is located so as to reveal the inside retail area of the building and so as to reveal all of the outside premises of said building. Each applicant for said license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(9)  All new applications for said regulatory licenses shall be accompanied either by lawful money of the U.S. or by a certified check or cashier's check, payable to the city, for the proper amount of the regulatory license fee. In the event the license is refused, the regulatory license fee shall be returned to the applicant, except for an administrative charge of $20.00 to cover the administrative costs of processing the application incurred by the city. 
(10)  The financial responsibility of every applicant for a regulatory license shall be shown to the satisfaction of the city council. Each applicant shall submit a complete statement of his financial condition with the application. 
(11)  Every applicant for said regulatory license or transferee of such license and every employee of applicant, upon hiring, that will work or perform duties on behalf of the applicant within the corporate limits of the city shall be fingerprinted by the city police department, the county sheriff's department, or other properly designated agent of the city before a license is issued hereunder. Said fingerprints may be submitted to any proper law enforcement agency to verify the information contained within the application. In addition to the set of fingerprints submitted hereunder by the applicant, the applicant shall also furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the state bureau of investigation or any other proper law enforcement agency. Should the fingerprinting check reveal that any information contained within the application is false or misleading, the city shall have the right to revoke the license granted to the applicant upon receipt by the city of the information learned from the fingerprinting submission. 
(b)  Notice. No application for said regulatory license shall be acted upon by the city council until after the applicant has run a notice of said application in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are run for the city for at least four different days prior to the meeting at which said application is to be presented and considered. Said notice shall contain the name of the person for whom the application is submitted and the name of the person applying, if different, and the location of the proposed business. This notice shall not be required from an existing regulatory license holder making application for the renewal of an existing license at the same location. 
(c)  Untrue or misleading statements. The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for said regulatory license shall be sufficient cause for the refusal, suspension, revocation, or cancellation of such license as the city council shall deem proper. 
(d)  Expiration. All said regulatory licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which issued. 
(e)  Fees. The regulatory license fees for which provision is made in section 11-8 are due and payable immediately. Any person who is doing business or begins to do business at any time after January 1 and before July 1 shall pay the full annual regulatory license fee. Any person who begins to do business on or after July 1 shall pay one-half of the annual regulatory license fee. 
(f)  Surrender, revocation before expiration. No regulatory license shall issue for less than a calendar year or remainder thereof subject to the provisions of subsection (e) of this section, and in case of the revocation or surrender of such regulatory license before the expiration of such calendar year, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 7, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-7. - Short-form applications; contents and terms. 
(a)  In the event the applicant is seeking a regulatory license for only one amusement machine, music amusement machine, or amusement ride, the application shall be made in person by the applicant to the city clerk or other properly designated agent of the city council, in writing on forms furnished by the city, signed by the applicant and contain, but not be restricted to, the following statements and information: 
(1)  Said applicant shall provide the same information as required by section 11-6(a)(1) through (7). It is the intent of the city council that where only one amusement machine, one music amusement machine, or one amusement ride is to be operated by the applicant, the applicant need not provide a financial statement to the city council, nor submit detailed plans of the building or structure (although the building must still meet the city building code), nor submit to any fingerprinting as a part of the application. 
(2)  Further, an applicant who may properly submit a short-form application also shall not be required to run any notice of said application in the newspaper, as set out in section 11-6(b). The short-form application shall contain all of the other information and statements as required by section 11-6 and shall be subject to all of the other terms and conditions as set out by section 11-6. 
(b)  An applicant for the operation of only one billiard table or one video poker amusement machine shall be required to submit a regulatory license application pursuant to section 11-6 and have said license contain all of the contents required of such applications under section 11-6 and meet all of the terms and conditions of section 11-6 and all other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 8, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-8. - Regulatory fees. 
(a)  As a part of its exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of said amusement machines, music amusement machines, billiard rooms, video poker amusement machines, or amusement rides, or any combination thereof, every applicant shall pay an annual regulatory license fee before being granted a regulatory license, in accordance with the schedule set out herein, for the privilege of operating said machines (including billiard tables) within the corporate limits of the city. The amount of said regulatory fees approximates the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city which includes, but is not limited to, the review of the operations of the applicant to be sure that said applicant complies with this chapter and that the applicant is not using or permitting the use of said machines as gambling devices or for gambling purposes, or both. The regulatory license fees which shall be paid by the applicant shall be as established by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The city council finds that the regulatory license fees assessed for each video poker amusement machine and each billiard table are necessary due to the intensive regulatory activity necessitated by said machines due to the easy use of said machines as gambling devices. Further, due to the nature of billiards and video poker amusement machines, besides being extremely susceptible to being used as gambling devices, said machines are also extremely susceptible to being repeatedly played as gambling devices to the detriment of the user. For these reasons, the regulatory fee is higher in an attempt to offset the regulatory expense incurred by the city in ensuring that the machines are being properly used for amusement and not as gambling devices. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 9, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-9. - Gambling devices not permitted. 
Amusement machines, music amusement machines, amusement rides, billiard tables, or video poker amusement machines, or any combination thereof, shall not be used, or allowed to be used, by the operator as gambling devices or for gambling purposes, or both. This chapter shall not be construed in any fashion to authorize, license, or permit gambling or any gambling devices, or both, within the corporate limits of the city (except as authorized by state law). Any amusement machine, music amusement machine, amusement ride, billiard table, or video poker amusement machine, or any combination thereof, that is used, or permitted to be used, by the operator for gambling purposes or as a gambling device, or both, shall be subject to confiscation by any proper law enforcement officer and agency and shall be grounds for the immediate termination of the regulatory license to operate said machine (including billiard table). 
(Ord. No. 106, § 10, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-10. - Regulatory license a privilege. 
The operation of amusement machines, music amusement machines, amusement rides, billiard rooms, or video poker amusement machines, or any combination thereof, in the city is a privilege, and not a right, and the issuance of a regulatory license hereunder shall not create any property or right in the licensee except to conduct the licensed business during the period the license is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 11, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-11. - Regulations. 
(a)  No holder of a regulatory license authorizing the operation of amusement machines, music amusement machines, amusement rides, billiard rooms, or video poker amusement machines, or any combination thereof, within the corporate limits of the city, nor any agent or employee of the licensee, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)  When otherwise authorized under chapter 8, Alcoholic Beverages, as to the sale of alcoholic beverages, knowingly sell, serve, or permit the use of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises unless the licensee derives at least 75 percent of its revenue from the sale of products or services other than alcoholic beverages. This subsection shall control over any provision of chapter 8. This provision shall not apply where the licensee operates three or fewer amusement machines or music amusement machines, or any combination thereof, on the premises, but the licensee must meet the revenue requirements under chapter 8 for sale by the drink for consumption on the premises in the city. All other terms and conditions of chapter 8 shall apply as to any premises which sells alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Operate said machines (including billiard tables) in a building where the inside retail area of the building cannot be seen from outside the building due to a lack of windows, opaque windows, closed shutters, or painted-over windows. The inside retail area of the building must be visible from the outside. 
(3)  Knowingly permit or cause to be permitted by any person in the licensee's employ a minor to be upon the premises during days and hours of operation of any public school system within the city. 
(4)  Knowingly permit the operation of said machines (including billiard tables) during the hours beginning 12:00 midnight until 6:00 a.m. This prohibition of operating during said hours shall not apply where the licensee only operates one amusement machine. 
(5)  No licensee shall allow any person less than 12 years of age to be on, frequent, or loiter on the premises unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(6)  Operate said machines (including billiard tables) in a building that does not meet the building code of the city for buildings used by the public, and said premises must have properly marked exits and proper restroom facilities. 
(7)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any illegal, lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practice on the licensed premises. Such illegal behavior or misconduct shall be immediately reported by the licensee to the proper law enforcement authorities. 
(8)  Permit said machines (including billiard tables) to be used for gambling purposes or as gambling devices, or both. 
(9)  Permit the operation of said machines, including music amusement machines, in such a manner, or with a volume, or both, so as to disturb the public peace and in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. Said machines shall not be operated or at a volume, or both, which can be heard from the nearest residence to the premises after 9:00 p.m. 
(10)  Permit any person to operate said machines on the premises without proper clothing (being proper dress of shirt, blouse, pants, shorts, skirt, and shoes, as applicable). 
(11)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under 18 years of age to sell or dispense coins, bills, other money, tokens, plates, discs, slugs, tickets, or other similar objects to operate said machines or to perform employment duties as to or concerning said machines. No holder of a regulatory license shall employ a person under 18 years of age. If the licensee sells alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises, any person in the employment of said licensee on the premises must be at least 21 years of age. 
(b)  The following shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation, or both, of said regulatory license. Whether or not said grounds exist shall be determined by the city council in its sole discretion: 
(1)  The violation by the license holder or his employee of any state or federal law or any ordinance of the city, other than traffic violations. The determination of whether any such violation has occurred shall be made by the city council, and an actual conviction in a court for such offense shall not be necessary in order to suspend or revoke the license. 
(2)  The failure of the license holder or his employee to report promptly to the proper law enforcement authorities any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring on the premises. 
(3)  Any conduct on the part of the license holder or his employee contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals. 
(4)  Operating or conducting the business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health or morals or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(5)  The violation of any state law or regulation or municipal ordinance pertaining to alcoholic beverages, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 13, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-12. - Violations; reporting and acting on. 
(a)  Any violation of this chapter that may warrant revocation of the regulatory license shall be reported by any person to the mayor, who shall have the power, in his discretion, to suspend the license or permit for a period not to exceed ten days pending a hearing before the city council on the question of whether or not the license or permit shall be revoked for cause, in compliance with section 11-5(d). 
(b)  Upon a charge that there has been a violation of this chapter, the mayor is hereby authorized in his discretion to order the place of business charged closed, pending a hearing on the charge. 
(c)  Any proper law enforcement authority including, but not limited to, any city police department, the county sheriff's department, and the state bureau of investigation shall have the authority to close any location holding a regulatory license for a period not in excess of 24 hours in the event there shall occur on the premises any violation of law or municipal ordinance, breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence, or other occurrence which is contrary to the public health, safety, welfare or morals, when in the judgment of a proper agent for said law enforcement authorities that such action is necessary to protect the public health, welfare, safety or morals. 
(d)  The city council shall have the right to suspend any regulatory license pending the hearing provided for in section 11-5(d), where, in the judgment of the city council, such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and morals. 
(e)  Any suspension as provided for in subsection (d) of this section shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated and shall be delivered to the license holder or the person in charge of the place of business, if the license holder cannot be located. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 14, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-13. - General provisions. 
(a)  Where applicable, when the holder of the regulatory license sells, serves, or permits the use of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises, and the 75 percent revenue requirement as provided by section 11-11(a)(1) is required, the 75 percent revenue requirement shall be determined on a calendar basis by a monthly report submitted by each licensee permitting such sales of alcoholic beverages. In the event that the 75 percent revenue requirement required by section 11-11(a)(1) falls below 75 percent of the business volume of alcoholic beverage sales for any quarter, the license holder shall be placed on probation for the next succeeding quarter. At the end of the next succeeding quarter, if the license holder's revenue from the sale of products or services, other than alcoholic beverages, has not obtained the 75 percent requirement, the mayor shall suspend said license in accordance with section 11-12(a). At the hearing before the city council in accordance with section 11-5(d), the city council, in its discretion, may revoke the regulatory license for noncompliance with the 75 percent revenue requirement of section 11-11(a)(1). Nothing herein provided shall prohibit the city council or the mayor from suspending or revoking said license for any other violations of this chapter. Authorized officials or agents, or both, of the city may examine the records of the licensee at any reasonable time to ascertain that the requirements of this and other provisions of this chapter are met. 
(b)  All of said machines shall be operated only on the premises for which the regulatory license is issued. 
(c)  The holder of every regulatory license hereunder shall have available in his place of business at all times a copy of this chapter and shall be responsible for compliance herewith by persons on the premises. 
(d)  Premises operated under the provisions of this chapter shall be open to inspection by authorized personnel of the city at all times. 
(e)  Upon receipt by the city clerk or any other properly designated agent of the city council of any application for a regulatory license (except as to those licenses as to which an applicant may submit a short-form application) or for the transfer of any license (except as to those licenses as to which an applicant may submit a short-form application), the clerk or proper agent of the city council shall forward the same to any proper law enforcement authority for investigation, who, following such investigation, shall attach thereto the entire police record of every person named in said application. The city clerk or other proper agent of the city council shall then submit the application with said report attached to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 15, 11-7-1994) 
Sec. 11-14. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as the same exists, or as may hereafter be amended, or who shall do anything required by this chapter as the same exists, or as may hereafter be amended, besides having the regulatory license subject to suspension or revocation, shall be subject to the general penalties as described in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 106, § 16, 11-7-1994) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3); dogs generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; rabies control and licensing of animals by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned animal. Any domesticated animal shall be considered "abandoned," for the purposes of this chapter, which shall have been placed upon public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or upon or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or attendant of the private property and is unattended or uncared for. Any domesticated animal shall also be considered as abandoned, for the purposes of this chapter, which shall have been upon or within the property of the owner or custodian of this animal for a period of time in excess of 36 hours unattended and without proper food and water. 
Animal at large means an animal not under restraint. 
Animal control officer means any officer, agent or employee of the governing authority designated by the governing authority to perform the duties of animal control and enforcement of this chapter and to perform the duties of dog control officer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), as amended from time to time. 
Animal shelter. The term "animal shelter" means: 
(1)  Any facility operated by or under contract for the state, county, a municipal corporation, a political subdivision of the state or the county humane society for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, and other animals; 
(2)  Any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian or veterinarians which operates for such purpose in addition to its customary purposes; and 
(3)  Any facility operated, owned, or maintained by a duly incorporated humane society, animal welfare society, or other nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection, and humane treatment of animals. 
Animal under restraint. Any domesticated animal is considered under restraint if: 
(1)  It is controlled within the property limits of its owner by a visible physical barrier (fence (nonelectronic), chain, leash, etc.) of its owner; 
(2)  It is controlled by a leash; 
(3)  It is at heel or beside a competent person and is obedient to the person's commands; or 
(4)  It is within the occupant enclosure of a vehicle or restrained if within the cargo area of a truck being driven or parked on the streets. 
Board of health means the county board of health. 
Dangerous animal means any animal that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the animal has been classified as a potentially dangerous animal and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
Domesticated animal means an animal that is living in or about the habitation of people including, but not limited to, cats, chickens, dogs, ducks, cows, fowl, geese, horses, rabbits, swine, domesticated wild animals and/or exotic animals. Pen-raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the state and may be kept in the state as pets. 
Exotic animal means any animal not native to the county and includes, but is not limited to, emus, iguanas, pythons, ostriches, reptiles and rhea. It shall also include any hybrid animal which is part exotic animal. 
Governing authority means the city council. 
Guard animal means any animal which has been trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command and any animal which, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of the property upon and within which it is located. 
Humane society means the county humane society or any corporation, organization or association existing for the purpose of prevention of cruelty to animals, education for humane treatment of animals or animal adoption for stray animals. 
Law enforcement agency means the city police department, the county sheriff's office or the county enforcement division. 
Livestock means any hoofed animal including, but not limited to, a cow, horse, goat, llama, bovine, equine and swine as well as all other animals used or suitable for either food or labor. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust, who or which owns, possesses, harbors, keeps, cares for, feeds, maintains, has custody or control of, or knowingly permits to be harbored or kept or to remain on or about their premises an animal within the jurisdiction of the city council. 
Potentially dangerous animal means any animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise threaten the safety of human beings, or any animal that, when unprovoked: 
(1)  Inflicts injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
(2)  Chases or approaches a human being upon the street, sidewalks or any public grounds in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Any such structure shall have a secure top, and, if the animal is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed in such a manner as to prevent the animal's escape from the fence. If the enclosure does not have a floor, the sides of the enclosure shall be embedded in the ground not less than two feet. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the animal. 
Public or private animal refuge means harborers of unwanted animals of any breed, including crossbreeds, who provide food, shelter, and confinement for a group of dogs, a group of cats, or a combination of dogs and cats. 
Records of appropriate authority. The term "records of appropriate authority" means: 
(1)  Records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; 
(2)  Records of any county or municipal animal control agency; 
(3)  Records of any county board of health; 
(4)  Records of any federal, state, or local court; 
(5)  Records of a dog control officer as provided in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22; or 
(6)  Records of an animal control officer as provided by this chapter. 
Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or a physical injury that results in death. 
Sexually mature animal means any dog or cat that has reached the age of 180 days or six months or more. 
Sterilization means the surgical removal of the reproductive organs of a dog or cat in order to render the animal unable to reproduce. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.010), 4-18-2002; Ord. of 9-24-2002, § 2) 
Sec. 14-2. - Animal control unit. 
There is created for the governing authority an animal control unit, totally separate from and independent of the county humane society, and it shall be staffed with such personnel as may from time to time be authorized by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.020), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-3. - Animal control officer; position established. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-22(c), the duties of the dog control officer shall be vested in the director of the animal control unit. The title of the officer shall be animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.030), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-4. - Cooperation with animal control officer. 
(a)  An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. All law enforcement agencies of the governing authority shall cooperate with the animal control officers in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful: 
(1)  To interfere with or fail to cooperate with any animal control officer or other officer acting pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  To take or attempt to take any animal from a county vehicle used to transport an animal pursuant to this chapter; or 
(3)  To take or attempt to take any animal from the animal control shelter or other impounding area used by the county animal control for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.040), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-5. - Enforcement of chapter. 
The primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit, which may call upon such other officers and employees of any law enforcement agency of the governing jurisdiction as may be necessary for the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.050), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-6. - Summons. 
Upon information known to, or a complaint lodged with, any officer or member of the animal control unit or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority, that any owner or possessor of an animal is in violation of this chapter, a summons shall be issued requiring the owner or possessor of such animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate court of the county on a day and time certain to stand trial for the violation. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.060), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-7. - Violations; penalty. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the magistrate court of the county, and, upon conviction, shall be subject to both fine and imprisonment, as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 36-32-1(c) and 36-35-6(a)2. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.070), 4-18-2002; Ord. of 9-24-2002, § 1) 
Sec. 14-8. - City may contract for animal control services. 
In the event that the city enters into a governmental agreement with another governing authority to provide animal control services, then the primary responsibility for enforcement of this chapter shall be vested in the animal control unit of that governing authority and the individual so designated by that governmental agreement. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.075), 4-18-2002) 
Secs. 14-9—14-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DUTIES TOWARDS ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-35. - Owner to keep animals under control. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal in his possession or control, to permit such domesticated animal to be at large and not under restraint. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.080), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-36. - Rabies vaccination; fee. 
(a)  When any dog, cat or other animal as may be required by state law to be vaccinated for rabies is being kept in the jurisdiction of the governing authority, it shall be the duty of any owner or possessor or custodian of said animal to procure current rabies vaccination if said animal is three months of age or older, as required by and in accordance with the rabies control rules of the board of health. The owner, possessor or custodian shall affix to the collar or harness of the animal a current vaccination tag as prescribed by the board of health. 
(b)  The veterinarian administering the antirabies vaccine required by this section shall collect, in addition to the charges for vaccination, the sum of $0.50 for each dog vaccinated. The fees collected under this provision shall be delivered to the county board of commissioners by the veterinarian collecting said fees on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which said fees were collected. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.090), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-37. - Display of rabies tag. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog, cat or other animal required to have a rabies vaccination by state law to allow such animal in any area of the jurisdiction of the governing authority without a visible collar which shall have attached a valid and current rabies vaccination tag as required by the board of health. It shall be the duty of each animal owner to provide a collar with a rabies vaccination tag for each animal, except when such animal is participating in an animal show or exhibition. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.100), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-38. - Loud noises prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any domesticated animal or bird that makes, continues or causes to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual sound or noise which unreasonably annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the jurisdiction of the governing authority and which is audible to a person of normal hearing ability more than 100 feet from the point of origin of this sound or noise. 
(b)  Anyone who keeps or maintains an animal or bird that unreasonably disturbs the comfort or repose of any person because the animal or bird is emitting frequent or long continued sound or noise, and who continues to keep, maintain, or allow any animal or bird to so disturb the comfort or repose of any person shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(c)  This section shall apply to horses, livestock, poultry and other farm animals, provided they are maintained in accordance with the governing authority's zoning regulations or ordinances, with the following exception: Multiple roosters being raised on other than a bona fide farm are subject to this section. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.110), 4-18-2002; Ord. No. 407, exh. A(4.10.110), 4-15-2009) 
Sec. 14-39. - Abandonment. 
It is unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal to knowingly abandon the animal within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.120), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-40. - Guard animals. 
(a)  In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, any person maintaining a guard animal in an area for the protection of persons or property shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The animal shall be confined to an enclosed area adequate to ensure that it will not escape. 
(2)  When not securely enclosed, the animal shall be under the absolute control of a handler at all times, muzzled and restrained by a secure leash which is not in excess of six feet in length and which is of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(3)  The owner or other persons in control of the premises upon which a guard animal is maintained shall post warning signs over or next to all exterior doors stating that such an animal is on the premises. At least one such sign shall be posted at each driveway or entranceway to said premises. Such sign shall be in lettering clearly visible from either the curbline or at a distance of 50 feet, whichever is greater, and shall contain a telephone number where some person responsible for controlling such guard animal can be reached 24 hours a day. 
(4)  The owner or custodian shall report to the animal control unit within 24 hours any of the following: 
a.  Escape of the animal; 
b.  An attack on a human or animal by the animal; 
c.  Transfer of ownership of the animal; or 
d.  Death of the animal. 
(b)  Prior to the placing of a guard animal on any property, the person responsible for the placing shall inform the animal control officer, all law enforcement agencies of the governing authority and the fire chief, in writing, of the following: 
(1)  Their intention to post said animal; 
(2)  The number of animals to be posted; 
(3)  The location where said animal will be posted; 
(4)  The approximate length of time said animal will be guarding the area; and 
(5)  The breed, sex, age and rabies tag number of said animal. 
Said notice must be renewed every 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.130), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-41. - Confining dogs and cats in heat. 
Every female dog or cat in heat shall be confined in a building or other enclosure in such manner that such female animal cannot come into contact with another sexually intact animal of the same species except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.140), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-42. - Physical harm. 
Any person who causes undue suffering, deprives an injured or sick animal of necessary medical attention, tortures, torments, disfigures, maims, mutilates, kills, beats, bruises, wounds or poisons or exposes any poisonous substance with the intent that the poisonous substance should physically harm any domesticated animal, whether belonging to himself or another, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.150), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-43. - Food, exercise and air. 
Any person who confines any animal, reptile or fowl and fails to supply it with sufficient quantities of wholesome food and water, or who keeps any animal, reptile or fowl in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.160), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-44. - Shelter. 
Any owner, custodian or possessor of any animal, reptile or fowl kept outdoors who fails, to provide shelter with at least a roof, a floor and three sides of adequate size for the animal, reptile or fowl it is intended for and sufficient to protect said animal, reptile or fowl from the elements shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.170), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-45. - Sanitation. 
Any owner, custodian or possessor of any domesticated animal who fails to maintain in a clean and sanitary condition and free from extreme and unreasonable objectionable odor all structures, pens, yards, and areas adjacent thereto wherein any animal is kept shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.180), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-46. - Leaving in autos. 
Any person who transports any animal, reptile or fowl in the trunk of any vehicle or leaves an animal or fowl in a vehicle in extreme heat without proper ventilation shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.190), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-47. - Fighting. 
No person shall: 
(1)  Own, possess, keep or train any animal or fowl with the intent that such animal or fowl shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting; 
(2)  Build, make, maintain, or keep a pit on premises owned by him or occupied by him or allow a pit to be built, made, maintained or kept on such premises for the purposes of an exhibition of animal or fowl fighting; 
(3)  In any manner encourage, instigate, promote or assist in an exhibition of animal or fowl fighting or intentional combat; or 
(4)  Charge admission, be an assistant, umpire or participant or be present as a spectator to any exhibition or animal or fowl fighting or combat. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.200), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-48. - Use of animals as prizes. 
Any person who offers as a prize or gives away any animal, reptile or fowl in any contest, raffle or lottery or as an enticement for fundraising or for entry into any place of business shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.210), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-49. - Dying or coloring certain animals or fowl for display, sale, gift, etc., prohibited. 
No person shall sell, offer for sale, give away, or display living baby chicks, ducklings, or other fowl, or rabbits which have been dyed, colored or otherwise treated so as to impart to them an artificial color. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.220), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-50. - Procuring another to do act. 
Any person who procures another person to do any of the acts prohibited in sections 14-42 through 14-49 shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.230), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-51. - Exemptions. 
A person who is: 
(1)  Lawfully engaged in any sporting or hunting activity; 
(2)  Slaughtering animals, reptiles or fowl for the purpose of providing food; 
(3)  Engaged in the lawful euthanasia of an animal, reptile or fowl; or 
(4)  Acting as a law enforcement officer or animal control officer in the line of duty to protect against a case of aggression of an animal, reptile or fowl; 
shall not be charged with a violation of this article if the death of an animal, reptile or fowl occurs from any such lawful activity. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.240), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-52. - Disposal of dead animals. 
If a domesticated animal shall die, the owner must bury the carcass at least three feet below the ground level and have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass within 12 hours after the death and discovery of the carcass. In the event the public works director or his designee of the governing authority shall be designated by said governing authority to remove said carcasses, then it is unlawful to bury said carcass and said carcass shall be removed at the expense of the owner of the animal, if known, and the finance director of the governing authority shall collect the fee for the same as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.250), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-53. - Sterilization of animals. 
(a)  Any public or private animal shelter, animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of the state, humane society, or public or private animal refuge shall make provisions for the sterilization of all dogs or cats acquired from such shelter, agency, society, or refuge by: 
(1)  Providing sterilization by a licensed veterinarian before relinquishing custody of the animal; or 
(2)  Entering into a written agreement with the person acquiring such animal guaranteeing that sterilization will be performed by a licensed veterinarian within 30 days after acquisition of such animal in the case of a sexually mature animal or by the sexual maturity of the animal in the case of a sexually immature animal; 
provided, however, that the requirements of this section shall not apply to any privately owned animal which any such shelter, agency, society, or refuge may have in its possession for any reason if the owner of such animal claims or presents evidence that such animal is the property of such person. 
(b)  All costs of sterilization pursuant to this section shall be the responsibility of the person acquiring such animal and, if performed prior to acquisition, may be included in any fees charged by the shelter, agency, society, or refuge for such animal. 
(c)  Any person acquiring an animal from a public or private animal shelter, animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of the state, humane society, or public or private animal refuge, which animal is not sterile at the time of acquisition, shall submit to the animal shelter, animal control agency, humane society, or public or private animal refuge a signed statement from the licensed veterinarian performing the sterilization required by subsection (a)(2) of this section within seven days after such sterilization, attesting that such sterilization has been performed. 
(d)  Every public or private animal shelter, animal control agency operated by a political subdivision of the state, humane society, or public or private animal refuge selling or offering for sale or exchange any dog or cat shall maintain and furnish to any person acquiring an animal from such shelter, agency, society, or refuge a current list of veterinarians licensed in the state who have notified the shelter, agency, society, or refuge that they are willing to perform sterilizations and the cost for such procedures. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.260), 4-18-2002) 
Secs. 14-54—14-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-80. - Reasons. 
(a)  Any animal, reptile or fowl may be impounded if: 
(1)  It is not under restraint or is at large; 
(2)  It does not have a visible collar with a valid and current rabies vaccination tag affixed as required by section 14-37; 
(3)  It has been abandoned for 36 hours or more; 
(4)  It has bitten or is reasonably suspected of biting another animal or human and is being held for the required quarantine period under the rules of the board of health; or 
(5)  It has been abused as prohibited in sections 14-42 through 14-51. 
(b)  Said animal, reptile or fowl shall be impounded according to such rules and regulations now or hereafter prescribed by law or by the resolutions and ordinances of the governing authority for the detention, control and disposition of animals, reptiles and fowl. All impounded animals, reptiles and fowl, except exotic animals and livestock, shall be housed and cared for at the county humane society facilities. Impounded exotic animals and livestock will be housed at a facility approved by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.270), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-81. - Housing and care of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals. 
(a)  Upon a finding that an animal, reptile or fowl is dangerous or potentially dangerous and that the owner knew the animal, reptile or fowl was dangerous or potentially dangerous or upon confiscation pursuant to section 14-128, the animal, reptile or fowl may be impounded by the animal control unit or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority until such time as the owner of the dangerous or potentially dangerous animal provides proof of compliance with the duties of the owner of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals as set forth in article IV of this chapter. Any owner shall be held to know that such animal, reptile or fowl was dangerous or potentially dangerous if the animal, reptile or fowl had at any time displayed any one or more of the behaviors described in the definitions of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals in section 14-1. 
(b)  All animals, reptiles or fowl impounded under this section shall be housed and cared for at the county humane society facilities unless another facility which meets the requirements for housing a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is expressly agreed upon between the animal control officer and the animal's owner. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.280), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-82. - Notice to owner; fees; redemption. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the animal control unit to immediately notify the owner of each domesticated animal impounded if the owner of the domesticated animal is known or can be reasonably ascertained. The owner of any domesticated animal impounded may reclaim such domesticated animal by the payment of: 
(1)  Any impoundment fee charged by the county; 
(2)  Any charges assessed by the county humane society for processing and boarding the animal; 
(3)  The cost of the rabies inoculation, if required due to the animal not wearing a current rabies inoculation tag; and 
(4)  Upon proof of payment of any fine already imposed for a violation of this chapter, within 72 hours of the impoundment of the animal, and, if after 72 hours, the animal has not been adopted through the county hall county. 
(b)  Owners of animals who have been identified and notified but who refuse to reclaim their animals will be responsible for said fees as charged by the county and the county humane society. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.290), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-83. - Disposition of animals. 
The animal control unit shall release to the county humane society for adoption or euthanasia any animal unredeemed or unclaimed by the owner after 72 hours, except as otherwise provided in this article. Any person adopting an animal from the county humane society that has been impounded by animal control shall pay any charges assessed by the humane society for required inoculations, as well as processing and boarding the animal, and show proof of payment of any fine already imposed for a violation of this chapter prior to receiving the animal. In the case of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal, the person adopting the animal shall show proof of compliance with the duties of owners of dangerous or potentially dangerous animals before receiving the animal. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.300), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-84. - Destruction of biting animals. 
All animals or fowl, other than a dog or cat, which are known to have bitten a person or any animal which cannot be held for a rabies observation period shall be euthanized and a lab specimen of brain tissue sent to the state department of epidemiology for testing and control of rabies in accordance with the rules of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.310), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-85. - Destruction of suffering animals. 
While being impounded, any animal, reptile or fowl which is suffering excessively or any animal which represents a real danger to persons or other animals, without regard to the period of confinement as provided in section 14-83, shall be destroyed by an animal control officer in as humane a manner as possible. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.320), 4-18-2002) 
Secs. 14-86—14-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 14-114. - Animal control officer; duties generally. 
The animal control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous animals and dangerous animal owners within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.330), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-115. - Notice required. 
When a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is classified as such, or when a potentially dangerous animal is reclassified as a dangerous animal, the animal control officer shall notify the animal's owner of such classification. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.340), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-116. - Contents of notice. 
Notices to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and either mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address or hand-delivered to the owner. Such notice shall be complete either upon its mailing or, if hand-delivered, upon personal receipt. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the animal's classification or reclassification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the animal is a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the governing authority or its designee, and shall specify the name of the agency which shall conduct the hearing. 
(5)  The notice shall state that either a filing fee in the amount of $250.00 or a sufficient pauper's affidavit showing that the owner is unable without undue financial hardship to pay the filing fee shall be filed with the hearing request to the governing authority or its designee for said hearing. 
(6)  The notice shall state that, if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that an animal is a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
(7)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the governing authority or its designee and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the governing authority or its designee. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.350), 4-18-2002; Ord. No. 407, exh. A(4.10.350), 4-15-2009) 
Sec. 14-117. - Liability of owner. 
The notice procedures provided for in this article are not an essential condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is held to know that such animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous if the animal has, at any time, displayed any one or more of the behaviors described in the definitions of dangerous animals or potentially dangerous animals as provided in section 14-1. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.360), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-118. - Presiding body at hearings. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-22 and 4-8-24, the governing authority may conduct hearings provided for in this article, may designate an animal control board to conduct such hearings, or may designate the board of health to conduct such hearings. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.370), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-119. - Procedure for hearings. 
When the governing authority or its designee receives a request for a hearing as provided in section 14-116, along with payment of the fee or a sufficient pauper's affidavit showing that the owner is unable without undue financial hardship to pay the filing fee required for said hearing, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The governing authority or its designee shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the animal owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and in addition thereto the governing authority or its designee shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority or its designee may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.380), 4-18-2002; Ord. No. 407, exh. A(4.10.380), 4-15-2009) 
Sec. 14-120. - Notice of determination. 
Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the governing authority or its designee shall notify the animal owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the animal is a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. If such determination is that the animal is not a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal, then the governing authority or its designee for said hearing may, in its discretion, return to the animal owner any filing fee paid. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.390), 4-18-2002; Ord. No. 407, exh. A(4.10.390), 4-15-2009) 
Sec. 14-121. - Certificate of registration. 
It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the jurisdiction of the governing authority a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal without a certificate of registration issued annually in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.400), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-122. - Proof of proper enclosure; posting of premises. 
Subject to the additional requirements of section 14-123, the animal control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal if the owner presents to the animal control officer or the animal control officer otherwise finds sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal; and 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous animal on the property and containing a symbol designed to inform children of the presence of a dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.410), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-123. - Proof of insurance or bond. 
In addition to the requirements of section 14-122, the owner of a dangerous animal shall present to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.00 per occurrence issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the state insuring the owner of the dangerous animal against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous animal; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $100,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the state payable to any person injured by the dangerous animal. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.420), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-124. - Notice of escape, death, or change of ownership. 
The owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal shall notify the animal control officer immediately if the animal has attacked a human, reptile or fowl or within 24 hours if the animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the animal has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the animal control officer with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.430), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-125. - Annual registration fee. 
An annual fee of $50.00 shall be charged by the animal control officer to defray the cost to register dangerous animals and potentially dangerous animals as required in this article. Said fee shall be due and payable at the time an application is made for a certificate of registration to be issued. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.440), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-126. - Muzzling of dangerous animals. 
It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the animal or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. The leash shall not be in excess of six feet in length and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.450), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-127. - Restraint of potentially dangerous animals. 
It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous animal to permit the animal to be outside a proper enclosure unless the animal is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. The leash shall not be in excess of six feet in length and shall be of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.460), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-128. - Confiscation; return to owner or destruction. 
(a)  A dangerous animal shall be immediately confiscated by the animal control officer, by a law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal control officer if: 
(1)  The owner of the animal, reptile or fowl does not secure and maintain the liability insurance or bond required by this article; 
(2)  The animal, reptile or fowl is not validly registered as required by this article; 
(3)  The animal, reptile or fowl is not maintained in a proper enclosure; 
(4)  The premises where the animal, reptile or fowl is located are not posted as required by this article; or 
(5)  The animal, reptile or fowl is outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. 
(b)  A potentially dangerous animal shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous animal if the animal, reptile or fowl is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by this article; 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of this article. 
(c)  Any animal, reptile or fowl that has been confiscated under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within ten business days of the date the animal, reptile or fowl was confiscated, said animal, reptile or fowl shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.470), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-129. - Exemptions. 
(a)  An animal that inflicts an injury upon a person when the animal is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties shall not be a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal within the meaning of this chapter. An animal shall not be a dangerous animal or a potentially dangerous animal within the meaning of this chapter if the injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. 
(b)  No owner of a dangerous animal shall be held criminally liable under this article for injuries inflicted by said owner's animal to any human being while on the owner's property if said owner is in compliance with the provisions of this article at the time of the injuries being inflicted. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.480), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-130. - Destruction. 
If impracticable to impound a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal due to its viciousness, or if the delay or attempt to impound the same be attended with danger, it shall be the duty of any law enforcement agency of the governing authority or the animal control officer to destroy the animal. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.490), 4-18-2002) 
Sec. 14-131. - Citation and court appearance for violations. 
Upon information known to or upon a complaint being lodged with an animal control officer or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority that an animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous and not being kept by its owner under restraint in compliance with this article, the animal control officer or any law enforcement agency employee of the governing authority shall issue a citation for the violation to the owner of the animal to appear before the judge of the magistrate's court of the county on a day and time certain for a hearing to determine if the animal is dangerous or potentially dangerous as defined in section 14-1. 
(Ord. No. 276, exh. A(4.10.500), 4-18-2002) 
Chapter 17 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Drop boxes. 
Drop boxes not associated with the principal use of the property on which they are located shall be prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 516 , § 3, 11-5-2015) 
Secs. 17-2—17-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES AND STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-19. - Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes—Findings and adoption. 
The city council finds that it is the intent of the city to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs. Accordingly, the city council hereby adopts the following state minimum standard codes: 
International Building Code (IBC). 
National Electrical Code (NEC). 
International Fuel Gas Code (IFGC). 
International Mechanical Code (IMC). 
International Plumbing Code (IPC). 
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (IRC). 
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC). 
International Fire Code (IFC). 
(Ord. No. 356, § 1, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-20. - Same—Adoption of appendices. 
The city council hereby adopts the following appendices of the codes referenced is section 17-19, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, by reference as though they were copied herein fully: 
International Building Code: All appendices (with the exception of appendix A, B, D and K). 
National Electrical Code: Annex. A-a. 
International Fuel Gas Code: All appendices. 
International Mechanical Code: All appendices (with the exception of appendix B). 
International Plumbing Code: All appendices (with the exception of appendix A). 
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings: All appendices (with the exception of appendix I and L). 
International Energy Conservation Code: All appendices. 
International Fire Code: All appendices. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 2, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-21. - Adoption of optional codes approved by the state department of community affairs. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts the International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) and the International Existing Building Code (IEBC), as approved and amended by the state department of community affairs, by reference as though they were copied herein fully. 
(b)  The following sections of the IPMC are revised as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Flowery Branch, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 103.1 General. All references in this code to the "code official" shall mean the "building official" of the City of Flowery Branch, hereinafter referred to as "the city." All references in this code to "the department" shall mean "the department of community planning." 
Section 103.2 Authority. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provision of this code. This building official is further authorized to render interpretations of this code which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
Section 103.3 Appointment. The building official, with the concurrence of the director of community planning, shall have the authority to appoint an assistant building official, other related technical officers, inspectors and other employees. 
Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the building official or his designees in carrying out the responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated by resolution of the city council. 
Section 111.2. The city council shall be the board of appeals. 
Section 111.2.1 Alternate members. This section is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 111.2.2 Chairman Chairperson. The mayor shall be the chairperson of the board of appeals and preside over meetings of the board of appeals. 
Section 111.2.3 Disqualification of member. A member shall not hear an appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial interest. 
Section 111.2.4 Secretary. The city clerk shall serve as secretary of the board of appeals. The secretary shall file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the city clerk. 
Section 111.2.5 Compensation of members. This section is deleted in its entirety. 
Section 111.3 Notice of meeting. The board shall meet, upon notice from the city clerk, within 20 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
Section 111.4 Open hearing. All hearings before the board shall be open to the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the code official and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. A quorum of the board shall be the same as a quorum as defined by the city Charter. 
Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of 12 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs; provided, however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Agricultural operations and agriculturally zoned properties, as defined by the adopted zoning ordinance, shall not be considered by the city to be nuisances if state law restricts agricultural facilities and operations from being deemed a nuisance. No agricultural facility or any agricultural operation at an agricultural facility shall be or shall become a nuisance, either public or private, as a result of changed conditions in or around the locality of such agricultural facility if the agricultural facility has been in operation for one year or more. This provision shall not apply when a nuisance results from the negligent, improper, or illegal operation of an agricultural facility. 
Section 302.10 Trees. 
(a)  Hazardous trees. Dead trees shall not be allowed to exist or to be maintained on any premises which are hazardous to persons on adjacent property or to adjacent property. A finding by a registered forester or certified arborist shall constitute prima facie evidence that a tree is in danger of falling upon adjacent lots or public streets due to the death of the tree. 
(b)  Tree stumps. Tree stumps greater than 12 inches in height above ground level shall not be permitted or maintained on any property for more than 14 days after the tree has been cut. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land disturbance permit. 
(2)  Same as "Agricultural" exemptions identified in Section 302.4. 
(c)  Tree debris. Felled trees, slash or removed tree limbs shall not be permitted or maintained on the ground on any property for more than 14 days. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Property covered by a valid land disturbing permit. 
(2)  Cut wood which is neatly stacked in lengths not to exceed three feet and which is stored in the side or rear yard. 
(3)  Same as "Agricultural" exemptions identified in Section 302.4. 
(4)  Composting activities which comply with state law. 
(5)  Creation of a natural habitat area (provided that it is located within an identified undisturbed buffer area and does not create a hazardous condition relating to drainage, access or general nuisance). 
Section 303.3 Stagnant water. Stagnant water in swimming pools, spas and hot tubs conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects shall not be permitted or maintained on any property. A finding by a health official of any governmental health department shall constitute prima facie evidence that stagnant water in a swimming pool, spa or hot tub is conducive to the breeding or harboring of mosquitoes or other insects. 
Section 304.14 Insect screens. Every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed. 
Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from November 1 to March 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68 degrees Fahrenheit (20 degrees Celsius) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required, provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
(2)  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30 degrees Fahrenheit (-1 degree Celsius) a minimum temperature of 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) shall be maintained. 
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from November 1 to March 31 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65 degrees Fahrenheit (18 degrees Celsius) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
(2)  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Ord. No. 356, § 3, 4-18-2007; Ord. No. 356-1, § 1, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-22. - Remedies and penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate a provision of the construction codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure or electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved, or demolished a building or electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  For violation of this article, the city may issue a citation to the alleged violator requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment of six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 357, att. A, § 6, 4-18-2007) 
Secs. 17-23—17-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 17-48. - Findings; adoption of administrative procedures for enforcement. 
The city council finds that it is the intent of the city to enforce the latest edition of the following Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, certain appendices of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, and certain optional codes approved by the state department of community affairs as identified within Ordinance No. 356. The administrative procedures appearing herein shall be used for the enforcement of said codes in the city. 
(Ord. No. 357, § 1, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-49. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs and all other adopted codes identified within Ordinance No. 356. Hereinafter, the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, certain appendices of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes, and certain optional codes approved by the state department of community affairs shall be referred to as "the construction codes." 
(b)  Code remedial. 
(1)  General. These construction codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof (public safety, health, and general welfare) through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the construction codes except as it relates to the purposes stated therein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system, or plan under the requirements of construction codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. The city, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(4)  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except in one and two family dwellings. 
(5)  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
(6)  Gas. The provisions of the International Fuel Gas Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances, and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(7)  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
(8)  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
(9)  Fire prevention. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(10)  Energy. The provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical electrical service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
(11)  One- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
(12)  International Property Maintenance Code and International Existing Building Code. The provisions of this code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired and/or demolished. 
(13)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the construction codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the construction codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(14)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. 
(15)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the construction codes shall be considered an integral part of the construction codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where construction code provisions conflict with a standard, the construction code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(16)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the construction codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(17)  Building department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. 
(18)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflicts with the interests of the department. 
(19)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq.). 
(20)  Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of the construction codes, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of the construction codes shall be defended by the governing jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(21)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. 
(c)  Existing buildings, general. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system to comply with all the requirements of the construction codes, provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the construction codes for new construction. (See also IBC Section 3403.1.) 
(d)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the construction codes as required by the building official. 
(e)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the construction codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Ord. No. 357, att. A, § 1, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-50. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the construction codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the construction codes which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the construction codes, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these construction codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to the construction codes. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the construction codes or in dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the construction codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system for which the permit was issued is in violation of or not in conformity with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe or unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the adopted International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), International Existing Building Code (IEBC) or by any adopted nuisance regulations. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the construction codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the construction codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the construction codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. No. 357, att. A, § 2, 4-18-2007) 
Secs. 17-51—17-73. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS, CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY AND TESTS 

Sec. 17-74. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. 
(1)  Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the construction codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
(2)  Exception. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
a.  Any portable heating appliance; 
b.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
c.  Any portable cooling unit; 
d.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the construction codes; 
e.  Replacements of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
f.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
g.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 w) or less. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the construction codes. 
(d)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(e)  Time limitations. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 120 days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(f)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications and of drawings drawn to scale, with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the construction codes. Such information shall be specific, and the construction codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with his official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, as appropriate, for the following: 
a.  All group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. Exception: single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(g)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent accessways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale, which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquidtight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous material stored. 
(h)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. Please be advised that examination of plans is subject to article III of this chapter and any corresponding fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official, at his discretion (in lieu of the plan review described in subsection (h)(1) of this section), may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or licensed engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the construction codes. This process will only be considered for unique projects that are minor in scope and size. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangements and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the construction codes as to strength, stresses, stains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspections reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the construction codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the construction codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(i)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the construction codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the construction codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the construction codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of planning for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building, and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(j)  Contractor responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing system for which a permit is required to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before he is permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with his license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(k)  Permit intent. 
(1)  A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the construction codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the construction codes. Every building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within 120 days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, he shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the construction codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official and consistent with all applicable local and state laws. 
(l)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(m)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas system, etc., has been paid. Please be advised that examination of plans are subject to articles III and V of this chapter and any corresponding fee schedule adopted by the city council. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, etc., before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. (See article V of this chapter.) 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system appears to be underestimated on the application, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include the total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(n)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas mechanical or plumbing system for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the construction codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and all violations of the construction codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by these procedures. He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the construction codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspection prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspection. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the construction code: 
a.  Building. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. Additional certification/verification of foundation location may be required as determined by the building official. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
b.  Electrical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
c.  Plumbing. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after the trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
4.  Note: See International Plumbing Code for required tests. 
d.  Mechanical. 
1.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
2.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
e.  Gas. 
1.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
2.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to ensure compliance with all the requirements of the construction codes and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
f.  Energy. 
1.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, if required. 
2.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
3.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-valve of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation or plumbing work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until release from the building official has been received. 
(o)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificates of occupancy, building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the construction codes, reviewed plans and specifications and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the construction codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the construction codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the construction codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(5)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(p)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connection. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the construction codes for which a permit is required, until released or authorized by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the construction codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(q)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved designs which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. No. 357, att. A, § 3, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-75. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. No. 357, att. A, § 4, 4-18-2007) 
Secs. 17-76—17-93. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTSIDE AGENTS FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 

Sec. 17-94. - Amendment to prior ordinances requiring professional review. 
This article shall amend prior enacted ordinances of the city which require or necessitate the need for professional review of the design and construction of development within the city, including, but not limited to, the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, adopted building codes in article II of this chapter, and water and sewer use ordinance, including, but not limited to, the amendment to said ordinance setting out standard specifications for water and sewer construction and as to storm drainage construction, and other such prior properly passed ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 1, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-95. - Agent for review and approval of design and construction in accordance with the ordinances for the city. 
Prior ordinances of the city which require certain technical or specific construction specifications as to both design and construction to be done within the city are hereby amended to allow the city council to designate the city engineer, or other proper duly authorized agent, to perform the review and approval of said technical and construction specifications as to design and construction. However, nothing herein shall permit or approve any such agent for the city to make any final zoning decision, or other decisions specifically required by law to be made by the governing authority. The intent and purpose of this article is to allow the city to utilize professionals with expertise in the areas where review and approval is required regarding technical and construction specifications as to design and construction of buildings and structures, subdivisions, storm drainage, water lines, sewer lines, road construction and other such development or construction within the city. Therefore, by proper resolution, the city council may designate the city engineer, and/or other proper agent, to perform the review and approval process as to technical and construction details as to design and construction within the city. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 2, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-96. - Reimbursement for expense of review and approval by agent. 
The city shall also be authorized, by proper resolution, to designate and set a fee schedule to reimburse the city for its costs and expenses regarding the review and approval by the duly authorized agent of the technical and construction specifications as to design and construction within the city. The fee schedule shall be regulatory in nature and designed to reimburse the city for its cost and expense in having said agent perform the review and approval process, and said fee schedule shall not be a revenue generating measure. The city council may establish different rates for different agents, and as to different reviews performed by said agent. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 3, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-97. - No warranty as to individuals due to review and approval by city agent. 
(a)  The review and approval of any agent of the city, including, but not limited to, any agent appointed by proper resolution pursuant to this article, the city council, or other duly authorized agent, shall only be to determine whether the design and construction to be performed within the city is in compliance with the public ordinances and design and construction specifications of the city. 
(b)  Approval and documentation of said approval, including, but not limited to, verbal or written approval of preliminary plats, site plans, subdivision plats, building plans/permits, certificates of occupancy, and all other such approvals or permits, is not a guarantee that the property, premises, line, appliance, structure, or building contains no code or ordinance violations, and merely certifies to the best of the ability of the agent of the city that the proposed plans, roads, actual lines, structures, or other construction are in compliance with the ordinances and construction specifications of the city, and that no code violations or ordinance violations, or both, were discovered. 
(c)  The applicant, owner, occupant, builder, designer, architect, contractor, any other party, or any combination thereof as to buildings/structures, preliminary/final/subdivision plat lines, roads, and premises shall be responsible for any code violations, ordinance violations, defects, injuries or damages arising from the premises, roads, structure, building, subdivision design, lines, or other improvements, which have been reviewed and approved by agents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 4, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-98. - Remedies and penalties for violation. 
As additional remedies to any other remedies and penalties allowed by any ordinance of the city, the city building official or city planner, upon an indication of a violation of the public codes or public ordinances, or both, of the city, may deny a building permit, construction permit, LDP (land disturbance permit), subdivision plan, a preliminary subdivision plat, a final subdivision plat, and authorize the city attorney to take such actions as are necessary, by court suit seeking injunctive relief, or other proper remedies, to prevent use of any property in violation with the public ordinances, or public code, or both, or to require that the construction or design be brought into compliance with the public codes and ordinances, or both, of the city, or constructing or maintaining any structure, premises, or improvements within the city in violation of said public codes or public ordinances, or both. Further, the failure of any applicant to pay the fees and expenses for the review and approval of any agent for the city shall authorize the city to withhold its approval and any permits needed by said applicant, until such time as applicant has completely paid the fees and expenses incurred by the city for the review and approved by the duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 5, 4-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-99. - Additional time to allow review and approval by agent of the city. 
Whenever previous ordinances provide for certain time periods for approvals of buildings/structures, proposed subdivision plats, line construction, road construction, structures, and other improvements, or design of any subdivision or improvement, or any combination thereof, said time periods are hereby extended for an additional 60 days in order to allow the properly designated agent for the city to conduct the review, inspection, and approval process regarding the design or improvement to be reviewed and approved. This time period extension shall also apply to those time periods within prior passed ordinances of the city that require the city council, planning department or building department to take action within a certain time period. This time extension does not apply to the review period identified within article 24 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 6, 4-18-2007) 
Secs. 17-100—17-126. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ABATEMENT OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 17-127. - Findings. 
(a)  It is found and declared that in the city there is or may be the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city or operation of law, or general nuisance law, and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city, and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is found and declared that in the city there is or may be in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. 
(c)  It is found and declared that the failure to maintain structures and premises in the city has a detrimental effect on the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 1, 12-18-2007) 
Sec. 17-128. - Abatement. 
(a)  Where it is determined by the zoning administrator that there exists in the city dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, building or structures unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, the zoning administrator or his designee may exercise the power to repair, close or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, which are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  All the provisions of this article, including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that said property is in violation of this article. 
(c)  All the provisions of this article, including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where there exists a violation of the state minimum construction codes and optional codes adopted and to be enforced by the city. 
(Ord. No. 372, § 2, 12-18-2007) 
Secs. 17-129—17-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FEES 

Sec. 17-155. - Establishment of fees by resolution. 
The council hereby authorizes the creation of fee schedule, which shall be a regulatory fee consistent with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(e), for building reviews and permits, planning and zoning applications, reviews and permits, water and sewer reviews and permits and other development applications, to be enacted by resolution and maintained on file with the city clerk. With respect to an application for annexation, the city manager may waive the application fee established by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 479, § I, 11-21-2013 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 479, § I, adopted Nov. 21, 2013 , repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 359, § 1, 4-18-2007; Res. No. 08-013, 8-20-2008. 
Chapter 20 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(5); business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YARD AND GARAGE SALES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Additional yard sale regulations appear in § 11.14 ("Yard Sale") of article 11 "Buildings, Structures, and Uses Accessory to Single-Family Residential Dwellings," in the Zoning Ordinance of the city. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 505A , § 1, adopted Jan. 19, 2017, repealed former Art. II, §§ 20-19—20-25, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 505, § 1, 12-18-2014. 

Sec. 20-19. - Title. 
This article shall be titled and known as the yard and garage sale ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 505A, § 1, 1-19-2017 ) 
Sec. 20-20. - Permits for sales. 
(a)  Every person desiring to conduct a yard or garage sale in the city shall make an application for a permit to conduct such sale with the city and pay a $5.00 application fee. 
(b)  Upon making the application, applicant will be assigned a permit, having a designated permit number, which shall be displayed during the sale. No permit shall be issued to any person who has been cited for violations of this article two or more times during the six months preceding the application date. 
( Ord. No. 505A, § 1, 1-19-2017 ) 
Sec. 20-21. - Required clean up after sale. 
After the yard or garage sale is conducted, all signs and trash collected on the premises, and all signs advertising the sale place on other locations shall be removed within 24 hours after the sale. 
( Ord. No. 505A, § 1, 1-19-2017 ) 
Sec. 20-22. - Duration of sale. 
No yard or garage sale shall be conducted for more than three days. 
( Ord. No. 505A, § 1, 1-19-2017 ) 
Sec. 20-23. - Number of sales. 
No more than four yard or garage sales shall be conducted upon any one lot or parcel during a calendar year. 
( Ord. No. 505A, § 1, 1-19-2017 ) 
Sec. 20-24. - Advertising a sale. 
(a)  No signs advertising a yard or garage sale shall be placed on traffic directional signs. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for anyone residing outside the city to advertise a yard or garage sale, which is to be conducted outside the city limits by placing signs on street rights-of-way, highway rights-of-way and utility poles within the corporate limits of the city. Such signs shall be removed by the city. 
( Ord. No. 505A, § 1, 1-19-2017 ) 
Sec. 20-25. - Traffic. 
Any person conducting a yard or garage sale shall be responsible for keeping the street clear for the movement of traffic during the time of said sale. 
( Ord. No. 505A, § 1, 1-19-2017 ) 
Secs. 20-26—20-51. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGISTRATION AND OCCUPATIONAL TAX 

Sec. 20-52. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
Location and office include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
Number of employees of a given business means the average number employed as of October 1 of the previous year. Two parttime employees would be counted as one fulltime employee. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. The term "practitioner of profession or occupation" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 2, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-53. - Required. 
(a)  Each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the code enforcement officer or his deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(b)  There is levied and assessed a license tax for each calendar year on all occupations and businesses in the city which, under the laws of the state, the city has the authority to license and collect a tax. Such license tax shall be determined in accordance with the schedule of taxes that is incorporated by reference into this article. A current copy of the license tax schedule is maintained in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. 
(c)  There is levied and assessed, in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, a business license tax on all depository financial institutions, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, which are located within the city. This business license tax shall not exceed 0.25 percent of the gross receipts, as defined and allocated in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, of such depository financial institutions. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 3, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-54. - Levied. 
An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(1) based upon the following criteria. The tax rate determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as established by the city council, from time to time. 
Sec. 20-55. - Purpose and scope. 
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations shall be taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 5, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-56. - Time taxes due; penalty and interest for default in payment. 
(a)  All occupation taxes shall be due and payable annually within 30 days following June 1. 
(b)  All occupation taxes not paid within 30 days following June 1 shall be delinquent and subject to an interest charge of 1.5 percent per month until paid. 
(c)  Should any occupation taxes remain due and unpaid for 90 days from the due date, the person liable for the taxes shall be subject to and shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the taxes due. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 6, 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 118-B, § I, 11-1-2006) 
Sec. 20-57. - New businesses. 
(a)  On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city: 
(1)  The occupation tax is due within 30 days of June 1 of each year or within 30 days following commencement of a new business whichever first occurs. 
(2)  Registration and regulatory fees shall be delinquent if not paid to the city immediately upon beginning business. 
(3)  However, the regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession when: 
a.  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health or safety of one or more individuals; 
b.  The work done or service provided have no adverse effect on any other person; and 
c.  Regulatory fees are tendered within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession. 
(b)  If the occupation tax or license fee is not paid, it shall be subject to an interest charge of 1.5 percent per month until paid. Additionally, should such occupation tax not be paid within 90 days of the first date the business transacted business in the city, an additional penalty of ten percent of the tax shall also be due. 
(c)  Any new profession, trade or calling beginning business in the city on or after July 1 shall be taxed at 50 percent of the annual rate pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-22. This does not apply to regulatory fees. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 7, 1-27-2005; Ord. No. 431, § 8, 3-4-2010) 
Sec. 20-58. - Collection. 
(a)  The tax registration provided for in this article shall be issued by the tax clerk and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained the registration, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished pursuant this article. 
(b)  In addition to the other remedies available to the city for the collection of occupation taxes, and regulatory fees due from persons subject to the tax or fee who fail or refuse to pay the tax or fee, the tax clerk shall issue executions against the delinquent taxpayers for any or all of the following: 
(1)  The amount of the taxes or fees due when the taxes or fees become due; 
(2)  Any penalty imposed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21(a); and 
(3)  Any interest imposed by the local ordinance in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21(b). 
(c)  The court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of ordinances of the local government which has levied the tax or imposed the fee may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax or regulatory fee. Such a civil fine shall not exceed $500.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(d)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(e)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 8, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-59. - Out-of-state business. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Businesses and practitioners subject to this section shall be required to pay an occupation tax to only one local government in this state, the local government for the municipal corporation or county in which the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by the individual business or practitioner. 
(c)  If a business or practitioner subject to this section provides to the local government in this state which is authorized to levy an occupation tax on such business or practitioner proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, the business or practitioner shall be exempt from the local occupation tax in this state. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 9, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-60. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 10, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-61. - Multiple businesses separately taxed. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax levied under this article. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 11, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-62. - Professionals. 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (c)(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10. 
(2)  A fee of $300.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; however, a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 12, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-63. - Practitioners exclusively employed by governmental agency. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 13, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-64. - Regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(b)  A regulatory fee schedule will be adopted by the council and amended from time to time by the council. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 14, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-65. - Allocation of occupation tax of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city, only the employees who work in the local government's jurisdiction will be counted for taxing purposes. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city one or more of the following: 
(1)  Financial documents pertaining to employee/payroll information. 
(2)  Certified letter from a licensed C.P.A. verifying average number of employees. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 15, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-66. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. Nonprofit organizations, state and local authorities are exempt from payment of occupation taxes and regulatory permits. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 16, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-67. - Evidence of state registration required; display. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 (O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq.) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 17, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-68. - Evidence of qualification required. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(b)  Before issuance of a new city business registration, the city building inspector/code enforcement officer shall first inspect the business for safety and certify that it is located within the proper zoning district with the tax clerk. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 18, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-69. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided for the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 19, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-70. - Building inspector/code enforcement officer's subpoena and arrest powers. 
The city building inspector/code enforcement officer or any city police officer shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 20, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-71. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, chapter 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-80 et seq. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 21, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-72. - Inapplicable tax. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by state laws or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 22, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-73. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
In the case of a business subject to an occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the number of employees from the commencing date to the end of the calendar year and such tax shall be paid at the time of registration pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 23, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-74. - More than one place or line of business. 
Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business will pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 24, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-75. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the city, through its officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The tax clerk officer shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the tax clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the tax clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty for delinquent tax will be assessed. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 25, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-76. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay an occupation tax or any part of an occupation tax required by this article before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in the previous section, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso factor, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax is at that time unpaid, or to an individual who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the tax clerk. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 26, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-77. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in the city, after the registration for such business has been revoked as provided in this article, required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make the returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 27, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-78. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax. 
In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the tax clerk, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city, the county and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and dated from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the code enforcement officer of the city upon the property of the defendant located in such jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the tax clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 28, 1-27-2005) 
State Law reference— Interest on judgments, O.C.G.A. § 7-4-12. 
Sec. 20-79. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 29, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-80. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 30, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-81. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is the duty of the city clerk and building inspections/code enforcement department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is the further duty of the city clerk and building inspections/code enforcement department and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 31, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-82. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax levied by this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 32, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-83. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 33, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-84. - Conflicts. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention of this section that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 34, 1-27-2005) 
Sec. 20-85. - Revocation. 
(a)  In addition to the penalties provided by this article, any person violating the provisions of this article or any ordinance or regulation governing the conduct of his business shall be subject to having his license revoked. No business license may be revoked by the city without first having provided the business owner with written notice stating the grounds on which the council may choose to proceed and providing the business owner with the right to a hearing, provided such right to hearing must be exercised by the business owner, in writing, within five days of receipt of council notice. 
(b)  The city council may, if it finds this article has been violated by the licensee, his agent or employee, instead of revoking a license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the city council may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 118-A, § 35, 1-27-2005) 
Secs. 20-86—20-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 448 , § I, adopted June 2, 2011, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 20-114—20-117, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to insurers and derived from Ord. No. 80, §§ 1—3, § 5, adopted 6-3-1991. 

Sec. 20-114. - License fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city, in the amount of $50.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 20-115 of this article, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $50.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
( Ord. No. 448, § I, 6-2-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-115. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-116. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a license agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $17.50 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
( Ord. No. 448, § I, 6-2-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-117. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 20-115 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 448, § I, 6-2-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-118. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurance transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the state in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 20-115 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 448, § I, 6-2-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-119. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 20-115 and 20-116 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 2012 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
( Ord. No. 448, § I, 6-2-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-120. - Enforcement. 
The fees and taxes levied by this article may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. A violation of this article shall be grounds for refusing, or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violations of other city ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 448, § I, 6-2-2011 ) 
Secs. 20-121—20-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 20-148. - Title. 
The ordinance shall be titled and known as the Flowery Branch Business License Tax for Depository Financial Institutions Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 1, 5-20-1996) 
Sec. 20-149. - Depository financial institutions business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, as amended, there is hereby an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the corporate limits of the city, including, but not limited to, all in-state banking associations, all out-of-state banking associations, all national banking associations, all federal savings and loan associations, all in-state building and loan associations, and all out-of-state building and loan associations. The business license tax shall be at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each of said depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, as amended. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 2, 5-20-1996) 
Sec. 20-150. - Due date; filing of return. 
Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city, on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d), as amended. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date of taxes levied by this ordinance shall be April 1, 1997, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. 121, § 3, 5-20-1996) 
Secs. 20-151—20-168. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLICITATION[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; exception from local peddler or itinerant vendor licensing requirements for persons selling agricultural products, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-6. 

Sec. 20-169. - Findings and intent. 
The intent of the city council in enacting this article is to regulate the sale of goods and services by soliciting at residences in the city, to the end that criminal activity in the city and abusive techniques utilized by any such solicitors which adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare in the city will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of door-to-door solicitation, nor is it an attempt to adversely affect interstate commerce. Instead, this article is intended to balance competing interest, reduce criminal activity and protect city residents from abusive sales techniques versus the conduct of proper commercial sales activity. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 1, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-170. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Solicitor means any person who solicits orders door-to-door or house-to-house on behalf of a business, individual, vocation or occupation. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 2, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-171. - Exempt activities or organizations. 
(a)  Persons, businesses and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Bona fide charitable organizations tax exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(c)  Bona fide charitable or nonprofit organizations whose field sales representatives are under the age of 18 are not required to obtain a solicitor's license. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 3, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-172. - License required; application. 
(a)  All persons, firms, companies, corporations or other entities engaging or offering to engage in business as a solicitor involving going from door-to-door or house-to-house, without an appointment or invitation, in residential areas or businesses in the city, for the purpose of soliciting orders, sales, subscriptions or conducting business of any kind, shall file an application in the required form, and obtain a solicitor's license for such activity from city clerk. 
(b)  The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Social Security number; 
(4)  Physical description; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's employer; 
(6)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant's supervisor; 
(7)  Brief description of products or services to be sold; 
(8)  Description of motor vehicles to be used by the applicant in conducting the solicitation; and 
(9)  Criminal history. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 4, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-173. - Investigation. 
(a)  A review of criminal history records is required prior to the issuance of a solicitor's license. In addition to a review of criminal history, the applicant must provide the following items: 
(1)  Two forms of positive identification (only official United States Government issued pictured identification accepted; e.g., a valid driver's license, military ID card or valid state ID car). 
(2)  Fingerprints may be required on occasion for positive identification. 
(b)  The city shall make an investigation, including, but not limited to, an investigation of the police record and moral character of the applicant. The city clerk shall furnish the application to the police chief. The police chief shall furnish a report to the city clerk of the criminal history record, if any, of the applicant. 
(c)  The criminal history record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of criminal history records, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 5, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-174. - Disqualification. 
(a)  No solicitor's license shall be issued to any applicant who provides any false or misleading information in connection with the application for the license required by this article. 
(b)  No solicitor's license shall be granted to any person under the age of 18 or who has been convicted, pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere under any federal, state or local law of any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sexual related crime, any theft or violence against person or property, any crime of possession or sale, or distribution of illegal drugs, distribution of material depicting nudity or sexual conduct as defined under state law, criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses, or attempts to commit any of these listed offenses, for a period of ten years prior to the date of application for such license and has been released from parole or probation. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 7, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-175. - Denial. 
(a)  If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the police chief shall endorse on such application his disapproval and the reasons for such disapproval, and return the application to the city clerk who will notify the applicant that the application is disapproved and that no license will be issued. 
(b)  No application for a solicitor's license shall be received or acted upon if the applicant has submitted the same or similar application for a solicitor's license within the preceding 12 months which was denied. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 8, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-176. - Approval; issuance. 
If, as a result of the investigation authorized by this article, the applicant's character and business responsibility are found to be satisfactory, the police chief shall endorse on such application his approval and reasons for such approval, and return the application to the city clerk, who shall, upon payment of regulatory fees as established by resolution of the city council, issue a solicitor's license. A solicitor's license shall contain the name, address, physical description and organizational affiliation of the licensee; a description of the solicitation activity to be engaged in; an expiration date; and the signature and seal of the city clerk. The city clerk shall keep a record of all solicitors' licenses issued. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 9, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-177. - Duration; renewal. 
A solicitor's license shall be valid for 12 months from the date it is issued. However, the license may be renewed by filing a renewal application with the city clerk upon forms prescribed by him, and paying a renewal fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 10, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-178. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The license issued to any solicitor charged with any felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, or violation of this or any other Flowery Branch ordinance shall be deemed suspended and subject to seizure from the time of lawful arrest by the police department. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to present the city clerk with proof that the arrest which lead to the suspension was dismissed, "dead-docketed," "nolle prossed," or "no-billed." Upon representation of proof of such dispositions, the solicitor's license will be reinstated and will be valid until the date of the original expiration. 
(b)  The license of any solicitor who is convicted, has entered a plea of guilty, or has received a nolo contendere to a felony, criminal trespass, public indecency, misdemeanor involving any type of sex crime, theft or violence against person or property, or criminal solicitation to commit any of these offenses, shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the chief of police or his designee from the time of such conviction, guilty or nolo contendere sentencing. 
(c)  The license of any solicitor who is convicted, has entered a plea of guilty or received a nolo contendere sentencing for any violation of this article shall be deemed revoked and subject to seizure by the chief of police or his designee from the time of such conviction, guilty or nolo contendere sentencing. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 11, 3-19-2008) 
Sec. 20-179. - Unlawful or prohibited activities. 
The following are prohibited practices for solicitors and any violation shall constitute grounds for suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of license, and/or arrest: 
(1)  Solicit on Sunday, or between the hours 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(2)  Solicit at any location where a sign is posted at or near the main entrance or driveway to the residence or business prohibiting such activity. 
(3)  Using any entrance, or part of the building, other than the main entrance to the residence or business. 
(4)  Entering a residence except at the express invitation of the occupant. 
(5)  Failure of the solicitor to inform the occupant in plain terms of the solicitor's identity and the purpose of the call. 
(6)  Making more than one solicitation call at the same location within any consecutive 14-day period, unless invited back by the occupant. 
(7)  The solicitor to represent that they are participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that they are offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(8)  The solicitor to use vulgar, insulting or threatening language in the course of any solicitation. 
(9)  The solicitor to remain upon the property of the residence or business after the occupant has verbally indicated that they do not wish to make a purchase. For the purpose of this article, a solicitation shall be deemed to continue until the solicitor has left the property of the residence or business. 
(10)  Soliciting anyone under the age of 18 years. 
(11)  Failure of solicitor to have a valid license prominently displayed on their person (upper front portion of the body commonly referred to as the top of the shoulders down to the waist) or refuse any person's request to examine same. 
(12)  For more than two solicitors to engage in solicitation upon any residence or business at the same time for the same goods or services. 
(13)  Solicitor to violate any of the provisions of this article, or to violate any other city ordinance while engaging in any solicitation activity. 
(14)  Solicitor to lend, rent or sell their license to another, or to solicit using the license of another. 
(15)  Solicitor to alter or deface their license or the license of another. 
(Ord. No. 374, § 12, 3-19-2008) 
Secs. 2-180—2-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMMERCIAL CONVEYOR CAR WASH USE OF RECYCLED WATER SYSTEMS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 462, §§ 1—4, adopted Dec. 15, 2011, enacted provisions which did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included as Ch. 20, Art. VII. 

Sec. 20-191. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install operational recycled water systems. 
( Ord. No. 462, § 1, 12-15-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-192. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after January 1, 2011, regardless of the water source. The provisions of this article do not apply to conveyor commercial car washes that were permitted or constructed before January 1, 2012. The provisions of this article do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay car washes. 
( Ord. No. 462, § 2, 12-15-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-193. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this article, have the meaning defined in this section: 
In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
Recycled water system means a water system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
( Ord. No. 462, § 3, 12-15-2011 ) 
Sec. 20-194. - Commercial car wash watering requirements. 
All new commercial conveyor car washes, permitted and constructed after January 1, 2012 must install operational recycled water systems. A minimum of 50 percent of water utilized must be recycled. 
( Ord. No. 462, § 4, 12-15-2011 ) 
Chapter 23 - COURTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to establish, maintain and operate a municipal court, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; city courts generally, O.C.G.A. § 15-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 23-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be titled and known as the Municipal Court of Flowery Branch Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 1, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-2. - Municipal court created; seal. 
Pursuant to the authority of the city Charter, as amended, and O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq., as amended, the city council hereby creates and establishes the municipal court of the city. The municipal court shall have a seal which shall contain the following words: "Municipal Court of Flowery Branch, Georgia," and in the center the word "Seal." 
(Ord. No. 143, § 2, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-3. - Jurisdiction of the court. 
The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city and to punish for violations thereof, and shall have jurisdiction and authority to try all offenses occurring within the territorial limits of the city which, under the laws of the state, are now and hereafter placed within the jurisdiction of courts of this nature, and to punish for violations of the same, to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws, including, but not limited to, abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. In addition to the jurisdiction and powers provided under the laws of the state, and by this chapter, the municipal court shall also have such jurisdiction and powers as provided by the city Charter, as amended. Sessions of the court shall be scheduled by the judge, with proper notice to the parties concerned. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 3, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-4. - Punishment. 
(a)  Upon violation of any law, statute or ordinance over which this court has jurisdiction, the judge of this court shall have the power to impose fines, impose imprisonment for periods of time, or impose community service, or any combination thereof, up to the maximums allowed by the city Charter, as amended, or as allowed by general law promulgated by the state general assembly. 
(b)  In addition to the punishments that may be assessed pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the judge of this court shall also have the power to impose upon the violator of any law, statute or ordinance over which this court has jurisdiction court costs in the amount of $35.00 per violation and, in addition thereto, require the violator to reimburse to the city any charges or assessments related to the violator, such as jail fees, cost of meals, medical care, transportation and caretaking of the violator, probation fees, and any and all other costs, up to an amount of $35.00 per violation or the actual cost incurred by the city as to said violator, whichever is greater. 
(c)  The municipal court, by and through the judge, shall also have the authority to establish, by written order, a schedule of no contest cash bonds which the accused may post when arrested or accused by citation. The schedule of no contest cash bond amounts shall be sufficient to cover court costs, impose a minimum fine, and provide for the recovery of the minimum amount to reimburse the city as to its costs as to a violator. At the time of posting a no contest cash bond, the receipt or citation shall contain the following language: "If you give a no contest cash bond and fail to appear for trial, this bond may be forfeited and, if so forfeited, shall constitute a guilty plea and waiver of certain constitutional rights," which shall be acknowledged by the person arrested, by signature upon the receipt or citation. A person arrested or accused by citation who does not wish to post a no contest cash bond may post a personal bond or standard appearance bond to assure his future appearance in court. If a person who gives a no contest cash bond fails subsequently to appear for trial, such failure shall constitute a guilty plea and the no contest cash bond shall be forfeited, unless the court proceeds as provided hereinafter. It shall not be necessary for the court to take any further action to forfeit the no contest cash bond. Forfeiture of a no contest cash bond shall be considered to constitute imposition and payment of a fine and restitution of court costs and expenses and, if so considered, shall be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation. If the judge determines at the time of the nonappearance at trial of the accused that, in the judge's discretion, substantial justice will not be accomplished by the forfeiture of the no contest cash bond amount and the disposition of the charges with prejudice, the posting of the no contest cash bond shall not be considered a plea of guilty nor constitute a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the violation, and any monies posted under the no contest cash bond shall be held in the court's registry pending subsequent prosecution, and the accused shall be served with a citation for a reasonable future appearance date, and, in default of the accused's appearance, the court shall issue a bench warrant for the accused's arrest. Upon a conviction under a subsequent prosecution, the proceeds of any no contest cash bond shall be applied and distributed towards the fine, court costs and expenses imposed by the court. If the accused posts a property bond or standard appearance bond and thereafter fails to appear at the designated time, a bench warrant shall be issued for such person and the bond shall be forfeited. 
(d)  The municipal court, upon the county board of commissioners adopting a resolution pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-21-91 et seq. providing for additional penalties in order to offset the operation, maintenance, construction, and repair of any county jail or detention facility, or both, and upon the city entering into an intergovernmental contract with the county through the county sheriff's department or other proper agent for the use of the county jail or detention facility, or both, by municipal prisoners, shall be authorized to impose and collect the additional penalties provided for in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93, so long as said additional penalties imposed and collected by the municipal court of the city are used to offset any fee charged by the county or the proper agent of the county to the city for the use of the county jail or detention facility, or both, by municipal prisoners. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 4, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-5. - Commitment. 
The judge of this court shall be a justice of the peace and shall have the authority of a justice of the peace to issue warrants, to bind over, commit to jail, or admit to bail for appearance of the next term of court of competent jurisdiction any person violating any ordinance or criminal law, or both, within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 5, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-6. - Bonds and forfeitures. 
(a)  The city clerk, any clerk of the municipal court, the mayor, the chief of police or their designated representatives designated in writing on file in the records of the city shall have the authority to accept cash bonds and security bonds for appearance in this court and the court may forfeit or otherwise dispose of said bonds as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 17-6-10 and 36-32-4. 
(b)  The city clerk, any clerk of the municipal court, the mayor, the chief of police, or any duly certified law enforcement officer of the city or their designated representatives designated in writing on file in the records of the city shall also have the authority to allow a personal recognizance bond of any person cited for a violation of any law, statute or ordinance; however, any personal recognizance bond granted for any traffic citation shall be conditioned upon a forfeiture of the person's driver's license upon their failure to appear at the next term of court of competent jurisdiction to answer the traffic citation charged against said person. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 6, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-7. - Rules and costs for municipal court. 
The municipal court, by and through the judge of this court, shall have the full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court, including, but not limited to, rules of procedure; evidentiary rules; rules regarding the production of evidence; rules to enforce obedience to the orders, judgments, and sentences of the court; and rules regulating the issuance of a summons, subpoena and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by the city Charter, as amended, or by the general laws of the state. The judge shall also have the full power and authority to set miscellaneous costs, such as the cost imposed for the issuance of a bench warrant. The rules, costs, and regulations so made and adopted shall be filed upon the public minutes of the court, and shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, at the cost of the person making the request with said costs being $0.25 per page, a copy of said rules shall be furnished to the person making the request. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 7, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-8. - Review by certiorari. 
The right of certiorari to the superior court from this court shall lie as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 8, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-9. - Probation system. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court, with the approval of the city council, is authorized to establish a probation system to provide probation supervision, counseling, and collection services for all monies to be paid by an offender according to the terms of the sentence imposed and any monies which by operation of law or pursuant to this chapter, or both, are to be paid by the offender in consequence of the conviction, and other probation services for persons convicted in the municipal court and placed on probation. 
(b)  The probation system as provided by subsection (a) of this section can allow and authorize the judge of the municipal court, with the approval of the city council, to enter into written contracts with private corporations, enterprises, or agencies to provide probation supervision, counseling, collection services for all monies to be paid by an offender according to the terms of the sentence imposed and any monies which by operation of law or under this chapter, or both, are to be paid by the offender in consequence of the conviction, and other probation services for persons convicted in the municipal court and placed on probation. Any such final contract negotiated by the judge with the private probation entity shall be attached to the approval by the city council to privatize probation services as an exhibit thereto. Every private probation officer and every private probation company shall meet the uniform professional standards required by O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102, and any contract providing for such services shall meet the uniform contract standards provided by O.C.G.A. § 42-8-102. The private probation company shall provide the reports as required by law, and all of the records of said company relating to the probation services shall be open to inspection by the judge of the municipal court and by the city. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 9, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-10. - Judge of court. 
The municipal court of the city shall be presided over by a judge who shall have the authority to try any case now or hereafter made triable in such court and shall have such other authority and perform such other duties as provided by law, statute or ordinance. One or more additional regular judges shall be appointed when required, in the opinion of the city council, by the caseload of the court. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 10, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-11. - Appointment and removal of judge. 
(a)  The judge may be removed at any time for good cause by a majority vote of the city council. Before removal, however, written charges must be proffered against him, which written charges must be signed by one or more of the city councilmembers. The judge must be furnished a copy of the written charges, together with notice of the time and place of the hearing, which must not be less than five days after serving the judge of a copy of the charges. Such hearing shall be public and the judge shall have the right to call witnesses on his own behalf and examine witnesses which appear before the city council against him. The action of the city council in removing or in refusing to remove the judge shall be final and there shall be no appeal from the action of the city council. 
(b)  Upon any vacancy occurring for any reason during a term of the municipal court judge, a new judge shall be appointed for the remainder of the two-year term during which the vacancy occurred. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 11, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-12. - Qualifications of judge. 
The judge of the municipal court shall be of good moral character. The appointee shall be at least 25 years of age at the time of the appointment and shall have been a citizen and resident of the county for at least two years preceding the appointment. In addition thereto, the appointee shall have been admitted to the state bar and shall have at least five years experience in the practice of law. The appointee shall hold no other municipal office of the city during the appointee's tenure as judge. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 12, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-13. - Salary of judge. 
The salary of the judge shall be fixed by the city council by proper resolution duly approved in a public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 13, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-14. - Disqualification. 
In the event of the disqualification, illness or absence from the city of the judge, the mayor or any councilmember may act as judge pro hac vice, or the council may appoint by written resolution a practicing attorney of the state bar who is a citizen and resident of the county as judge pro hac vice. Any judge so appointed shall have all the power and authority of the judge while acting as such. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 14, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-15. - Solicitor of court. 
The municipal court, in the discretion of the city council, may have a solicitor, whose duties are to prosecute persons charged with violating ordinances of the city or of any other law over which the municipal court has jurisdiction; to assist the judge and other officers and personnel of the court in achieving justice in all cases; and to perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or by ordinance or which necessarily appertain to this office. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 15, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-16. - Appointment and removal of solicitors. 
The solicitor of the municipal court, in the discretion of the city council, may be appointed by the city council for a term of two years. The solicitor may be removed at any time by the city council, at its sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 16, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-17. - Qualifications of solicitor. 
The solicitor of the municipal court must be of good moral character and shall have been a resident and citizen of the county for at least one year at the time of the appointment and shall have been admitted to the state bar and shall have practiced law for at least one year at the time of the appointment. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 17, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-18. - Salary of solicitor. 
The salary of the solicitor shall be fixed by the city council by proper resolution duly approved in a public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 143, § 18, 9-15-1997) 
Sec. 23-19. - Public defender. 
The municipal court, in the discretion of the city council, may have a public defender, whose duties are to counsel and/or defend persons charged with violating ordinances of the city or of any other law over which the municipal court has jurisdiction; to assist the judge and other officers and personnel of the court in achieving justice in all cases; and to perform such other duties as are or may be required by law or by ordinance which necessarily appertain to this office. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 1, 8-12-2010 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 435 , § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 2010, deleted the former § 23-19 and enacted a new § 23-19 as set out herein. The former § 23-19 pertained to clerks of court and derived from Ord. No. 143, § 19, 9-15-1997. 
Sec. 23-20. - Appointment and removal of public defender. 
The public defender of the municipal court, in the discretion of the city council, may be appointed by the council for a term of two years. The public defender may be removed by the city council, at its sole discretion. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 1, 8-12-2010 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 435 , § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 2010, deleted the former § 23-20 and enacted a new § 23-20 as set out herein. The former § 23-20 pertained to appointment and removal of clerks and derived from Ord. No. 143, § 20, 9-15-1997. 
Sec. 23-21. - Qualifications of public defender. 
The public defender of the municipal court must be of good moral character and shall have been a resident and citizen of the county for at least one year at the time of the appointment and shall have been admitted to the state bar and shall have practiced law for at least one year at the time of the appointment. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 1, 8-12-2010 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 435 , § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 2010, deleted the former § 23-21 and enacted a new § 23-21 as set out herein. The former § 23-21 pertained to duties of clerks and derived from Ord. No. 143, § 21, 9-15-1997. 
Sec. 23-22. - Salary of public defender. 
The salary of the public defender shall be fixed by the city council by proper resolution duly approved in a public meeting. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 1, 8-12-2010 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 435 , § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 2010, deleted the former § 23-22 and enacted a new § 23-22 as set out herein. The former § 23-22 pertained to contempt and derived from Ord. No. 143, § 22, 9-15-1997. 
Sec. 23-23. - Appointment of counsel for indigents. 
The judge of the municipal court shall have a procedure and forms consistent with state law in order to determine indigence and to appoint counsel to defendants who apply and qualify for appointed council." 
( Ord. No. 435, § 1, 8-12-2010 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 435 , § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 2010, deleted the former § 23-23 and enacted a new § 23-23 as set out herein. The former § 23-23 pertained to oaths to be administered to judge and solicitor and derived from Ord. No. 143, § 23, 9-15-1997. 
Sec. 23-24. - Clerks of court. 
There may be a clerk of the municipal court and there may be an assistant clerk of the municipal court of the city. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 2, 8-12-2010 ) 
Sec. 23-25. - Appointment and removal of clerks. 
The city clerk may be the clerk of the municipal court. In addition, the city council may designate by proper resolution an assistant clerk of the court to assist the city clerk in the performance of these duties. The assistant clerk shall serve at the discretion of the city council, who may remove said assistant clerk at any time at its sole discretion. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 2, 8-12-2010 ) 
Sec. 23-26. - Duties of clerks. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk and/or the assistant clerk to perform such duties relative to the operation of the municipal court as the judge shall direct and perform all such other duties as are required or permitted by law or ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 2, 8-12-2010 ) 
Sec. 23-27. - Contempt. 
Any person held in contempt of court may be fined for such contempt, may be imprisoned for such contempt, or may be subject to performing community service, or any combination thereof, up to the maximum allowed by the city Charter, as amended, or as allowed by general law promulgated by the state general assembly. 
( Ord. No. 435, § 2, 8-12-2010 ) 
Sec. 23-28. - Oaths to be administered to judge, solicitor and public defender. 
(a)  The following oath shall be administered to the judge of the municipal court by the mayor upon said judge assuming office: "I do solemnly swear that I will carry out the duties of judge of the municipal court of Flowery Branch, Georgia, in accordance with the law, that I will act impartially in deciding issues between the municipality and persons accused of violating ordinances of the municipality, and that I will conduct myself and the affairs of the municipal court in such a manner as will reflect credit upon the municipality in its administration of justice." 
(b)  The following oath shall be administered to the solicitor of the municipal court, should one be authorized by proper resolution in a public meeting by the city council, by the mayor upon the solicitor assuming the office of solicitor: "I do solemnly swear that I will conduct the office of the solicitor of the municipal court of Flowery Branch, Georgia, in accordance with the law, that I will prosecute all cases made in said court to the very best of my ability, and that I will so conduct myself in carrying out the duties of the office in such a manner as will reflect credit upon the municipality in its administration of justice." 
(c)  The following oath shall be administered to the public defender of the municipal court, should one be authorized by proper resolution in a public meeting by the city council, by the mayor upon the public defender assuming the office of public defender: "I do solemnly swear that I will conduct the office of the public defender of the municipal court of Flowery Branch, Georgia, in accordance with the law, that I will counsel and defend all defendants appearing in said court to the very best of my ability, and that I will so conduct myself in carrying out the duties of the office in such a manner as will reflect credit upon the municipality in its administration of justice." 
( Ord. No. 435, § 2, 8-12-2010 ) 
Chapter 25 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 25-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. 473, § I, 1-17-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
(a)  Declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the City of Flowery Branch. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(3)  Continuance . The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city council may, by resolution and in accordance with the city charter, end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(4)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
a.  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
1.  The Hall County Emergency Management Director (EMD) or designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites pursuant to Resolution 13-001. 
2.  In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary and appropriate investigations, the EMD (see subsection (a)(4)a.1. of this section) or his designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
3.  The EMD (see subsection (a)(4)a.1. of this section) is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city council. 
4.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety or welfare of the public, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
b.  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the following sections of this chapter as appropriate. If any of these sections are included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
c.  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city council is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 25-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
d.  Additional emergency powers. The EMD (see subsection (a)(4)a.1. of this section) shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
1.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
2.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
3.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
4.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
5.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
6.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
7.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
8.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
9.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(b)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
WHEREAS, the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Flowery Branch, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the applicable local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2)  That the following sections of the City of Flowery Branch Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section 25-5, Overcharging; Section 25-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section 25-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section 25-2(a)(4)c, d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE]. 
[Signed] 
Mayor, City of Flowery Branch" 
(c)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
( Ord. No. 473, § I, 1-17-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, the city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the EMD (see section 25-2(a)(4)a.1.) or city council during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties . Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the EMD (see section 25-2(a)(4)a.1.) or city council upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the EMD (see section 25-2(a)(4)a.1.) is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the city council during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement . Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the city police department. 
( Ord. No. 473, § I, 1-17-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city council shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any e-verify affidavit or other state required affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. 
(c)  Purchasing . Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city council may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees . Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
( Ord. No. 473, § I, 1-17-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-5. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this chapter constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's social security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from secretary of state, if required; 
(10)  A signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1; 
(11)  At least one secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city council, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three months. 
( Ord. No. 473, § I, 1-17-2013 ) 
Sec. 25-6. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by EMD (see section 25-2(a)(4)a.1.). 
(d)  Enforceability . This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
( Ord. No. 473, § I, 1-17-2013 ) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOWERY BRANCH SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 425A , § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2017, repealed former Art. II, §§ 26-19—26-28, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 425, § 1, 4-20-2010. 

Sec. 26-19. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Flowery Branch Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-20. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs) include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design Professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District means the Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 26-22 of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 26-21(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (manual) published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the county soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in section 26-22(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)—(7) and (9)—(11) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments onsite or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in section 26-22 of this article; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. 
Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970. And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a minor buffer impact as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-23. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Flowery Branch without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the community development department must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of section 26-22 of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by six copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 26-22 has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per section 26-23, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the erosion and sedimentation act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  the local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 26-22 of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by section 26-22 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 26-23 are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the erosion and sedimentation act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The city, or their designee, will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 26-23. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-26. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements of O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-27. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Sec. 26-28. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
( Ord. No. 425A, § 1, 12-7-2017 ) 
Secs. 26-29—26-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GROUNDWATER USE 

Sec. 26-60. - Title. 
This article shall be entitled and known as the Groundwater Use Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 1, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-61. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Annual average withdrawal means the total yearly amount of water pumped by a water source or water system divided by the number of days in that year. This amount is expressed in gallons per day (gpd). 
Aquifer means a geologic formation, a group of such formations, or a part of such a formation that is water-bearing. An aquifer may consist of a stratum or zone of rock below the surface of the earth capable of containing and producing water as from a well. 
Area of operation means the territory located within the corporate limits of the city. 
Chemigation means the injection of chemicals, fertilizers, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, or nematicides into irrigation water. 
Consumptive use means any use of water withdrawn from the ground other than a nonconsumptive use, as defined in this section. 
Design pumping capacity means the actual rate that a well pump will produce water at the time the well pump was installed. This rate will vary with the horsepower of the pump motor, total dynamic head, and size of discharge pipe. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
Drawdown means the extent to which the groundwater level is being lowered when a well is being pumped or when the water is discharging from a flowing well, and is the difference, in feet, between the static water level and pumping level. 
Farm use means irrigation of any land used for general farming, forage, agriculture, pasture, turf production, orchids, trees, and ornamental nurseries, or provisions for water supply for farm animals, poultry farming, or any other activity conducted in the course of a farming operation. The term "farm use" shall also include the processing of perishable agricultural products and the irrigation of recreational turf. 
Geologic information means the information relative to the origin, history of the rock, which includes a description of the lithology, age, stratigraphic sequence, structural relationship, areal distribution and thickness of the rock at or below the surface of the earth, and which is obtained by examination of the rock exposed at the ground surface and from well cuttings, well cores, and geophysical logging from drilled wells. 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
Groundwater means water of underground streams, channels, artesian basins, reservoirs, lakes, and other water under the surface of the earth, whether public or private, natural or artificial, which is contained within, flows through, or borders upon the corporate limits of the city, or any portion thereof. 
Hydrologic information means information related to water standing or moving in porous media and includes hydraulic conductivity, transmissivity, porosity, storage coefficient, specific capacity, chemical quality of the water, potentiometric surface, water recharge of the rock at or below the surface of the earth, water levels, drawdown, and radius of influence of the cone of depression in areas of groundwater withdrawal, and which is obtained by pumping tests, flowmeter, laboratory tests, water surface measurements, observation wells, and accepted mathematical formulas. 
Maximum day withdrawal means the highest total amount of water pumped by a water source or water system in a 24-hour period. This amount is expressed in gallons per day (gpd). 
Monthly average withdrawal means the total amount of water pumped by a water source or water system in any one month of the same year in which the annual average withdrawal is measured, divided by the number of days in that month. This amount is expressed in gallons per day (gpd). 
Nonconsumptive use means the use of water withdrawn from a groundwater system or aquifer in such a manner that it is returned to the groundwater system or aquifer from which it was withdrawn without substantial diminution in quantity or substantial impairment in quality at or near the point from which it was withdrawn, providing that in determining whether a use of groundwater is nonconsumptive, the city may take into consideration whether any material injury or detriment to other water users within the corporate limits of the city, or as to the public water system of the city, or both, by reason of reduction of water pressure in the aquifer or system, has not been adequately compensated by the permit applicant who caused or substantially contributed to such injury or detriment. 
Person means any and all persons, including individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, joint ventures, trusts, unincorporated organizations, public or private institutions other than the city, municipalities or political subdivisions other than the city, governmental agencies, or private or public corporations other than the city organized under the laws of this state or any other state or country. 
Pumping level means the distance, in feet, from the land surface or other permanent specified datum, preferably the top of the casing to the water surface (water level) in the well when water is being pumped from the well. 
Rock means the material that forms the essential part of the earth's solid crust, and includes loose, incoherent masses, such as a bed of sand, gravel, clay or volcanic ash, as well as firm, hard, solid masses of granite, metamorphics, sandstone, limestone, and shale. 
Specific conductance means the water's capacity to convey an electric current and is related to the total concentration of the ionized substances in the water and the temperature at which the measurement is made and is generally reported as micromhos/cm or microsiemens/cm. 
Static water level means the distance, in feet, from the land surface or other permanent specified datum, preferably the top of the casing, to the water level in a well or to the pressure head (shut-in head) after the flow is shut off from a flowing well, when no water is being pumped from the well and the water level has reached equilibrium. 
Water table means the surface of an unconfined water body at which the pressure is atmospheric. It is defined by the levels at which water stands in wells that penetrate the water body far enough to hold standing water. 
Well means any excavation that is cored, bored, drilled, jetted, dug, or otherwise constructed for the purpose of locating, testing, or withdrawing groundwater, or for the purpose of evaluating, testing, developing, draining, or recharging any groundwater reservoir or aquifer, or any excavation that may control, divert, or otherwise cause the movement of water from or into any aquifer. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 2, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-62. - Permit required. 
No person shall withdraw, obtain, or utilize groundwater within the corporate limits of the city in excess of a maximum day withdrawal of 200 gallons per day for any person unless such person has first obtained a permit therefor from the city, unless exempted by this article. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 3, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-63. - Permit application. 
(a)  Any person who is withdrawing, obtaining, or utilizing groundwater and who is required under section 26-62 to obtain a permit shall submit an application for a permit to use groundwater to the city council, on forms prepared and furnished upon request by the city council. The applicant shall furnish the city council with sufficient documented evidence as set forth in this section to evaluate the effects of the described water use upon the water resources within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person intending to withdraw, obtain, or utilize groundwater and who is required under section 26-62 to obtain a permit shall submit an application for a permit to use groundwater to the city council, on forms prepared and furnished, upon request, by the city council through the city clerk, or any other properly designated agent. No groundwater shall be withdrawn, obtained, or utilized until a permit has been granted (except as provided in section 26-62). The applicant shall furnish the city council with sufficient documented evidence as set forth in this section to evaluate the impacts of the proposed water use upon the water resources within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  During the early stages of planning for a proposed groundwater withdrawal and in any case prior to the start of well construction, the intended user should have a conference with the mayor or any other duly designated agent of the city, including, but not limited to, any member of the city council, to determine the acceptability of the proposed well, the aquifer to be utilized, the well spacing and well depth, and the amount of intended groundwater use. Such conference shall be granted within 30 days after request therefor. The intended user should furnish the city council, through the mayor or any other duly designated agent with such available, documented evidence as set forth in subsections (d) through (f) of this section for presentation at the conference or for later submittal, but prior to well construction. Based, in part, on the information furnished by the intended user and upon other considerations as outlined within this article, the city council may deny the permit or may approve the permit upon such terms and conditions as the city council may deem necessary to protect the public water system of the city and to ensure an adequate public water supply. If necessary to provide to the city council sufficient information in order to make a decision as to the issuance of a permit for groundwater use, an applicant may construct a well at the applicant's own risk and expense. Upon completion of the construction of the well and prior to any groundwater use, the intended user shall submit an application for a groundwater use permit to the city council pursuant to sections 26-64 and 26-65. The construction of any well by the applicant will be at the applicant's own risk prior to the grant of a groundwater use permit pursuant to sections 26-64 and 26-65, and the construction of said well shall not grant to applicant any vested right to withdraw, obtain or utilize groundwater until the issuance of a permit in accordance with section 26-65. 
(d)  Sufficient documented evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the following (except for farm use applications): 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location of the existing or proposed well, identified by number, for which the permit is requested, marked on the best map available; 
(3)  The latitude and longitude, to the nearest ten seconds, of the well obtained from the location map; 
(4)  The closest public street adjacent to the property upon which the well is located; 
(5)  The ground elevation of the well, if available; 
(6)  The amount of water withdrawn or proposed to be withdrawn, or used, and a statement to indicate the extent to which such use or withdrawal is reasonably necessary to meet the needs of the applicant; 
(7)  Any present or anticipated unreasonable adverse effects or potential unreasonable adverse effects on other water uses or users, including, but not limited to, adverse effects on public use, including, but not limited to, the public water system of the city, or farm use, or both; 
(8)  A statement specifying the beneficial use of the groundwater withdrawn or to be withdrawn and whether the water use is a consumptive or nonconsumptive use, as herein defined; 
(9)  If the water use is, or proposes to be, a nonconsumptive use, the applicant shall state the following: 
a.  The treatment of the water and procedure used, or the proposed treatment of the water and the procedure to be used, to return the water to the aquifer or groundwater system from which it is, or proposed to be, withdrawn; 
b.  The location of the injection well to be shown on the same map as the existing, or proposed, withdrawal wells; 
c.  The chemical, physical, and bacteriological quality, and any other specified water quality analysis, the division or the city, or both, may require, of the return water, noting specifically any substantial impairment of the water quality from the water withdrawn; 
d.  The aquifer or groundwater system from which the groundwater is withdrawn, or intended to be withdrawn, and the amount of water to be returned to the aquifer or groundwater system; and 
e.  Any substantial decrease in quantity as originally withdrawn from the aquifer or groundwater system. 
(10)  The acquifer from which the groundwater is withdrawn, or intended to be withdrawn; 
(11)  For existing wells, besides the above information, the well construction data for each well on forms provided by the city, including, but not limited to, the following information: 
a.  Name of driller; 
b.  Date of drilling; 
c.  Total well depth in feet; 
d.  Diameter of drilled hole; 
e.  Diameter and depth of casing, including casing material; 
f.  Depth of grouting; 
g.  Diameter and depth of the setting of the well screen, if used, and the material and type of screen; 
h.  Type of permanent pump, size, horsepower, and yield; 
i.  Static water level and pumping level; and 
j.  Number of hours the well is pumped per day. 
(12)  A copy of any and all applications and information supplied by the applicant to the division, the state department of agriculture, and any other governmental entity (state or federal), and said entity's responses and determinations, as to any groundwater use within the corporate limits of the city. 
(e)  For farm use, sufficient documented evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Applicant's full name; 
(2)  Mailing address; 
(3)  Closest public street adjacent to the premises upon which the existing or proposed well is located; 
(4)  Purpose of withdrawal; 
(5)  Maximum day withdrawal; 
(6)  Well construction data, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Well depth; 
b.  Depth of pump intake below ground surface; 
c.  Design pumping capacity of well; and 
d.  Depth of well casing. 
(7)  Month and year of well pump installation; 
(8)  Number of acres irrigated from this well and average number of inches of water applied from this well per year; 
(9)  Whether or not chemicals, fertilizers, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, or nematicides are injected into the irrigation water; 
(10)  Map showing the location of the water source; and 
(11)  A copy of any and all applications and information supplied by the applicant to the division, the state department of agriculture, and any other governmental entity (state or federal), and said entity's responses and determinations, as to any groundwater use within the corporate limits of the city. 
(f)  Any person submitting an application for a groundwater use permit who is at the time of application withdrawing, obtaining, or utilizing groundwater and who is unable to furnish accurate information concerning the amounts of groundwater being withdrawn or used shall be required, as the city council deems necessary, to do the following: 
(1)  Install one or more water meters; or 
(2)  Some other more economical means acceptable to the city council for measuring the groundwater withdrawn or used. 
(g)  The city council, in determining the amount of groundwater withdrawn or used by an applicant, may use one or more of the following: 
(1)  The rated capacity of the pump; 
(2)  The rated capacity of the cooling system; 
(3)  The standards or methods employed by the United States Geological Survey in determining such quantities; or 
(4)  Any other acceptable method. 
(h)  Except for farm use, those applicants intending to withdraw, obtain, or utilize groundwater from wells constructed after December 31, 1994, shall submit, in addition to the information required in subsection (d) of this section, well construction details and specifications, as the city council deems necessary, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Total depth of well, in feet; 
(2)  Size of drilled hole; 
(3)  Size and depth of casing and type of casing material; 
(4)  Size and depth of the placing of the well screen and the type of material, if used; 
(5)  Depth of grouting; 
(6)  Deep well airline of steel, iron, or heavy-gauge copper material, with screw cap, for water level measurement; and 
(7)  Filling, plugging, and sealing procedures for any well that is to be abandoned. 
(i)  In the event that any groundwater within the corporate limits of the city has a corrosive nature, proposed well construction specifications and casing material may require modification as the city council deems necessary to avoid any potential unreasonable adverse effects on the aquifer or groundwater system, or of other water uses, including, but not limited to, the public water system within the city. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 4, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-64. - Standards for city council consideration of permit applications, modifications, revocations, and denials. 
(a)  In considering permit applications, revocations, and modifications, the city council shall consider: 
(1)  The number of persons using an aquifer and the object, extent, and necessity of their respective withdrawals or uses; 
(2)  The nature and size of the aquifer; 
(3)  The physical and chemical nature of any impairment of the aquifer, adversely affecting its availability or fitness for other water uses (including public and farm use); 
(4)  The probable severity and duration of such impairment under foreseeable conditions; 
(5)  The physical and chemical nature of any impairment of the aquifer utilized to provide groundwater for the public water system of the city adversely affecting its availability or fitness for said use; 
(6)  The probable severity and duration of such impairment under foreseeable conditions; 
(7)  The injury to public health, safety, or welfare which results if such impairment were not prevented or evaded; 
(8)  The kinds of businesses or activities to which the various uses are related; 
(9)  The importance and necessity of the uses claimed by the permit applicants, or of the water uses within the corporate limits of the city and the extent of any injury or detriment caused or expected to be caused to other water uses (including public and farm use); 
(10)  The importance and necessity of the water use of the groundwater to provide a public water system by the city, and the extent of any injury or detriment caused or expected to be caused to said system upon a grant of the permit to a private or public (other than the city) applicant; 
(11)  Division from or reduction of flows in other watercourses or aquifers; 
(12)  Any other relevant factors, such as, but not limited to, the best geologic and hydrologic information available on the aquifer or groundwater system within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  A permit applicant bears the burden of proof as to each of the standards set out in subsection (a) of this section and that the granting of a permit to the applicant will not have an unreasonably adverse effect upon other water uses within the corporate limits of the city, including, but not limited to, the public water system of the city, including unreasonably adverse effects upon the potential as well as present use of the groundwater within the corporate limits of the city. Failure by the applicant to meet the burden of proof or submit sufficient information shall be grounds for the city council to deny a permit application, or issue a temporary permit in accordance with section 26-65(c). 
(c)  In any case where a permit applicant can prove to the city council's satisfaction that the applicant was withdrawing or using groundwater prior to December 31, 1994, the city council shall take into consideration the extent to which the prior use or withdrawal was reasonably necessary in the judgment of the city council to meet the applicant's needs and the applicant's investment in land, construction of the well and anticipated usage of the groundwater, and shall grant a permit which shall meet the reasonable needs, unless the granting of such permit will have unreasonably adverse effects upon other water uses within the corporate limits of the city, including, but not limited to, the public water system of the city, including unreasonably adverse effects upon the potential as well as present use of the groundwater within the corporate limits of the city. In determining whether a permit will have an unreasonable adverse effect, the city council shall consider the standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  The city council shall have the power to: 
(1)  Modify or revoke any permit when the city council deems necessary upon not less than 60 days' written notice to any person affected when the groundwater use or withdrawal is not in compliance with the terms of the permit or when there is found to be an unreasonable adverse affect upon the water uses or users in the area, including the public water system of the city, and including potential as well as present use, based upon the considerations set forth in subsection (a) of this section; or 
(2)  Deny a permit application if the application therefor or the effect of the water use proposed or described therein upon the water resources of the area is found to be contrary to the public interest or general welfare. Such a decision shall be based upon the considerations and standards set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 5, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-65. - Granting of a permit to use groundwater. 
(a)  When sufficient evidence is provided by the applicant that the water withdrawn or used, or intended to be withdrawn or used, is a nonconsumptive use, as defined in section 26-61, a permit therefor shall be issued by the city council without the conditions set forth in subsection (d) of this section; provided, however, that in determining whether a use of groundwater is nonconsumptive, the city council may take into consideration, based on the best geologic and hydrologic information available, whether any material injury or detriment to other water users of the area by reason of the reduction of water pressure in the aquifer or system has not been adequately compensated by the permit applicant who caused or substantially contributed to such injury or detriment. Any permit issued for a nonconsumptive use does not imply consent to inject any waste or pollutant material into the groundwater system. 
(b)  When the water withdrawn or used, or proposed to be withdrawn or used, by the permit applicant is a consumptive use and when there are not unreasonable adverse effects upon other water uses, including the public water system of the city and including potential as well as present use, based upon the standards set forth in section 26-64(a), a permit to use groundwater shall be issued by the city council containing such conditions as set forth in subsection (d) of this section as the city council deems necessary to the development and use of the water resources. The permit shall only be valid for one year from the date of approval by the city council. 
(c)  The city council may grant any temporary permit for less than a year as the city council shall specify where conditions make such temporary permit essential. A temporary permit may be issued whenever the city council has insufficient information to evaluate the effects of a permit application as set forth in section 26-64(a). 
(d)  A permit for a consumptive use may contain, but not be limited to, one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  Total permitted well depth in feet; 
(2)  The aquifer or groundwater system to be utilized; 
(3)  Maximum pumping rate; 
(4)  Maximum day withdrawal; 
(5)  Pumping level (elevation below which water may not be pumped); 
(6)  Amount of groundwater to be withdrawn or used; 
(7)  Well spacing to minimize well interference; 
(8)  Time of withdrawal; 
(9)  Require observation or monitoring well to be installed for monitoring groundwater levels and water quality. 
(e)  Water withdrawn under any permit shall be used only for the purposes set forth in the permit. 
(f)  The permit holder shall notify the city council by registered letter of any changes in the beneficial use, or if a greater amount of water is desired to be withdrawn. A permit may be modified by the city council at the request of the permit holder after the city council has considered the standards set forth in section 26-64(a). 
(Ord. No. 108, § 6, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-66. - Duration of permit and renewal. 
(a)  No permit granted under section 26-65 shall be issued for a period longer than 12 months (one year) from the date of the grant of the permit by the city council. 
(b)  A permit may be renewed following its expiration upon compliance with the provisions for submitting a new permit application and by submitting a groundwater use report in compliance with section 26-67. With a renewal permit, an applicant may certify that the information contained within the original application has not changed and may submit this certification along with a copy of the original application as its renewal application. 
(c)  No permit shall be transferred without the express approval of the city council. The approval is as to only a change in ownership, and the new owner must provide to the city council all of the information required by section 26-63 or certify that the information provided within the current application of the transferor has not changed, prior to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 7, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-67. - Submission of groundwater use report with renewal application. 
(a)  Every person who has obtained a permit to use groundwater shall file with the city council with any renewal application, a certified statement of the quantities of water used or withdrawn, sources of water, and the nature of the use thereof, which occurred during the term of the permit. The certified statement (report) shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name of permit holder and permit number; 
(2)  Beneficial use of groundwater use; 
(3)  Source of groundwater, identifying the aquifer utilized and identifying the well using each aquifer; 
(4)  Quantity of water used or withdrawn monthly from each aquifer (if a well penetrates more than one aquifer, it is to be noted); 
(5)  Average hours pumped per day; 
(6)  The static and pumping levels of each aquifer utilized and the date the water levels were measured; the measurements are to be made during the last month of the term of the current permit; and 
(7)  For a nonconsumptive use, the amount of water returned to the aquifer or groundwater system from which the water is withdrawn. 
(b)  The permit holder shall have a specific conductance analysis of the groundwater from the well performed by a laboratory acceptable to the city council, when the permit holder seeks a renewal application, and a copy of the report shall be submitted to the city council with the renewal application and the groundwater use report. The city council may also collect water samples from the well and perform specific conductance analysis as it deems necessary. The specific conductance analysis shall be according to a method acceptable to the city council. The city council, considering the information contained within the original application, the renewal application, the groundwater use report, and the standards of section 26-64(a), may waive the requirement of a specific conductance analysis for a renewal application. 
(c)  If any person who is required to submit a groundwater use report is unable to furnish accurate information concerning the amounts of groundwater being withdrawn or used, or if there is evidence that a report is false or inaccurate, or if a person is withdrawing or using a larger quantity or under different conditions than permitted, the city council shall take such action as it deems necessary, including, but not limited to, any one of the following: 
(1)  In determining the amount of groundwater being withdrawn or used; 
a.  Require the person to install one or more water meters; 
b.  Require the person to use some other economical means acceptable to the city council for measuring the groundwater use; 
c.  Require the person to use the rated capacity of the pump; 
d.  Require the person to use the rated capacity of the cooling system; 
e.  Require the person to use the standards or methods employed by the United States Geological Survey in determining such quantities; 
f.  Any other acceptable method. 
(2)  Require the person to withdraw or use only the amount of groundwater permitted; or 
(3)  Revoke or amend the permit. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 8, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-68. - Dewatering wells. 
(a)  Any person withdrawing groundwater in excess of 200 gallons per day for dewatering the subsurface rock to a depth of not more than 30 feet or to a greater depth if approved by the city council, for the purpose of construction of trenches for sewer or water pipes, or excavation for foundations or utility construction, shall be excluded from obtaining a permit to withdraw groundwater, provided such use is for a period of not more than 60 days, unless an extension of time is approved by the city council for a justifiable reason. 
(b)  Any person withdrawing groundwater in excess of 200 gallons per day for dewatering the subsurface rock for any purpose other than stated in subsection (a) of this section shall make application for a permit to withdraw, obtain, or utilize groundwater to the city council as required in section 26-63. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 9, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-69. - Brackish water encroachment or deterioration of water quality. 
To protect against or abate brackish water (due to salt or otherwise) encroachment or deterioration of the water quality of the groundwater, the city council shall take into consideration the best information on the geologic and hydrologic characteristics of the rocks and the groundwater withdrawals of the area involved and shall require the user to take such action as it deems necessary for control of brackish water (due to salt or otherwise) intrusion into freshwater aquifers. The control measures may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pumping arrangements to reduce groundwater withdrawal in areas of concentrated pumping; 
(2)  Rearrangement of the location of wells to eliminate or reduce concentrated areas of groundwater withdrawal; 
(3)  Requirement of selective withdrawal from other available freshwater aquifers than presently used; 
(4)  Curtailment of groundwater withdrawal of proposed water users in the area; 
(5)  Selective curtailment or reduction of groundwater withdrawal where it is found to be in the public interest or general welfare to protect the water resources; 
(6)  Conjunctive use of freshwater or brackish water aquifers, or waters of less desirable quality, where water quality of a specific character is not essential; 
(7)  Use of observation or monitoring wells, drilled into freshwater aquifers between areas of groundwater withdrawal and the location of brackish water zones, to detect the movement of brackish water towards the freshwater aquifers, or to detect the deterioration of water quality; 
(8)  Use of interceptor wells, drilled into the area of encroachment, to intercept the brackish water toward the center of excessive groundwater withdrawal; 
(9)  Use of relief wells, drilled into the brackish water aquifer, to relieve hydraulic pressure in the aquifer causing encroachment; 
(10)  Plugging with cement of deep wells that have penetrated brackish water zones or zones of undesirable water quality, where hydraulic pressures cause leakage and contaminate freshwater aquifers of lower pressures; 
(11)  Abandonment of wells which are then to be filled, plugged, and sealed; and 
(12)  Such other control or abatement techniques as are technically feasible and proven to be successful in other areas and nationally. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 10, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-70. - Unreasonable adverse effects on groundwater withdrawal. 
In order to protect against or abate unreasonable adverse or potential adverse effects on other water users within the corporate limits of the city, including, but not limited to, the public water system of the city, the city council shall take into consideration the best information available on the geologic and hydrologic characteristics of the rocks and groundwater withdrawals of the area and shall require the user to take such actions as it deems necessary. The control measures which the city council may require the user to take may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Selective withdrawal from other freshwater aquifers then presently utilized; 
(2)  Pumping arrangements to reduce groundwater withdrawal in areas of concentrated pumping; 
(3)  Selective curtailment or reduction of groundwater withdrawal where it is found to be in the public interest to protect the water resources; 
(4)  Selective curtailment or reduction of groundwater withdrawal or revocation of the permit where it is found to be in the public interest to protect the public water system of the city; and 
(5)  Such other control techniques as are technically feasible and proven successful in other areas and nationally. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 11, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-71. - Geologic and hydrologic information. 
(a)  The city may gather and obtain all necessary geologic and hydrologic information on the characteristics of any aquifer or groundwater system which is contained within, flows through, or borders upon the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of evaluation, control, and management of the groundwater resources. The city shall maintain and retain all geologic and hydrologic information presented by any permit applicant. The city may also gather and obtain from the division all necessary geologic and hydrologic information that has been gathered by the division on the characteristics of the aquifer or groundwater system which is contained within, flows through, or borders upon the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Any person who drills a well to obtain groundwater and who is required under this article to obtain a permit to use groundwater shall furnish the city council at the time of application for a permit to use groundwater such geologic and hydrologic information and well construction data as the city council requires. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 12, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-72. - Test wells. 
Any person drilling a well for the purpose of obtaining geologic and hydrologic information for the study of groundwater availability within the corporate limits of the city should submit to the city all information obtained from the testing program. Prior approval of the testing program should be obtained from the city council. Test wells drilled and not developed for groundwater use and not used as observation wells shall be plugged and sealed in accordance with section 26-73. Test wells drilled by the city or its authorized agents shall be exempt from the permit requirements. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 13, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-73. - Abandoned wells. 
(a)  Any existing well which has been abandoned and no longer put to beneficial use and which have been deemed by the city council to have an unreasonable or potentially unreasonable adverse effect on other water uses or users, or which result, or may result, in physical or chemical impairment of the aquifer or groundwater system, including, but not limited to, the public water system of the city, shall be filled, plugged, and sealed at the owner's expense in a manner acceptable to and approved by the city council. 
(b)  Whenever the city council deems an abandoned well to be an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or to the groundwater quality, the well may be plugged, filled, and sealed by the city with all costs and expenses to be reimbursed to the city and paid by the owner. Such action shall be taken only after notice to the owner and after a period of five days from such notice, during which period the owner may file a written objection to such action. If such an objection is filed, the city shall not permanently plug, fill, and seal the well, but may install a temporary plug or seal. Within 30 days of the filing of the written objection by the owner, and after notice to the owner, the city council shall hold a hearing to determine whether the well should be permanently plugged, filled, and sealed. The owner shall bear the burden of proof that the well is not an imminent danger to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or to the groundwater quality. Failure to meet this burden shall result in the well being permanent plugged, filled, and sealed. 
(c)  Upon the filling, plugging, and sealing of an abandoned well, the city shall be informed by a certified statement from the contractor within 30 days after the sealing, that the well have been sealed according to the procedure approved by the city council. 
(d)  Observation wells used for the investigation or management of groundwater by the city or approved for this purpose shall not be considered abandoned so long as they are maintained for this purpose. Wells without pumps shall be covered with a secure cap when measurements are not being made. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 14, 11-21-1994) 
Sec. 26-74. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists, or as may hereafter be amended, or who shall do anything required by this article as the same exists, or as may hereafter be amended, besides having any groundwater permit held by such person, be subject to suspension or revocation, shall also be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. Each day of noncompliance by the person with this article shall be deemed a separate violation of this article, and the person shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 for each violation. The city, in its discretion, may also seek enforcement of the article and compliance by the person with the article by way of injunctive relief. 
(Ord. No. 108, § 15, 11-21-1994) 
Secs. 26-75—26-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-92. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the City of Flowery Branch Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 1, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-93. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of nonstormwater discharges to the city separate storm sewer system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal law. This article establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the city separate storm sewer system in order to comply with the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the city separate storm sewer system by any person; 
(2)  To prohibit illicit discharges and illegal connections to the city separate storm sewer system; 
(3)  To prevent nonstormwater discharges, generated as a result of spills, inappropriate dumping or disposal, to the city separate storm sewer system; and 
(4)  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance, monitoring and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 2.1, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-94. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 2.2, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-95. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to modify or repeal any ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 2.3, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-96. - Responsibility for administration. 
The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 2.4, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-97. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
City separate storm sewer system means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including, but not limited to, any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catchbasins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural and manmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which are: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; or 
(2)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(3)  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity means activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Illegal connection means either of the following: 
(1)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
(2)  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit discharge means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the city storm sewer system, except as exempted in section 26-123(b). 
Industrial activity means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Nonstormwater discharge means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pollutant means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Paints, varnishes, and solvents; 
(2)  Petroleum hydrocarbons; 
(3)  Automotive fluids; 
(4)  Cooking grease; 
(5)  Detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); 
(6)  Degreasers; 
(7)  Cleaning chemicals; 
(8)  Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; 
(9)  Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; 
(10)  Floatables; 
(11)  Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; 
(12)  Liquid and solid wastes; 
(13)  Sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; 
(14)  Dissolved and particulate metals; 
(15)  Animal wastes; 
(16)  Wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; 
(17)  Concrete and cement; and 
(18)  Noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes, but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Premises means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 3, 10-27-2005) 
Secs. 26-98—26-122. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITIONS 

Sec. 26-123. - Discharges prohibited, exempted. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under his control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
(b)  The following discharges are exempt from the prohibition provision in subsection (a) of this section: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; 
(2)  Discharges or flows from firefighting, and other discharges specified in writing by the county fire department or city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
(3)  The prohibition provision in subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 4.1, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-124. - Illegal connections prohibited. 
(a)  The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city storm sewer system is prohibited. 
(b)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, unless the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(c)  A person violates this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the city separate storm sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(d)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to an approved onsite wastewater management system or the sanitary sewer system upon approval of the waste water treatment plant superintendent or his designated agent. Responsible parties shall comply with this section within 72 hours of notification. 
(e)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such locating be completed. Such notice will specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. Results of these investigations are to be documented and provided to the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 4.2, 10-27-2005) 
Secs. 26-125—26-146. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGES, ACCESS, AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 26-147. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 5, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-148. - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
(a)  The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
(c)  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
(e)  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(f)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
(g)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility is a violation of this article. 
(h)  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 6, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-149. - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
(a)  Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which are resulting or may result in illicit discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the city separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
(b)  Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(c)  In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, emergency response agencies and/or other appropriate agencies shall be immediately notified. 
(d)  Failure to provide notification of a release as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section is a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 7, 10-27-2005) 
Secs. 26-150—26-166. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 26-167. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  In the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, the city is authorized to enter upon the subject private property, without giving prior notice, to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. The city is authorized to seek costs of the abatement as outlined in section 26-171. 
(Ord. No. 05- 323, § 8.1, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-168. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever the city finds that a violation of this article has occurred, the city may order compliance by written notice of violation. 
(1)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
a.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
b.  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring, or has occurred; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
e.  A statement of the penalty that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
f.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(2)  Such notice may require without limitation: 
a.  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
b.  The elimination of illicit discharges and illegal connections; 
c.  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
d.  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
e.  Payment of costs to cover administrative and abatement costs; and 
f.  The implementation of pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 8.2, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-169. - Notice of appeal. 
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the city. The notice of appeal must be received within 30 days from the date of the notice of violation. A hearing on the appeal before the city council shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 05- 323, § 8.3, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-170. - Enforcement measures after appeal. 
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the city council, then representatives of the city may enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 8.4, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-171. - Costs of abatement of the violation. 
(a)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the assessment or to the amount of the assessment within 14 days of such notice. If the amount due is not paid within 30 days after receipt of the notice, or if an appeal is taken, within 30 days after a decision on said appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(b)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 8.5, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-172. - Civil penalties. 
In the event the alleged violator fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate, after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 8.6, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-173. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 8.8, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-174. - Remedies not exclusive. 
(a)  The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and the city may seek cumulative remedies. 
(b)  The city may recover attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 05-323, § 8.9, 10-27-2005) 
Secs. 26-175—26-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

Sec. 26-202. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the City of Flowery Branch Litter Control Ordinance. This article is modeled on the Georgia Litter Control Law (O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.) and adoption of this article is authorized by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 1, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-203. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To provide for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
(2)  To prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 2.1, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-204. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 2.2, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-205. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 2.3, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-206. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, cigarette butts, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not waste as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
Public or private property means: 
(1)  The right-of-way of any road or highway; 
(2)  Any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; 
(3)  Any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; 
(4)  Timberlands or forests; and 
(5)  Residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 3, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-207. - Prohibition against littering on public or private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, throw from a vehicle, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or any waters in the city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 4, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-208. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 5, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-209. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this article or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 6.1, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-210. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 6.2, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-211. - Penalties. 
Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  According to the general penalties described in section 1-12. 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city. 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pickup and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(5)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 6.3, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-212. - Enforcement. 
The police chief or some other duly designated officer of the city is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-324, § 6.4, 10-27-2005) 
Sec. 26-213. - Construction site litter control. 
Construction site operators shall control waste such as discarded building material, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter and sanitary waste to prevent it from entering or causing adverse impact to the city storm sewer system or any state waters. 
( Ord. No. 324A, § 1, 3-16-2017 ) 
Secs. 26-214—26-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OUTDOOR WATERING OF LANDSCAPE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 444, adopted Jan. 6, 2011, enacted provisions which did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included as Ch. 26, Art. VI. 

Sec. 26-221. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(a)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(b)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable state guidelines; 
(c)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(d)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(e)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(f)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(g)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(h)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(i)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(j)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(k)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(l)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(m)  Hydro seeding. 
( Ord. No. 444, 1-6-2011 ) 
Sec. 26-222. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in [this article]. 
(b)  The city police department shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court/municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
( Ord. No. 444, 1-6-2011 ) 
Chapter 29 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The ordinance designating the historic district, establishing its boundaries, and naming properties within it (Ordinance No. 376, adopted August 8, 2008) has been reprinted in its entirety as an appendix to this Code. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited in short title as the Historic Preservation Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. I, § 1.1, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-2. - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted to: 
(1)  Support and further findings and determinations that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets, and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of public health, prosperity and general welfare; 
(2)  Stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods as well as protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists, thereby promoting and stimulating business; 
(3)  Enhance the opportunities for federal tax relief of property owners under relevant provisions of the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, allowing tax investment credits for rehabilitation of certified historic structures (26 USC 191); and 
(4)  Establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. I, § 1.2, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-3. - Authority. 
This section is adopted pursuant to the requirements of and authority granted to local governments by the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. I, § 1.3, 6-4-2008; Ord. No. 375-A , § 1, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 29-4. - Interpretations. 
(a)  Zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provision of this chapter. 
(b)  Zoning ordinance definitions may apply. Where the city zoning ordinance provides a definition of a particular term, word or phrase which has meaning in the context of this chapter, the zoning administrator may assign the same meaning of such term, word or phrase to this chapter. 
(c)  Minimum requirements. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements. 
(d)  Literal interpretation where clarity exists. Where the literal interpretation is clear to the zoning administrator, it shall be construed literally. 
(e)  Where ambiguity may exist. Where ambiguity exists or may exist, the zoning administrator shall interpret this chapter in favor of the least restrictive use of property. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. II, § 2.1, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means a request for a review of the zoning administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter, or a request to appeal any decision made on a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission. 
Applicant means a property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the city for approval of an application under the terms of this chapter. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building, accessory, means a building subordinate to the main (principal) building on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
Certificate of appropriateness (COA) means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Commission means the historic preservation commission of the city, as established in this chapter. 
Condition of approval means a requirement adopted by the historic preservation commission at the time of approval of a certificate of appropriateness or by the zoning administrator, as the case may be, placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this chapter in order to reduce an adverse impact of the request or to further protect the public health, safety, or general welfare, or to further the purposes of this chapter. 
Design guideline means a standard of appropriate activity that will preserve or enhance the architectural character and site design and function of a building, structure, or development. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials, or any land disturbing activity which alters the elevation of the land, removes significant vegetation, or causes structures of any kind to be erected or removed. 
Elevation drawing means an architectural drawing of a building or building facade, intended to illustrate its design, characteristics and major features. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the type and/or texture of the building material and the type and/or style of windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site that affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the city council. 
Historic property means an individual structure, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the city council. 
Improvements means the physical additions and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
Landscaping means the modification of the landscape for an aesthetic or functional purpose. A landscaping area includes the area within the boundaries of an individual lot that includes the preservation of existing vegetation and the continued maintenance thereof, as well as the installation of trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, and flowers. Landscaping areas may also include decorative rock, bark, mulch and other similar approved materials, in addition to vegetation and live plant material. 
Major work means any material change in appearance to an exterior architectural feature of a building in a historic district or on a historic property and which requires a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to this chapter involving: 
(1)  The construction, demolition or relocation of a building, structure, or part thereof; 
(2)  An addition of building space to a building or structure; 
(3)  Construction/installation of accessory buildings and/or structures on site; or 
(4)  Any grading, land disturbance, and/or paving or improvement for additional parking involving five or more parking spaces or 2,000 square feet or more of area. 
Massing means the overall visual impact of a structure's volume, and involves a combination of height and width and the relationship of the heights and widths of the building's components. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any structure, site or work of art within a historic district (except exterior paint alterations), and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details; 
(2)  Demolition of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, signs, or other appurtenant features. 
Minor work means any material change in appearance to an exterior architectural feature of a building in a historic district or on a historic property and which requires a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to this chapter which does not meet the definition of major work, as determined by the zoning administrator. A sign is hereby defined as a minor work. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical, or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Proportion means a balanced relationship of parts of a building, signs and other structures, and landscape to each other and to the whole. 
Sign means a lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, illuminated, or colored visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bringing to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way, a driveway or parking lot with access to a public right-of-way, or from an adjacent property, except as specifically noted otherwise in article 24 of the city zoning ordinance. The term "sign" includes, but is not limited to, banners, balloons, flags, pennants, streamers, windblown devices, and advertising devices. Furthermore, the term "sign" includes the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of the observers. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structures. 
Structure means anything built, constructed or erected, or established or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. For purposes of this chapter, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, dog houses, and outdoor fenced animal runs are considered structures. Tents, vehicles, trailers, and play equipment attached to the ground in some permanent or temporary way shall be considered structures. A structure may or may not be easily moved from a given location on the ground. Walls and fences are considered structures. 
Use, accessory, means a use of land subordinate to the principal building or use on a lot for purposes incidental and related to the principal building or use and located on the same lot therewith. 
Zoning administrator means the manager of planning and community development of the city (or any similar position as it may be retitled) or his authorized designee. 
Zoning map means the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. II, § 2.2, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-6. - Findings. 
(a)  Removal of this requirement will allow for longstanding and valued historic preservation commission members to continue their service to the city. 
(b)  There is a challenge in finding city residents to serve on the historic preservation commission. 
(c)  It is possible that members may elect to not fulfill their full term, and new members would be appointed. 
( Ord. No. 375-A , § 2, 9-17-2015) 
Secs. 29-7—29-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION 

Sec. 29-29. - Established. 
A historic preservation commission is hereby established. The members of the historic preservation commission, as it existed on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, shall remain members of the historic preservation commission for the duration of their appointments or until or unless provided otherwise by the city council through appointment. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. III, § 3.1, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-30. - Jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction of the historic preservation commission shall be the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. III, § 3.2, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-31. - Composition; term; qualifications; compensation. 
(a)  Number of members . The historic preservation commission shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. 
(b)  Terms . Members shall serve one-year terms. 
(c)  Residency required. All the members shall reside within the city limits. 
(d)  Required qualifications. A majority of the voting members of the historic preservation commission shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history or architecture. 
(e)  Desired qualifications. To the extent available in the city, at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions and at least one member shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of building construction or real property appraisal. 
(f)  Salary and compensation. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. III, § 3.3, 6-4-2008; Ord. No. 375-A , § 3, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 29-32. - Ex officio members of the historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Optional appointment. In addition to the members of the historic preservation commission, the city may appoint one or two ex officio members to the commission. Ex officio members shall not be members per se for purposes of this article and actions of the commission. 
(b)  Requirements and qualifications. A person is eligible to serve as an ex officio member if he is a resident of the city or if he owns property or a business in the city limits. 
(c)  Terms. If appointed, ex officio members shall serve three-year terms. 
(d)  Roles and responsibilities. Ex officio members shall advise the historic preservation commission and may participate in discussion during meetings of the commission, but ex officio members shall not make motions or participate in votes of the commission. 
(e)  Interpretation. This section shall not be construed in any manner inconsistent with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-24 for membership of the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. III, § 3.4, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-33. - Rules and procedures. 
(a)  Rules. The historic preservation commission may adopt rules and procedures for the transaction of its business and consideration of applications. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedure without amendment to this article. Unless adopted otherwise, the latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall determine questions of procedure of the commission. 
(b)  Public hearings. Unless other procedures are adopted by the historic preservation commission, when a public hearing is held by the commission, it shall follow the procedures of article 35 of the city zoning ordinance for conducting said meeting. Posting and notice requirements for issuance of COAs shall fall under sections 29-91 and 29-92 respectively. 
(c)  Meetings. The historic preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and procedures for the calling of special meetings. 
(d)  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of all voting members. 
(e)  Public records. A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The historic preservation commission and individual members, including any ex officio members, if appointed, shall be subject to any applicable conflict of interest provisions of the city Charter or this Code. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. III, § 3.5, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-34. - Powers. 
The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within its respective historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny the same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10.1 et seq.; 
(7)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within its historic preservation jurisdiction; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property, and acquire and/or sell historic properties. The historic preservation commission shall not obligate the city council without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. III, § 3.6, 6-4-2008) 
Secs. 29-35—29-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS AND PROPERTIES 

Sec. 29-57. - Historic designation. 
(a)  Commission authority. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to compile and collect information, conduct surveys of historic resources within the city, and recommend districts, buildings and properties to city council for designation as being historic. The commission shall present to the city council any such nominations for historic districts and historic properties. 
(b)  Application. A historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners may apply for historic district designation. A historical society or property owner may apply for designation as a historic property. 
(c)  Reports. The historic preservation commission shall prepare formal reports when nominating historic districts or local properties. These reports shall describe the historic, cultural, architectural, or esthetic significance of the place, districts, site, building, structure, or work of art proposed for designation as historic. The report shall be submitted to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources, which will be allowed 30 days to prepare written comments concerning the report. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.1, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-58. - Criteria for selection of historic districts. 
The historic preservation commission may recommend and city council may approve by ordinance as a historic district any geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof, which: 
(1)  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
(2)  Represents one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and/or 
(3)  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.2, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-59. - Critera for designation of properties. 
The historic preservation commission may recommend, as a historic property, and city council may approve by ordinance as historic any structure, site, work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy or preservation by reason of value to the city, or the local region, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; and/or 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to city, the county, the state, or the local region. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.3, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-60. - Public hearing and notice requirements. 
(a)  Public hearing required. The commission and the city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance to designate a historic district or historic property. 
(b)  Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three times in the principal newspaper of general circulation within the municipality or county in which the property or properties to be designated or acquired are located; and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all owners and occupants of properties included within the proposed designation. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to date set for the public hearing. A letter sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shall constitute legal notification of property owners under this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.4, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-61. - Review by state historic preservation division. 
Upon the recommendation that any property or district be considered historic, and prior to consideration by the city council of any ordinance to officially designate such historic district or historic property, the historic preservation commission shall submit a report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site, building/structure, or work of art, to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources. The historic preservation division shall have at least 30 days to prepare written comments on the proposed designation. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.5, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-62. - Action by city council and ordinance contents. 
Following its public hearing, the city council may adopt the ordinance as prepared, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the proposal. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
(1)  Require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city; 
(2)  Describe the property to be designated; 
(3)  Set forth the names of the owners of each property; and 
(4)  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated historic property or any structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district; except as otherwise may be exempted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.6, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-63. - Notification following ordinance adoption. 
Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of an ordinance designating a historic district or historic property, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notice of such designation which shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.7, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-64. - Amendment to district and property designations. 
The boundary of any district or property may be amended in conformance with the provisions of this article relative to public hearings and notice and in conformance with all applicable provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. The boundary amendment shall also be subject to public hearing and notice requirements of the Zoning Procedures Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. and applicable provisions of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance relative to public hearing and notice. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. IV, § 4.8, 6-4-2008) 
Secs. 29-65—29-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS 

Sec. 29-87. - Required. 
(a)  After the designation by ordinance of a historic district or property, no material change in the appearance of such historic property or of a structure, site, or work of art within such historic district, as defined by this chapter, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission, except as otherwise specifically provided by this chapter. A certificate of appropriateness must be issued by the zoning administrator, after approval by the historic preservation commission, prior to any material change in appearance in such district or to any property unless an exemption is granted by the zoning administrator as provided in this article. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  The state department of transportation (GDOT) and the contractors, including cities and counties, performing work funded by GDOT are exempted from this article. Local governments are exempted from the requirements of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that local governments shall notify the historic preservation commission 45 business days prior to beginning any undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.1, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-88. - Exempted exterior environmental features. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the requirement to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission, the zoning administrator shall be authorized to administratively authorize and approve the following exterior environmental features, as defined, without the need to obtain a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation commission: 
(1)  Window air conditioning units installed on the side or rear facade of a building, provided they do not cause the removal, replacement, or damage to the window or window sash; 
(2)  Air conditioning, heating, or mechanical systems located on the ground in a side or rear yard; 
(3)  Satellite dishes, provided they are not mounted on front or side building facades or in front yards or readily visible side yards; 
(4)  Ramps or other equipment required for handicapped accessibility, if placed at a side or rear entrance; 
(5)  Dumpsters, when located in rear yards, subject to compliance with the screening requirements of the city zoning ordinance; 
(6)  Grading, land disturbance, and/or paving or improvement for additional parking for four or fewer parking spaces or less than 2,000 square feet of area, within a rear yard; 
(7)  Fences and walls in side or rear yards, constructed of wood, brick, concrete, stone, or vinyl-coated chainlink, provided that they do not exceed eight feet in height; 
(8)  Ground signs, unlighted, not exceeding four square feet in area, on property used for a detached, single-family residential use or nonresidential or permitted principal use; 
(9)  Window signs and door signs, unlighted; 
(10)  Special event signage, unlighted, upon permit issued by the zoning administrator in accordance with the city zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Temporary ground signs, unlighted, during the time when a space, unit, building, or land is for sale, rent, or lease, not exceeding four square feet of area; 
(12)  Temporary wall signs, unlighted, during the time when a space, unit, building, or land is for sale, rent, or lease, or under construction, not to exceed four square feet of area. 
(b)  The zoning administrator is authorized to prepare administrative forms and to provide evidence, upon application and for a fee, if authorized, that a proposed action is exempted from the requirement to obtain a certificate of appropriateness pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.2, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-89. - Preapplication conference. 
All applicants for a certificate of appropriateness are strongly encouraged, but not required, to schedule a preapplication conference with the zoning administrator or his designee. A preapplication conference is a time where applicants can familiarize themselves with the application requirements and processes, and gain preliminary input from staff as to the suitability of the proposed material change in appearance. Typically, the historic preservation commission is not represented at a preapplication conference, although this does not preclude one or more members of the commission from attending and participating in a preapplication conference. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.3, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-90. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Required information. All applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made as required by the zoning administrator, and shall at a minimum contain the following information: 
(1)  Elevation drawings, color and material samples. Every application or review involving the construction of a new building or structure and alterations and/or additions to existing structures in any historic district or within a property designated as a historic property shall be accompanied by exterior elevation drawings drawn to a specified scale and signed by an architect, engineer or other appropriate professional and submitted in sufficient number of copies as required by the zoning administrator. Said exterior elevation drawings shall clearly show in sufficient detail the exterior appearance and architectural design of proposed change to buildings or structures and new construction, as applicable. Each application shall also indicate proposed materials, textures and colors, and provide samples of materials and colors. 
(2)  Photographs. Photographs of all sides of the affected existing building or structure visible from the street shall accompany all applications, as well as adjoining properties. Photographs of all sides of the building visible from the street shall accompany applications for the demolition of structures under consideration for demolition, as well as photographs showing contiguous properties. Photographs shall be submitted in printed copy and in digital form unless otherwise specified by the zoning administrator. 
(3)  Site plan and landscaping plan. For every application, a plot plan or site plan drawn to a specified scale shall be submitted which shows all improvements affecting appearances visible from the street such as walls, walks, terraces, plantings, tree protection areas, accessory buildings, signs, lights, and other elements. In the case of a building or structure demolition, the site plan and landscaping plan shall show how the foundation area will be restored. 
(4)  Fee. A fee as may be established by the city council shall be submitted for said application. 
(5)  Additional information. Any additional information as may reasonably be required by the zoning administrator shall be submitted with the application. 
(b)  Variations or waivers. Where, in the opinion of the zoning administrator, a requested change would be considered minor, the zoning administrator may vary or waive any of the information requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.4, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-91. - Public hearing and notice for major works. 
(a)  The historic preservation commission shall hold a public hearing on all applications for a major work, as defined in section 29-5, at the time and place and on the date so advertised. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the zoning administrator or the historic preservation commission from holding a public hearing or providing notice beyond the minimum requirements of this section. 
(b)  When a completed application for a major work is received, the zoning administrator shall cause the following notices of public hearing be accomplished at least ten days prior to the public hearing scheduled before the historic preservation commission: 
(1)  On a sign, which shall be posted in a conspicuous, visible location on the property which shall indicate the nature of the proposed material change in appearance and the time, date, and place of the public hearing; 
(2)  In writing to the applicant and abutting property owners; and 
(3)  By publication at least once in the form of an advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the city or the legal organ. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.5, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-92. - Notice for minor works. 
When a completed application for a minor work is received, the zoning administrator shall cause a sign to be posted at least ten days prior to the meeting of the historic preservation commission at which the application will be considered. Said sign shall be posted in a conspicuous, visible location on the property and shall indicate the nature of the proposed material change in appearance and the time, date, and place of the meeting before the historic preservation commission. The commission may hear from any individual attending the meeting and who would like to voice their concerns or opinions concerning applications for certificates of appropriateness involving minor works. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.6, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-93. - Criteria for acting on applications. 
In passing judgment on applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall consider the appropriateness of any proposed material change in appearance in the context of the following criteria: 
(1)  New construction, reconstruction, alterations and/or renovations. A decision by the historic preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for new construction, reconstruction, alterations and/or renovations shall be guided by: 
a.  Consistency with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards of Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings; 
b.  Consistency with any adopted design guidelines for historic districts or historic properties as may be identified within the zoning ordinance or community agenda; 
c.  Expert advice, if any is sought on the matter; 
d.  The nature and character of the surrounding areas and the consistency of the proposed application with such nature and character; 
e.  The general design; character, and appropriateness of design; scale of buildings; arrangement, texture, materials, and colors of the structure in question; and the relation of such elements to similar features of structures in the immediate surrounding area, including site and landscaping. 
The historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use as having any affect on exterior architectural features. 
(2)  Relocation. A decision by the historic preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present settings; 
b.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be; 
c.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; 
d.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
(3)  Demolition. A decision by the historic preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
a.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object; 
b.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree or object to the ambiance of a district; 
c.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location; 
d.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining of its kind in the neighborhood or the city; 
e.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be; 
f.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse; 
g.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.7, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-94. - Time frame; approval; denial; inactivity; public record. 
(a)  Time frame for action. The historic preservation commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing of a complete application. Failure of the commission to act within the 45-day period shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. Additional time may be taken where the applicant and the commission have made a mutual agreement for said extension. 
(b)  Approval. The historic preservation commission shall approve the application and direct the zoning administrator to issue a certificate of appropriateness if: 
(1)  It finds that the proposed material change in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district; and 
(2)  The commission finds the application is consistent with the criteria for judging applications for certificates of appropriateness as established in this article. 
The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all certificate of appropriateness applications and their actions relating to said applications. 
(c)  Denial. The historic preservation commission may deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness when, in the opinion of the commission, such proposed change would be detrimental to the interests of the historic district or historic property and the public. In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reason for doing so and shall transmit a record of such action and the reasons therefor, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application. The denial of an application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding on the zoning administrator and, in such a case of denial, no building permit shall be issued. 
(d)  Void for inactivity. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within 18 months of the date of issuance. An extension on the certificate of appropriateness approval may be authorized at the discretion of the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.8, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-95. - Changes after approval. 
No material change in the appearance of a historic property, structure, site or work of art within the historic district shall be made or permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof after the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness unless and until all requirements of this chapter are met. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.9, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-96. - Exclusion. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property, which maintenance or repair does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent the property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. V, § 5.10, 6-4-2008) 
Secs. 29-97—29-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 29-121. - Appeals. 
(a)  Who may appeal. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, or by the zoning administrator in the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this chapter, may appeal such determination to the city council. 
(b)  Timing. The appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision of the historic preservation commission or zoning administrator, as the case may be, and must be made by petition delivered to the zoning administrator. In the case of a failure of the commission to act, an appeal must be made within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action. 
(c)  Content. The appeal shall be stated as on the application exactly as presented to the historic preservation commission or the zoning administrator, as the case may be. 
(d)  Notice. The appeal shall be advertised for public notice in accordance with applications for certificates of appropriateness as required by article IV of this chapter. 
(e)  Action on appeal. The city council may approve, modify and approve, or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission or the zoning administrator, as the case may be, if it finds that the commission or zoning administrator abused their discretion in reaching a decision. 
(f)  Appeal of historic preservation council action. Appeals of decisions of the city council made pursuant to this section may be taken to superior court of the county in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. VI, § 6.1, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-122. - Variances. 
(a)  Where the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of any specific property by reason of unusual circumstances, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter or to interpret the meaning of this article to relieve such difficulty or hardship. However, such variance, modification, or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the provisions of this chapter so that the architectural or historic integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. 
(b)  In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. Neither financial constraints alone, nor a situation of a person's own making, shall be considered an undue hardship. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. VI, § 6.2, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-123. - Enforcement. 
After a certificate of appropriateness has been authorized and notification of such has been transmitted to the zoning administrator, the zoning administrator shall from time to time inspect the construction approved by such authorization. The city, through the zoning administrator or city attorney, shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. VI, § 6.3, 6-4-2008) 
Sec. 29-124. - Penalties. 
Violation of any provision of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided for the punishment of violations in the city's zoning ordinance and adopted nuisance ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. VI, § 6.4, 6-4-2008) 
Secs. 29-125—29-146. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - LEGAL STATUS 

Sec. 29-147. - Incorporation clause. 
This article is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq., which act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this article. Where any provision of this article is in conflict with any provision of the act, the act shall control. Or where this article is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the act, such provision of the act, so as to meet the mandate of the act, shall be fully compiled with. 
(Ord. No. 375, art. VII, § 7.1, 6-4-2008) 
Chapter 32 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide for police protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); Georgia Peace Officer Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 35-8-1 et seq.; municipality's liability for torts of police or other officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 32-1—32-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 32-19. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Police Department Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 1, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 32-20. - Established. 
(a)  A police department for the city is hereby reestablished, established and created with the function of said department to provide police protection to citizens, persons, and property within the city. Without limiting the foregoing, the functions of the police department shall be: 
(1)  Acting to prevent, detect and investigate violations of the criminal laws of the state and violations of the ordinances of the city committed within the city and apprehend and arrest those persons who violate such criminal laws and ordinances; 
(2)  Patrolling the public roads and highways of the city, and to safeguard the lives and property of the citizens and persons of the city; 
(3)  Conducting accident investigations and traffic enforcement; 
(4)  Serving and executing warrants; 
(5)  Apprehending and arresting any person who is a fugitive from justice; 
(6)  Suppressing riots and maintaining public order within the city; 
(7)  Participating in the prosecution of alleged perpetrators of criminal offenses and violations of city ordinances; 
(8)  Performing any other law enforcement duty set for the department by the mayor or the city council, or both; and 
(9)  Performing all related law enforcement functions. 
(b)  The city manager is hereby authorized to add or delete additional functions for the police department to perform. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no provision of this article shall be construed as preventing the police department and its personnel from performing law enforcement duties outside of the city limits, when such duties are a direct result of performing the law enforcement function and police protection function within the city limits. Examples shall include hot pursuit of a criminal perpetrator across the city-county boundary, responding to a request for aid pursuant to a mutual aid agreement, and testifying against a criminal accused within state court in Gainesville, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 2, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 32-21. - Mutual aid agreements. 
The city, by and through its city council, in its discretion, is authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements with other law enforcement agencies and to authorize the personnel of said agencies to perform law enforcement functions within the city in order to aid the police department in carrying out its assigned functions under this article. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 6, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 32-22. - Jail agreements. 
The city, by and through its city council, in its discretion, is authorized to enter into any jail agreement with any private or other governmental entity to provide for the proper incarceration of alleged perpetrators of state laws, traffic offenses, and city ordinances until time of trial or as a part of the sentence imposed by any court of competent jurisdiction, or both. Any such jail agreement shall provide for the proper incarceration of said individuals in accordance with federal, state and local laws and GCIC standards, policies and procedures applicable to the operation of detention centers. 
(Ord. No. 140, § 8, 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 32-23. - Positions of the department. 
The city police department is authorized to have the positions of employment as provided hereinafter in this section. The positions of employment of the city police department are as follows: 
(a)  Chief of police. The chief of police for the city police department shall be responsible for administrating and supervising the police department and its police officers. The police chief's duties may be further defined by the city manager. 
(b)  Officer next in the chain of command. This officer shall be next in the chain of command of the city police department and shall perform the duties of the chief of police when the chief of police is unavailable for any reason or incapable for any reason of performing the chief's duties. This officer shall hold the rank assigned to the officer by the police chief, in the chief's discretion, and may be any rank including but not limited to assistant chief of police, police captain, police lieutenant, or police sergeant. This officer shall also perform such administrative duties as assigned to him by the chief of police and/or the city manager, or the mayor, or the city council (following the chain of command established by proper administrative policy), or any combination thereof. 
(c)  Police officers. The city police department shall also have two or more police officers (the exact number of which shall be set by the city manager (in consultation with the police chief) and who shall be held to the standards set forth in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-8, et seq. The police officer's general duties include: 
(1)  Acting to prevent, detect and investigate violations of the criminal laws of Georgia and violations of the ordinances of the city committed within the city and apprehend and arrest those persons who violate such criminal laws and ordinances; patrol the public roads and highways of the city, and to safeguard the lives and property of the citizens of the city; conduct accident investigation and traffic enforcement; to serve and execute warrants; to apprehend and arrest any person who is a fugitive from justice; and to suppress riots and maintain public order within the city; 
(2)  Acting as an active peace officer having the powers of arrest, and participating in the law enforcement duties required of police officers of the city police department, including but not limited to the patrolling of the city, investigation of crimes, protection of the citizens and property of the city; interviewing of witnesses; participation in the prosecution of alleged perpetrators of criminal offenses; and the related duties of being an active peace officer held to the standards set forth in O.C.G.A. § 35-8-8, et seq.; 
(3)  Following policies set by the police chief and/or the city manager regarding the administration of the police department; 
(4)  Any other law enforcement duty as set by the police chief and/or the city manager. 
(d)  Other personnel. The city police department shall have one or more civilian clerical/ support staff (the exact number of which shall be set by the city manager in consultation with the police chief). Clerical/support staff shall follow policies set by the police chief and/or the city manager regarding the administration of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 431, § 7, 3-4-2010) 
Secs. 32-24—32-47. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FALSE ALARMS 

Sec. 32-48. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm administrator means a person designated by the city to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts and administer the provisions of this article. 
Alarm company means a person subject to the licensing requirements, and/or a company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems; this person shall be licensed in compliance with city, county and state laws. 
Alarm signal means a detectable signal, audible or visual, generated by an alarm system, to which law enforcement is requested to respond. 
Alarm system means any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the occurrence of an illegal or unauthorized entry or other activity requiring immediate attention and to which law enforcement is requested to respond, but does not include motor vehicle or boat alarms, fire alarms, domestic violence alarms, or alarms designed to elicit a medical response. 
Alarm user means any person leasing or operating an alarm system or on whose premises an alarm system is maintained for the protection of such premises. 
Alarm user awareness class means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems and the problems created by false alarms. 
Automatic dial protection device means an automatic dialing device or an automatic telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system which, upon being activated, automatically initiates to the police department a recorded message or code signal indicating a need for law enforcement response. 
Cancellation means the process where response is terminated when the alarm company designated by the alarm user notifies the police department that there is not an existing situation at the alarm site requiring police response after an alarm dispatch request. If cancellation occurs prior to police arriving at the scene, this is not a false alarm for the purpose of civil penalty, and no penalty will be assessed. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm user, his employees or agents, and signals activated to summon law enforcement personnel unless law enforcement response was cancelled by the alarm user or his agent before law enforcement personnel arrive at the alarm location. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user. 
Local alarm means an alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of a structure and is not monitored by a remote monitoring facility, whether installed by an alarm company or user. 
Runaway alarm means an alarm system that produces repeated alarm signals that do not appear to be caused by separate human action. The police department may in its discretion discontinue police responses to alarm signals from what appears to be a runaway alarm. 
SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard means the American National Standard Institute (ANSI)- approved Security Industry Association (SIA) CP-01 Control Panel Standard, as may be updated from time to time, that details recommended design features for security system control panels and their associated arming and disarming devices to reduce false alarms. Control panels built and tested to this standard by a nationally recognized testing organization will be marked to state: "Design evaluated in accordance with SIA CP-01 Control Panel Standard Features for False Alarm Reduction." 
Verify means an attempt by the monitoring company or its representative to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to attempt to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 1, 6-17-2009) 
Sec. 32-49. - Duties of the alarm user. 
(a)  An alarm user shall maintain the premises and the alarm system in a method that will reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(b)  An alarm user must respond or cause a representative to respond to the alarm system's location within 30 minutes when notified by the police department to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system. 
(c)  An alarm user shall not manually activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report or to perform routine maintenance as prescribed by an alarm system provider. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 2, 6-17-2009) 
Sec. 32-50. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to activate an alarm system for the purpose of summoning law enforcement when no burglary, robbery, or other crime dangerous to life or property is being committed or attempted on the premises or when no medical emergency is occurring on the premises, or otherwise to cause a false alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to install, maintain, or use an audible alarm system which can sound continually for more than ten minutes. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 3, 6-17-2009) 
Sec. 32-51. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that three or more false alarms within any rolling 12-month period is excessive and constitutes a public nuisance, and shall be unlawful. Civil penalties for false alarms shall be established by resolution of the city council to be kept on file by the city clerk. 
(b)  Other civil penalties. Violations will be enforced through the assessment of a civil penalty in an amount established by resolution of the city council, to be kept on file by the city clerk. 
(c)  Payment of civil penalties. Civil penalties shall be paid within 30 days from the date of the invoice. 
(d)  Civil noncriminal violation. A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a civil violation and shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 4, 6-17-2009) 
Sec. 32-52. - Alarm user awareness class. 
The city may create and implement an alarm user awareness class and may request the assistance of the area alarm companies to assist in developing and implementing the class. The class shall inform alarm users of the problems created by false alarms and instruct alarm users how to help reduce false alarms. The class shall be presented at no cost to alarm users. The city may grant the option of attending a class in lieu of paying one assessed fine. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 5, 6-17-2009) 
Sec. 32-53. - Appeals. 
(a)  Process. Assessments of civil penalties and other enforcement decisions made under this article may be appealed by filing a written notice of appeal with the alarm administrator within ten days after the date of notification of the assessment of the civil penalty or other enforcement decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of the civil penalties or other enforcement decision. Appeals shall be heard through an administrative process established by the city. The hearing officer's decision is subject to review by the county superior court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. 
(b)  Standard. The hearing officer shall review an appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decision, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any other enforcement decision where warranted. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 6, 6-17-2009) 
Sec. 32-54. - Confidentiality. 
In the interest of public safety, all information contained in and gathered through the alarm registration applications, no response records, applications for appeals and any other alarm records shall be held in confidence by all employees and/or representatives of the city. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 7, 6-17-2009) 
Sec. 32-55. - Government immunity. 
The provisions of this article are not intended to, nor will they, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by law is retained. The alarm user acknowledges that the police department response may be influenced by factors such as the availability of police units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels and prior response history. 
(Ord. No. 418, § 8, 6-17-2009) 
Chapter 35 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1. - Discharge of firearm in city prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or wantonly fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm within the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Persons who shall fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm in defense of person or property; 
(2)  Law enforcement officers; and 
(3)  Persons who shall fire, shoot off or discharge a firearm at a firing range approved by the sheriff or police chief of the county or city in which the firing range is located and which is supervised by law enforcement officers or representatives of a local, state or national gun club. 
(Ord. No. 7, § 1, 6-3-1978) 
Sec. 35-2. - Public drunkenness. 
A person who shall be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, or by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud, or unbecoming language, is guilty of the offense of public drunkenness. 
(Ord. No. 9, § 1, 1-6-1979) 
Sec. 35-3. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of disorderly conduct in the city. A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person is placed in fear of safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Without provocation, uses to or of another in his presence opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in his presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called fighting words; 
(4)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of a female or of a male under the age of 14 years, or by telephone to a female or to a male under the age of 14 years; 
(5)  Communicates to any female within the state by writing or printing any obscene or vulgar language or improper proposals; 
(6)  Engages in indecent or disorderly conduct in the presence of a female in any public place; 
(7)  Telephones another repeatedly, whether or not conversation ensues, for the purpose of annoying, harrassing or molesting another or his family, or uses over the telephone language threatening bodily harm, or telephones and intentionally fails to hang up or disengage the connection, or knowingly permits any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this subsection; 
(8)  Uses violent and forceful behavior at any time in or near a public place such that there is a clear and present danger that free movement of other persons will be arrested or restrained or other persons will be incapacitated in the lawful exercise of business or amusement; 
(9)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another; 
(10)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking, or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(11)  Disturbs the peace of others by violent, indecent, offensive or boisterous conduct or language which said conduct or language was calculated to cause anguish or injury to another; 
(12)  Crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(13)  Throws any stone or other missile upon or at any person, vehicle, building, tree, sign or other public or private property; 
(14)  Throws any stone or missile from any vehicle, either moving, stopped, or parked, upon or at any person, building, vehicle, tree, sign or other public or private property; 
(15)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(16)  Expectorates, urinates, or defecates on any public street, alley, sidewalk or floor of any public building or a building where the public gathers or has access; 
(17)  Makes a false alarm with reference to the request of firefighting apparatus or cries fire in any public place for the sole purpose of causing turmoil; 
(18)  Prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, peeks in the door or window of any inhabited building or structure located thereon without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof; 
(19)  Interrupts the speaker of any lawful assembly or impairs the lawful rights of others to participate effectively in such assembly or meeting when such conduct is calculated to provoke or tend to cause turmoil or disturbance; 
(20)  Frequents any public place with the intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(21)  Assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, devise or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in said city, or who shall aid and abet therein; 
(22)  Displays any deadly weapon in a public place in a manner which is calculated to alarm or frighten other persons present; or 
(23)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the current ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10, § 1, 1-6-1979) 
State Law reference— Fighting in a public place, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-32; use of "fighting words," obscene and vulgar or profane language, etc., O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39. 
Sec. 35-4. - Loitering. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be titled and known as the Flowery Branch Loitering Ordinance. 
(b)  Loitering on private property prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be prohibited for any person to loiter or prowl upon the premises of any private property within the municipal boundaries of the city, including, but not limited to, all private residences, buildings, structures, vessels, railroad cars, or storage yards, or to remain upon such premises when that person does not have a legitimate cause or need to be present thereon, or that person does not have authority or permission to be present thereon. 
(2)  Any person who shall not have any legitimate cause or need to be present upon the private premises, or who has no authority or permission to be present on the private premises, who shall willfully fail to remove himself from such premises after the owner or occupier of the private property or a duly authorized law enforcement officer shall request the person to do so shall be guilty of violating this section. 
(c)  Loitering under other circumstances. 
(1)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when the person is in a place, public or private, at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(2)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any citation for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain the person's presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure, except when the offense occurs on private property upon the complaint of the owner or occupier of the private property, or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 83, §§ 1—4, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 35-5. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Camp means residing in our using a location for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for more than one hour at a time; cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
Storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more than one hour. 
(b)  Streets and sidewalks. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any street or sidewalk or public right-of-way. 
(c)  Other public property. Blocking ingress and egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from buildings. 
(d)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section by simply sleeping, sitting or lying down in a prohibited location or for a prohibited period of time without having first received an oral or written warning to cease such unlawful conduct. 
(e)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, this section shall not apply to nor be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using sidewalks; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting down, lying down or napping while attending performance, festivals, concerts, fireworks or other special events taking place in any park or on any street or sidewalk closed by permit for such purpose; 
(6)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; 
(7)  Persons sitting or lying down while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office or other retail facility to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance or other special event; 
(8)  Persons sitting or lying down in an orderly line awaiting entry to any building, including shelters, or awaiting social services, such as provisions of meals; or 
(9)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks, or sleeping anywhere else while being carried by an accompanying person or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(f)  Penalty. Any person who violates this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
Secs. 35-6—35-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINORS 

Sec. 35-27. - Title. 
This article shall be titled and known as the Flowery Branch Curfew Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 1, 10-7-1991) 
Sec. 35-28. - Prohibition of minors 17 years of age or younger to be at large during night hours. 
It shall be prohibited for any minor 17 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play, or be at large in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 2, 10-7-1991) 
Sec. 35-29. - Exceptions to the prohibition. 
The prohibition provided for by section 35-28 shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places referenced in section 35-28 during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate travel through the city, which shall be excepted in all cases from this curfew. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 3, 10-7-1991) 
Sec. 35-30. - Prohibition of parent or guardian allowing a minor 17 years of age or younger to be at large during the prohibited hours. 
It shall be prohibited for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any child 17 years of age or younger to permit or, by insufficient control, to allow such child to be in, upon, or at large on the public streets or any other places listed in section 35-28 within the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day, except as allowed by the circumstances set out in section 35-29. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 4, 10-7-1991) 
Sec. 35-31. - Warning upon first violation. 
Upon conviction of violation of this article for the first time, a person (a minor or parent, or both, etc.) shall be given a warning citation. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 5, 10-7-1991) 
Sec. 35-32. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, after receiving a warning citation, shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 6, 10-7-1991) 
Sec. 35-33. - Separate offenses. 
Each violation of this article shall constitute a separate offense and shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 84, § 7, 10-7-1991) 
Secs. 35-34—35-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISES 

Sec. 35-55. - Title. 
This article shall be titled and known as the Noise Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 1, 3-18-1991) 
Sec. 35-56. - Certain noises unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 2, 3-18-1991) 
Sec. 35-57. - Loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises. 
The following are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public area in the city except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonable loud or harsh sound by means of any signaling device and the sounding of any device for any unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for any producing or reproducing of sound in a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with a volume louder than necessary for the convenient hearing of the person who is in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which the machine or device is operated, and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any set, instrument, photograph, machine or device in a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals. The keeping of any animal, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, and birds, which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary or moving internal combustion engine or motor boat except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. Such are not in any event to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(8)  School, courts, places of worship, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning place of worship or court while in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the normal operation of that institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed in those streets indicating a school, hospital or court is adjacent thereto. 
(9)  Hawkers, peddlers, vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(10)  Noise to attract attention. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 3, 3-18-1991) 
Sec. 35-58. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, any activity which would naturally cause a loud noise such as a parade, Fourth of July fireworks display, a gospel singing, construction of a building or similar type functions or activities which are properly permitted by the proper official of the city shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 3, 3-18-1991) 
Sec. 35-59. - Penalties. 
Any person failing to comply with the lawful provisions hereof or any act prohibited hereby or failing to do any act mandated hereby shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 4, 3-18-1991) 
Sec. 35-60. - Repeal of conflicting provisions; adoption of provisions in favor. 
All resolutions or ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with the terms of this article are hereby repealed, but it is hereby provided that any resolution, ordinance or law which may be applicable hereto and aid in carrying out and making effective the intent, purpose and provisions hereof which shall be liberally construed to be in favor of the city is hereby adopted as part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 79, § 5, 3-18-1991) 
Secs. 35-61—35-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLICITATION 

Sec. 35-71. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have definitions as outlined herein: 
Aggressive manner means: 
(1)  Approaching speaking to a person or following a person before, during, or after soliciting if the conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, to fear damage to or loss of property, or to otherwise be intimidated into giving money or any other thing of value; 
(2)  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a negative response to such soliciting; 
(3)  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person without that person's consent in the course of soliciting; 
(4)  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
(5)  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited; 
(6)  Following a person being solicited with the intent of asking that person for money or other things of value; or 
(7)  Soliciting money from anyone who is waiting in line. 
Automated teller machine means a device linked to a financial institution's account records which is able to perform transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries or mortgage and loan payments. 
Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines and the adjacent space which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
Check cashing business means any person duly licensed to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration pursuant to Georgia law. 
Financial institution means any banking corporation, credit union, or foreign exchange office as defined by Georgia law. 
Public place means a place where a governmental entity has title, to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, or playground. 
Soliciting means asking for money or objects of value with the intention that the money or objects be transferred at that time, and at that place. Soliciting shall include using the spoken, written, or printed word, bodily gestures, or signs with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other things of value or soliciting the sale of goods or services. 
( Ord. No. 515 , § 3, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 35-72. - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(b)  No person shall solicit on private or residential property without permission from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such property. 
(c)  No person shall solicit within 20 feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution or check cashing business or within 20 feet of any automated teller machine without the consent of the owner of the property or another person legally in possession of such a facility. When an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, the distance of 20 feet shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the facility. 
(d)  No person shall solicit an operator or other occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located on any street for the purpose of performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. This subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passenger of such vehicle. 
(e)  No person shall solicit from any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying or reserving a public parking space. 
(f)  No person shall solicit while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(g)  No person shall solicit in any public transportation vehicle or at any bus or public transportation stop. 
(h)  No person shall solicit in any public parking lot or public parking structure. 
(i)  No person shall solicit in a group of two or more persons. 
(j)  No person shall solicit within ten feet of an entrance to a building. 
( Ord. No. 515 , § 3, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 35-73. - Solicitation at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit after sunset or before sunrise. 
( Ord. No. 515 , § 3, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 35-74. - False or misleading solicitation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting. False or misleading representations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and is stranded when this statement is not true; 
(2)  Stating or suggesting falsely that the solicitor is either a present or former member of the armed services; 
(3)  Displaying any indication of physical disability when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; or 
(4)  Stating that the solicitor is homeless when he or she is not. 
( Ord. No. 515 , § 3, 9-17-2015) 
Sec. 35-75. - Penalty. 
Any person failing to comply with this section as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
( Ord. No. 515 , § 3, 9-17-2015) 
Chapter 38 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Title. 
This article shall be titled and known as the Flowery Branch Park Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 1, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-2. - Use and operation of the Flowery Branch Park. 
The Flowery Branch Park shall be a public park open to any member of the general public for recreational uses including all intellectual, creative, social or educational interests as allowed by state law. The park may be used for special events by public interest groups, if the events will not cause a danger to the public safety, upon special written permission granted by the city council. The city council is authorized to adopt and promulgate all rules and regulations relating to the use and operation of the park. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 2, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-3. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The daily hours of operation of the Flowery Branch Park which will allow the use and enjoyment of said park by any person shall be from dawn to dusk. 
(b)  Any use of or entry onto the premises of the Flowery Branch Park at a time other than the hours of operation shall be a violation of this chapter. No person shall have the legal authority, right, or privilege to remain upon the premises of the Flowery Branch Park at a time other than the approved hours of operation or remain after receiving a direction to leave by an authorized representative of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 3, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-4. - Vandalism prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, in any manner, to vandalize, to mark on, deface, injure, displace, dig, excavate, remove, or construct on any real or personal property within the Flowery Branch Park, except when done with special written permission granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 4, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-5. - Speed limit for vehicles. 
It shall be prohibited for any person to drive a vehicle on any road in the Flowery Branch Park and recreational area in excess of 15 mph. As used in this section, the term "vehicle" means any wheeled conveyance for the transportation of persons or materials. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 5, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-6. - Commercial fishing prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited to fish commercially or to buy or sell fish caught in the waters of the Flowery Branch Park. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 6, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-7. - Fishing devices regulated. 
It shall be prohibited to fish with any device other than a pole and line or rod and reel in the waters of Flowery Branch Park except with the prior written permission of the city council and as allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 7, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-8. - Hunting and trapping prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited to hunt, trap, or otherwise pursue or catch any wildlife in the Flowery Branch Park, unless such activity has been approved by prior written permission of the city council and is allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 8, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-9. - Alcoholic beverages or intoxicants prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited for any intoxicated person to enter or remain on the premises of the Flowery Branch Park. It shall also be prohibited for any person to consume or use alcoholic beverages or intoxicants on the premises of the Flowery Branch Park. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 9, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-10. - Metal detection prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited for any person to use in the Flowery Branch Park any electronic device for the detection of metals, minerals, artifacts, or lost articles, or for treasure hunting, unless such activity has been approved by prior written permission of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 10, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-11. - Fireworks prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited for any person to use or possess in the Flowery Branch Park any fireworks, explosives, or firecrackers, unless such use has been approved by prior written permission of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 11, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-12. - Discharge of projectiles within the park prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited for any person to use or possess in the Flowery Branch Park any firearms, bows and arrows, spring guns, air rifles, sling shots, or any other device which discharges projectiles by any means, unless such use has been approved within restricted areas by the prior written permission of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 12, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-13. - Projectile discharge into the park prohibited. 
It shall be prohibited for any person to shoot into the Flowery Branch Park by way of any firearm, bow and arrow, spring gun, air rifle, sling shot, or any other device which discharges projectiles by any means, from beyond the boundaries of the Flowery Branch Park. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 13, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-14. - Direction to leave. 
Any person who violates any section of this article may be directed to leave the Flowery Branch Park by any authorized representative of the city council. No person shall have legal authority, right, or privilege to remain within the Flowery Branch Park after receiving such a direction. It shall be prohibited to refuse to leave the Flowery Branch Park after violating any section of this article and after being directed to leave by an authorized representative of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 14, 9-16-1991) 
Sec. 38-15. - Penalty. 
Any person who shall do anything prohibited by this article as the same exists, or as it may hereafter be amended, or who shall fail to do anything required by this article as the same exists, or as it may hereafter be amended, besides being required to leave the premises of the Flowery Branch Park, shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12 and as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 82, § 15, 9-16-1991) 
Secs. 38-16—38-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR EVENTS 

Sec. 38-34. - Issuance of regulatory licenses. 
(a)  The power to issue a regulatory license for the operation of an outdoor exhibition, outdoor performance, outdoor musical festival or concert, or other outdoor public assembly to raise money, as a commercial activity, or for profit shall be reserved specifically for the city council, and said power shall be exercised as provided hereinafter. 
(b)  The city council, by way of a regularly scheduled public meeting or by a specially called meeting, shall make an investigation and may hold a hearing, as necessary, to assess the impact of the outdoor events set forth in this section upon the health, safety and general welfare and security of the city. The application for a license for any of the outdoor events set forth in this section shall set forth conclusive evidence: 
(1)  That the applicant shall provide sufficient security people, at the expense of the applicant, to control the public and enforce all laws within the area occupied by the business and/or event; 
(2)  That the applicant shall provide adequate emergency medical facilities, at the expense of the applicant, to provide sufficient emergency medical care for members of the public who patronize the applicant's business and/or event; 
(3)  That the applicant shall provide adequate maintenance personnel to clean the area occupied by the business or event, or both, as well as those areas which are adjacent to the area occupied by the business or event, or both, and which are littered as a result of the business, event, or its patrons, or any combination thereof; 
(4)  That a study has been prepared establishing the adequacy of the facility for the use as applied for, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The appropriateness of the facility for the proposed use in light of the surrounding uses adjoining the facility; 
b.  The adequacy of parking (with sufficient area to park one passenger vehicle for each anticipated four patrons); and 
c.  The adequacy of the public roads to handle the access to the business facility or event, or both, for the number of anticipated patrons (and specifically requiring that there be no parking within the right-of-way for public roads); 
(5)  That the applicant shall provide adequate toilet facilities such that a minimum of one toilet fixture per 100 patrons is provided; 
(6)  That the applicant shall provide adequate drinking water for the members of the public who patronize his business or event, or both; 
(7)  That the applicant shall designate a resident of the state as agent and lawful attorney in fact upon whom may be served all summons or other lawful processes in any action or proceeding against the business or event, or both, for any action arising as a result of the business or event, or both. The name and address of such resident agent shall be filed with the application and be a part thereof; 
(8)  That the applicant shall secure and provide proof thereof with the application an insurance policy or a bond affording coverage to the business or the event, or both, which insurance policy or bond shall be subject to any personal injury or death or property damages to the following limits: 
a.  An indemnity bond subject to a limit of $500,000.00; or 
b.  An insurance policy or public liability bond subject to a limit of $500,000.00 for personal injury or death or property damage sustained by any one person and subject to a limit of $1,000,000.00 for personal injuries or death or property damages sustained by two or more persons as a result of any one accident or event; 
(9)  That the applicant shall provide a study indicating the projected attendance, scheduling details such as time, place, and manner of holding the outdoor event, anticipated noise levels, and how the applicant proposes to minimize any adverse consequences of the outdoor event as to surrounding or adjoining homeowners or landowners. 
(c)  The city council, considering whether the applicant meets the requirements of subsection (b) of this section, may either issue the license, issue the license with conditions, or deny the license as necessary, in the opinion of the city council, to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare and security of the city. 
(d)  The city manager may, at his discretion, waive any or all of the requirements for an applicant. 
(e)  The failure of the applicant for a regulatory license for an outdoor event set forth in this section to make the required application in sufficient time for the city manager to consider the application at one regular meeting of said city council prior to the beginning of the operation of the event, or at a specially called meeting ten days prior to the event, shall result in the automatic denial of the license. 
(f)  The regulatory fee required for outdoor events falling under this section shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(g)  The specifically enumerated requirements set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any event if the anticipated attendance at which is fewer than 250 people. 
(h)  Any person who conducts an outdoor event without receiving a regulatory license as required by this article, or conducts an outdoor event not meeting the requirements of this article, or both, shall be subject to the penalties allowed by section 1-12, as assessed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court. Each day of holding, operating, or conducting an event in violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(i)  The city, its agents or employees in their official capacity, and any event sponsored by the city, shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 4-17-1995; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 2-19-2015 ) 
Chapter 41 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 41-1—41-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 433 , § I, adopted June 3, 2010 deleted the former Art. II, §§ 41-19—41-29, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to collection and disposal and derived from Ord. No. 53-B, § 1, 7-21-1997; Ord. of 9-15-1997, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 53-C, §§ 1—4, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 53-D, § 1, 10-4-2006; Ord. No. 53-E, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 53, §§ 1-1—1-9, 10-22-1987. 

Sec. 41-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, term and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the following meanings: 
Biomedical waste means that term as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22 on January 1, 1993. 
Bulk item means large appliances and items such as washers, dryers, microwaves, stoves, refrigerators, air conditioners, trash compactors, water heaters, televisions, computers, monitors, stereos and furniture. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house, business, retail, industrial, public or semi-public establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single family dwelling. 
Construction and demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations of pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, asbestos, asbestos containing waste, wood, brick, metal, concrete wall board, paper cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other non-putrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. Such wastes also include, but are not limited to, wastes generated by the cleaning out of basements, attics, storage areas, or major cleanups from move ins or move outs. 
Garbage means all classes of putrefactive or readily decomposable animal, fish, fruit or vegetable matter and any matter or substance used in the preparation, cooking, dealing in or storage of meats, fowl, fish, fruits and vegetables that are subject to immediate decay and the attraction, harborage and breeding of flies or rodents. It may include the following: tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics, and wrapping or packaging materials. 
Hazardous substance means that term as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-92 on January 1, 1993. 
Hazardous waste means that term as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 12-8-62 on January 1, 1993. 
Refuse means the useless, unused, unwanted, neglected, abandoned or discarded material resulting from normal household or commercial establishment activities, or materials which by their presence may injuriously affect the health, safety and welfare of persons in the city. 
Resource recovery and compactor sites means any resource recovery and compactor site operated by Hall County, Georgia. 
Solid waste means garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, recyclables, yard waste, bulk items, and any other form of solid waste ordinarily resulting from normal household or commercial establishment activities. 
Yard waste means grass trimmings, leaves, small shrubbery trimmings, garden refuse, sod, pine needles, branches not in excess of six inches in diameter and four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight. Yard waste shall not include rock, dirt or roots. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-20. - Responsibility for management of solid waste, garbage, refuse and bulk items. 
(a)  Every person residing or conducting business in the city shall be responsible for ensuring that the solid waste, garbage, refuse and bulk items generated by their home or business is properly disposed of as set forth in this article. If any solid waste, garbage, refuse or bulk items can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or has been the property of any person or business prior to being disposed of, such identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that such person or organization disposed of such solid waste in violation of this article. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person to dispose of any solid waste, garbage, refuse or bulk items generated by their home except by the following approved methods: 
(1)  Utilize the city or a person(s) to whom the city may grant a franchise for collection, conveyance and disposal of said waste; 
(2)  Collect, convey and dispose of said waste at a county resource recovery and compactor site; or 
(3)  Collect, convey and dispose of said waste at any other state, county or city approved facility. 
(c)  The city shall report to the county the names and addresses of all persons who do not choose to use the city or its franchisee for the collection, conveyance and disposal of solid waste, garbage, refuse and bulk items or who do not have a plan approved by the director of community planning for collection, conveyance and disposal of solid waste, garbage, refuse and bulk items at a state, county (other than Hall County) or city approved facility. 
(d)  The city or its franchisee will collect garbage, refuse and bulk items in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(e)  The city or its franchisee shall collect, convey and dispose of yard waste from property located within the city only upon request made to the city clerk, and hereby establishes a charge for said yard waste collection, conveyance and disposal. 
(f)  The following items, products, or materials will not be collected and it shall be a violation of this article for any person to place such items, products or materials in any container for collection: Paint, construction materials, rubber tires, acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids, hazardous substances, hazardous waste, biomedical waste and dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-21. - Collection days designated. 
Garbage and refuse shall be collected from the various premises in the city as follows: 
Collections from single family dwellings and commercial establishments will normally be made once weekly on Monday or Tuesday, except for legal holidays. One bulk item per month shall be collected once monthly on the second Monday or Tuesday, except for legal holidays. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-22. - Preparation and storage of garbage and refuse for collection. 
(a)  Garbage and refuse shall be placed in plastic bags with the tops securely tied and stored in the container(s) provided by the city or its franchisee. Garbage and refuse placed in containers un-bagged in plastic will not be collected and the customer will be notified of noncompliance with this section. 
(b)  Each occupied single family dwelling or commercial establishment shall be provided at least one container with a capacity of 96 gallons. One additional container may be provided at an additional cost to the sanitation service customer in an amount established by resolution of the city council or by its franchisee. Neither the city nor its franchisee will collect garbage and refuse from single family dwellings or commercial establishments which cannot be stored in a maximum of two such containers. 
(c)  The director of community planning shall not issue a building permit for multifamily dwellings until the said dwelling have an approved plan for the collection, storage and disposal of garbage and refuse. Neither the city nor its franchisee will collect garbage and refuse from multifamily dwellings unless the refuse is placed in containers approved by the city council or its franchisee. 
(d)  Containers shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, tightly covered at all times except for filling, emptying and cleaning, free from odor and such containers shall be filled in such manner as to allow pickup by one person. Such container shall be further maintained so as to prevent the overflow or scattering of garbage and refuse. 
(e)  Containers which are inside fenced areas will not be picked up. Garbage and refuse shall be ready for pickup no later than 6:00 a.m. on the designated pickup days. If the containers are placed curbside for garbage and refuse removal, they shall be removed from the curb the same day as the garbage and refuse is collected. 
(f)  Yard waste shall be placed in clear plastic bags or if opaque plastic bags or paper bags are used they must be marked as "yard waste." Said bags shall be placed immediately behind the sidewalk or if there is no sidewalk, immediately behind the curb or off the pavement and shall not be located as to impede or obstruct or divert either pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the flow of surface water or block drains. No garbage or refuse shall be mixed with yard waste. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-23. - Commercial establishments and large multifamily dwellings. 
(a)  All commercial establishments and large multifamily dwellings within the city unable to store its garbage and refuse as provided in subsection [(b)] shall arrange for proper garbage and refuse collection, conveyance, and disposal from a private contractor. 
(b)  All containers shall be maintained on private property except where permission is granted by the city council to utilize public alleys, streets or sidewalks. 
(c)  All commercial establishments shall maintain containers in a sanitary condition free from odor and shall prevent the overflow or scattering of garbage on the premises, nearby properties or public streets and places. 
(d)  The planning director or his designee shall not issue a building permit for commercial establishments or large multifamily dwellings until said premises have approved plans for the collection, storage and disposal of garbage and refuse. 
(e)  Provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who, as an incidental part of providing construction or demolition services, and using vehicles, dumpsters or roll-off containers which they own or lease, remove construction or demolition debris from the sites at which they are performing such services. This provision shall not be construed to relieve such persons of any requirements under federal or state law. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-24. - Billing procedure. 
(a)  All persons utilizing the city's franchisee(s) for collection, conveyance and disposal of solid waste, garbage, refuse and bulk items shall be billed directly by the franchisee(s). 
(b)  All persons utilizing the county resource recovery and collection sites for collection, conveyance and disposal of solid waste, garbage, refuse and bulk items shall be billed in accordance with the county's code of ordinances. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-25. - Placing of solid waste for pickup. 
(a)  All persons utilizing sanitation services of the city or its franchise shall place solid waste items for pick-up on their premises located so as to be easily accessible to street pickup, not to be placed over or next to fixed items such as fire hydrants, telephone or electrical boxes, mail boxes or anything that could be damaged by equipment or personnel picking up said items, but not including the street, sidewalk, or properties other than the premises of the depositor. Neither the city nor its franchisee will be responsible for repairing or replacing items removed or damaged which was placed curbside in such a manner that it appeared to be intended for removal or was not visible because it was mixed with other items placed curbside. 
(b)  Neither the city nor its franchisee shall be responsible for collecting or hauling construction or demolition waste. Such material must be disposed of by the contractor, tenant, or owner of the property. Neither the city nor its franchisee shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes, or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors or building contractors. 
(c)  For rental properties, all solid waste originating from the property during the clean up between tenants shall be the responsibility of the landlord and/or the property owner. The following shall apply to all solid waste originating from the property of a landlord cleaning up between tenants: 
(1)  Following an eviction, any property, solid waste, belongings, or other items shall be placed on some portion of the landlord's property, immediately behind the sidewalk or if there is no sidewalk, immediately behind the curb or off the pavement and shall not be located as to impede or obstruct or divert either pedestrian or vehicular traffic or the flow of surface water or block drains. 
(2)  After execution of a writ of possession, such property shall be regarded as abandoned. Any property, solid waste, belongings, or other items placed curbside following an eviction shall be removed within 24 hours of the physical eviction by the property owner. If the property is not removed with 24 hours, the city may commence removal at the expense of the property owner and the property owner shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-26. - Unauthorized use of dumpsters and prohibiting scavenging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or otherwise leave solid waste in dumpsters that are leased and paid for private use, except by permission of the owner. This prohibition includes dumpsters on government property. Only dumpsters marked "For Public Use" shall be used and it shall be unlawful to import garbage to these dumpsters. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to scavenge or remove solid waste from dumpsters. Solid waste in these dumpsters is the property of the company providing the service. 
(c)  Each dumpster shall display one sign in easy to read printing, which sign shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Notice that the unauthorized and unlawful use of the dumpster is a violation of this section. 
(2)  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
Sec. 41-27. - Penalties. 
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this article shall on conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now, or hereafter provided by law. Each day in violation of any provision of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 433, § I, 6-3-2010 ) 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 433 , § I, adopted June 3, 2010 deleted Art. III, §§ 41-47—41-51, which pertained to yard trimmings and derived from Ord. No. 129, §§ 1—5, 1-6-1997. 
Chapter 42 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS 
ARTICLE I. - STREET LIGHTING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 42-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to create special districts for the provision of street lighting services along public rights-of-way within such districts and to levy and collect assessments within each district to pay the cost of providing such services. 
( Ord. No. 451, § 1, 9-1-2011 ) 
Sec. 42-2. - Standards. 
Existing and proposed public street lights shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  Existing public streets—Above ground power. Street lights shall be installed on existing utility poles at a spacing no closer than 200 lineal feet with 100 watt minimum fixtures. 
(b)  Existing public streets—Underground power. Street lights shall be installed on poles and in conformance with all applicable standards of the city and utility provider. 
(c)  Proposed public streets. The owner, developer or other person developing a subdivision providing street light services shall be required to conform to all of the standards provided in Article 10 Section 1026 "Street Lights" of the city's adopted Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 451, § 1, 9-1-2011 ) 
Sec. 42-3. - Districts other than residential. 
Street lighting in nonresidential districts shall only be permitted by city council approval subject to the safety, economic and other factors involved. Nonresidential lighting districts shall be established consistent with the procedures set forth in this article. 
( Ord. No. 451, § 1, 9-1-2011 ) 
Sec. 42-4. - Cost of service for creation. 
The city council does hereby declare that the cost of service for creation of street light districts or street lighting hereafter created shall be a "service" as authorized by the Constitution of the state. 
( Ord. No. 451, § 1, 9-1-2011 ) 
Sec. 42-5. - Responsibility for costs; fees and charges; security deposit. 
(a)  Each property owner receiving street lighting service within a street light district created by the city council shall be required to pay a special assessment levied on each property for the provision of such service in an amount established by resolution of the city council. This assessment shall be equal to each property owner's pro-rata share of the total charge for annual lighting within the district based on the charges of electric utility companies plus an annual fee to cover administrative costs. 
(b)  Alternatively, a property owners' association as defined by the Georgia Property Owners' Association Act, as may be amended, may petition the city council on forms provided by the city to pay the special assessment for an entire district provided that the property owners' association currently receives an ad valorem tax bill. The city council may elect to collect a security deposit from the property owners' association. Said security deposit shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
( Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-2-2012 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 467 , § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 2012, repealed former § 42-5 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 451 , § 1, 9-1-2011. 
Sec. 42-6. - Tax lot or parcel defined costs for nonresidential lots. 
Tax lot or parcel is hereby defined as any single tract of land which falls within any of the zoning classifications as defined by the city's zoning ordinance, as shown on the city land lot maps, or as shown on the county tax maps. However, in nonresidental zoning areas different criteria may be adopted by the city council for the payment of installation and operational costs. 
( Ord. No. 451, § 1, 9-1-2011 ) 
Sec. 42-7. - Payment due date; penalties; imposition of liens; forfeiture of security deposit. 
Payment of the fees provided for in this article shall be due the same date of each year as ad valorem taxes are due to the city. Failure to pay shall subject the property owner or the property owners' association to the same penalties provided for failure to pay ad valorem taxes. The fees charged for street lighting services shall constitute a special assessment on each property served by such services. The fees charged for street lighting services shall be added to the property owner or the property owners' association's ad valorem tax bill and shall constitute a lien on the property owned. Said liens shall have the same priority as tax assessments, and an execution may issue for the purposes of enforcing the lien including foreclosure and or judicial sale. Additionally, a property owners' association's failure to pay the fees provided for in this article shall forfeiture its security deposit and may result in the discontinuance of lighting service within the special assessment district. In the event the property owners' association fails to pay the fees provided for in this article, the next annual lighting charge for the special assessment district shall be levied in accordance with section 42-5(a). 
( Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-2-2012 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 467 , § 1, adopted Aug. 2, 2012, repealed former § 42-7 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 451 , § 1, 9-1-2011. 
Sec. 42-8. - Billing, accounting, collecting and receiving monies. 
The city clerk shall be responsible for the billing, accounting, collecting, and receiving of the monies provided for in this article. 
( Ord. No. 451, § 1, 9-1-2011 ) 
Sec. 42-9. - Creation of a street lighting special assessment district. 
(a)  By property owner. Any tax lot or parcel owner in the city may present a request for creation of a special taxing district for street lights to the city council. Upon receipt of the request, the city council shall determine the appropriate boundaries for a special assessment district for street lights that will serve the lot owner presenting the request and neighboring lot owners. The city council shall then prepare a map showing this proposed special assessment district for street lights. The requesting lot owner shall then circulate a petition for the creation of the proposed special assessment district for street lights among the lot owners in the proposed district. If 51 percent of the lot owners in the proposed district sign the petition affirming the creation of a special assessment district for new or existing street lights, then the petition shall be presented to the city council. The city clerk shall verify the signatures on the petition prior to advertising the public hearings required by this section. Following signature verification, the city council shall conduct two public hearings for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed special assessment district for street lights. Safety and economic factors shall be the prime consideration in making such determination. The public hearings shall be advertised at least one time in the official organ of the county, giving notice of the hearings at least 15 days before the public hearings. Following the public hearings, the city council may approve, by ordinance, a street lighting district. Following adoption of said ordinance, the city council shall notify the city clerk to apply a special assessment for each property to pay as part of the city's annual ad valorem property tax bill. 
(b)  The city council on its own action may initiate a street lighting district for any area of the city for which the city is being charged or will be charged for electrical service by the electric utility company servicing the area encompassing the proposed street lighting district. The city council shall conduct two public hearings for the purpose of determining whether or not to create the proposed special taxing district for street lights. Safety and economic factors shall be the prime consideration in making such determination. The public hearings shall be advertised one time in the official organ of the county, giving notice of the hearings at least 15 days before the public hearings. Following the public hearings, the city council may approve, by ordinance, a street lighting district. Following adoption of said ordinance, the city council shall notify the city clerk to apply a special assessment for each property to pay as part of the city's annual ad valorem property tax bill. 
( Ord. No. 451, § 1, 9-1-2011 ) 
Chapter 44 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 44-1—44-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Voters approved the Freeport exemption in a referendum held March 15, 1994. 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 44-19. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Constitutional Freeport Exemption Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 1, 12-21-1998) 
Sec. 44-20. - Effective within corporate limits of city. 
The general constitutional Freeport exemption law as set forth in article VII, section II, paragraph III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983 (Ga. Const. art. VII, § II, ¶ III) and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 is hereby made effective within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 2, 12-21-1998) 
Sec. 44-21. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Finished goods means goods, wares and merchandise of every character and kind but shall not include unrecovered, extracted or unsevered natural resources, raw materials, goods in the process of manufacture or production or the stock in trade of a retailer. 
Raw materials means any material whether crude or processed that can be converted by manufacture, processing or combination into a new and useful product but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted or unsevered natural resources. 
(b)  All other definitions, terms and provisions of the aforesaid constitutional amendment and O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 shall be and the same are hereby incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference thereto. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 4, 12-21-1998) 
Sec. 44-22. - Ad valorem taxation exemptions. 
The city does exempt from ad valorem taxation all the value of the following types of tangible personal property or any combination thereof is and shall be exempted from ad valorem taxation: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production, which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for herein shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in the state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside the state, and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside the state and stored transshipment to a final destination outside the state. The exemption provided for herein shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in the state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this subsection shall be designated as being in transit upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, where such property is being stored. Such official books and records shall contain a full, true and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such in transit property shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of the state and of any political subdivision of the state. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 3, 12-21-1998) 
Sec. 44-23. - Increase, reduction, revocation of exemption. 
Any increase, reduction or revocation of such exemption may be accomplished only by the procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 
(Ord. No. 165, § 5, 12-21-1998) 
Secs. 44-24—44-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 379-A , §§ 1—17, adopted Apr. 1, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence, to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been included herein as Art. III, §§ 44-31—4-47. 

Sec. 44-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
Guest room means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truckstop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, timeshare or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in this city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession; licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for more than 30 consecutive days. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money—whether received in money or otherwise—including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as herein provided. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 1, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-32. - Hotel-motel excise tax levy. 
There is hereby set and levied on each occupant of a guest room of any hotel located within the corporate limits of the city a tax in the amount of five percent of the rent for such occupancy. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 2, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-33. - Proceeds of the tax. 
The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 3, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-34. - Use of funds generated by additional taxes. 
Upon approval by the city council of the city on an annual basis, the additional tax imposed by this article in excess of the first three percent shall be paid to the Lake Lanier Convention and Visitors Bureau ("Lake Lanier CVB") so long as (a) the majority of the funds paid are used for advertising and promoting the city and its surrounding area and (b) the city has representation on the Lake Lanier CVB. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 4, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-35. - Collection of tax by operator. 
It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the city to collect the tax on occupants imposed in section 44-32 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 5, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-36. - Exemptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article: 
(a)  No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed on charges made for hotel rooms, provided to any person who certifies that they are staying in such hotel room, as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty. 
(c)  The tax authorized by this article shall apply to the fees or charges for any hotel room during the first 30 days of continuous occupancy and shall not apply to charges imposed for any continuous occupancy thereafter. The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to charges made for the use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or to any hotel room provided without charge. 
(d)  The tax authorized by this article shall not apply to the charges for any hotel room, furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any hotel room with a state or local government credit card, such room shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by the state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this subsection. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 6, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-37. - Registration of operator. 
(a)  Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register such business with the city clerk, on a form provided by the city clerk for such purpose. The required registration hereunder shall set forth the name under which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business, and such information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
(b)  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 7, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-38. - Certificate of taxing authority. 
Upon the registration of an operator under this article, the city clerk shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 8, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-39. - Due date and required report. 
All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. The tax imposed by this article shall become delinquent for each month after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the taxes levied by this article, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 9, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-40. - Collection fee allowed operators. 
Operators collecting the tax levied by this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from the state sales and use tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1, et seq. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 10, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-41. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  If any operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the city clerk or his designated representative shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in which the operator failed to file the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his determination as herein provided. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(c)  Penalties and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination as provided in section 44-39 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 11, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-42. - Deficiency determination. 
(a)  If the city clerk or his designated representative is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(c)  Penalties and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination as provided in section 44-39 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 12, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-43. - Required records. 
Each operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep, for a period of at least three years, all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers setting forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 13, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-44. - Administration and enforcement. 
The city clerk or his designated representative shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax herein imposed, and in so doing shall have the following powers: 
(a)  To examine, or authorize the examination of, the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting hotel rooms to persons subject to the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid; 
(b)  To require the filing of reports by any person having in his possession or custody information relating to rentals of hotel rooms which are subject to the tax herein levied. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 14, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-45. - Action for collection of tax. 
At any time within three years after any tax levied under this article or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the city attorney may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 15, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-46. - Successors or assignees of operator. 
If any operator liable for any tax, interest, or penalty imposed by this article sells his or her business or quits the business, he or she shall make a final return and payment within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. The operator's successors or assigns, if any, shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase money to cover the amount of the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article and unpaid until the former owner and/or operator produces either a receipt from the city showing that the taxes, interest, and penalties due under this article have been paid or a certificate from the city that no tax, interest, or penalty is due under this article. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase money as required by this article, that person shall be personally liable for the payment of any taxes, interest, and penalties accruing under this article and unpaid by any former owner and/or operator and/or assignor. The personal liability of the purchaser in such a case shall not exceed the amount of the total purchase money, but the property being transferred shall in all cases be subject to the full amount of the tax lien arising from the delinquencies of the former owner and/or operator and/or assignor. Paid executions may be transferred and enforced as otherwise provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 16, 4-1-2010 ) 
Sec. 44-47. - Penalties. 
Any operator who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor amenable to the process of the city's municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by the city's charter and as otherwise allowed by law. Each and every day that a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 379-A, § 17, 4-1-2010 ) 
Chapter 47 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Cities are authorized to exercise power over parking facilities and traffic control devices, Ga. Const. art. IX, §§ II, III(a)(4) and (11); power of local authorities with respect to uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; future amendments or repeal of adopted provisions of state law effective in city without action of board of city commissioners, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-373; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 47-1. - Adoption by reference. 
Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376 and O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, excluding O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, as now or hereafter amended, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with the like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. No. 3, § 1, 4-2-1977; Ord. of 8-4-1979) 
Sec. 47-2. - Penalties. 
Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided by the provisions of the city Charter, and such penalty provisions of said charter are hereby incorporated as a part of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 3, § 2, 4-2-1977) 
Secs. 47-3—47-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPEED ZONES 

Sec. 47-23. - Established. 
The following rules, regulations and restrictions shall apply in the city relative to the speed of vehicles: 
(1)  The following roadways shall be classified as on systems roadways: 

 
(2)  The following roadways shall be classified as off systems roadways: 

 
(3)  The following hours shall be identified as "School Zone Hours": 
A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time—School days only. 
P.M. from 15 minutes prior to dismissal time to 45 minutes after dismissal time—School days only. 
(Ord. No. 307, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 365, § 2, 8-15-2007; Ord. No. 447, §§ 1—3, 6-16-2011 ) 
Sec. 47-24. - Use of radar. 
It shall be unlawful to use speed detection devices on any state route, county road, or city street which is not listed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 4, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 447, § 4, 6-16-2011 ) 
Sec. 47-25. - Construction/work zones. 
The provisions of this article shall also apply to any construction or work zone on any state route to the extent allowable by law. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 5, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 447, § 5, 6-16-2011 ) 
Sec. 47-26. - Enforcement and punishment. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided by state law as presently exists or as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 307, § 6, 5-25-2004; Ord. No. 447, § 6, 6-16-2011 ) 
Secs. 47-27—47-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCK ROUTES 

Sec. 47-56. - Designation of local truck route—Downtown deliveries. 
The local truck route for downtown deliveries shall be posted to identify the following roadways: 

 
(Ord. No. 368, § 2, 9-5-2007) 
Sec. 47-57. - Same—Through truck traffic between Atlanta Highway and McEver Road. 
The local truck route for through truck traffic between Atlanta Highway and McEver Road shall be posted to identify the following roadways: 

 
(Ord. No. 368, § 3, 9-5-2007) 
Sec. 47-58. - Designation of local marina access route. 
The local marina access route shall be posted to identify the following roadways: 

 
(Ord. No. 368, § 4, 9-5-2007) 
Sec. 47-59. - Enforcement and punishment. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided by law as presently exists or as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 368, § 5, 9-5-2007) 
Chapter 50 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Home rule powers of municipality to regulate sewage collection and disposal systems and water treatment systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6), (7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; municipalities authorized to acquire, construct, operate and maintain water and sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Rates for water and sewer use. 
(a)  All water furnished by the city to users or property situated within or without the corporate limits shall be metered and computed monthly and be paid for at rates as established by resolution of the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  All sewer service furnished by the city to users or property situated within or without the corporate limits shall be metered and computed monthly and be paid for at rates as established by the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 100-C, § 1, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 100-D, § 1, 4-20-2004; Ord. No. 100-F, § 1, 12-15-2006) 
Sec. 50-2. - Application for water and/or sewer service. 
(a)  A person or entity seeking water service, sewer service or both from the city shall make application to the city. 
(b)  An applicant seeking water service, sewer service or both for residential use shall make a cash security deposit at the time of application for each service sought. A schedule of such cash security deposits as established by resolution of the city council shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(c)  The amount of the cash security deposit for other than residential use shall be established by resolution of the city council, considering the following factors: 
(1)  The history of utility service with the application; 
(2)  The anticipated amount of service that the applicant will require; 
(3)  The typical monthly bill for an applicant; 
(4)  The type of sewage that would be discharged, if applicable; and 
(5)  Such other factors that would bear on the provision of water and sewer service. 
(d)  Every applicant shall pay an administrative start-up fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council at the time of applying for water service, sewer service or both to cover administrative bookkeeping, the administrative labor in beginning and ending service, and providing a final accounting to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 3, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 100-B, § 1, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 100-E, § 1, 10-4-2006) 
Sec. 50-3. - Water and sewer service connection. 
(a)  Each consumer subscribing to use the water service of the city shall pay a connection fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  Each potential consumer who desires to use the sewer service of the city shall make application to the director of community planning on such forms and with such information as determined by the director of community planning. 
(c)  Applications for sewer service shall be approved as follows: 
(1)  Applications requesting an allocation of sewer capacity up to 5,000 gallons per day shall be approved by the city manager. 
(2)  Applications requesting an allocation of sewer capacity over 5,000 gallons per day shall be approved by the city council. 
(d)  Each applicant approved to use the sewer service of the city shall, within 60 days of approval, pay a connection fee for the total allocated sewer capacity in an amount as established by resolution of the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(e)  The allocation of sewer capacity shall be reserved for a period of two years from the date of approval at no additional charge. However, if after two years from the date of approval the applicant, property owner or user is not using at least 20 percent of the allocated sewer capacity, the city shall notify the applicant, property owner or user of the insufficient use. Within 30 days from the receipt of said notice, the applicant, property owner or user shall pay a reservation extension fee in the amount of 20 percent of the total connection fee. The payment of a reservation extension fee shall entitle the applicant, property owner or user to a one time extension of the reservation of the allocated sewer capacity for one year from the date of payment of a reservation extension fee. If a reservation extension fee is not timely received by the city, the applicant, property owner or user shall forfeit any unused sewer capacity allocation and receive a refund equal to 80 percent of the connection fee for the forfeited sewer capacity. 
(f)  The applicant, property owner or user may at any time return any allocated sewer capacity to the city and receive a refund equal to 80 percent of the charge for the returned sewer capacity. 
(g)  If sewer capacity use on any day exceeds the sewer capacity purchased, the applicant, property owner or user shall pay the connection/capacity fee established by resolution of the city council for the excess used. 
(h)  Sewer capacity is allocated specifically to the property and may not be transferred or assigned to any other property or to any other person other than a subsequent owner of the property to which the sewer capacity was originally allocated. 
(i)  A subsequent owner of the property to which sewer use is measured by a water master meter shall not be required to pay a connection fee for the amount of sewer capacity originally allocated except that the subsequent owner shall pay to the city all reasonable costs, including, but not limited to, the cost of permitting, inspecting and making new connections, associated with any changes to sewer infrastructure and sewer metering attributable to the change in use in amounts established by resolution of the city council. 
(j)  The amount of sewer capacity originally allocated shall be confirmed by resolution of the city council. 
(k)  In the event the subsequent owner of the property to which sewer capacity was originally allocated changes the use of the property such that less capacity is required, the difference in capacity required reverts to the city at no cost to the city. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 4, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 100-B, § 2, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 100-C, § 2, 5-23-2000; Ord. No. 100-F, § 2, 12-15-2006; Ord. No. 100-G, § 1, 6-20-2007; Ord. No. 100-H, § 1, 12-5-2007) 
Sec. 50-4. - Change of occupancy. 
(a)  Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed and the discharge of all sewage up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service or sewer service, or both, within 48 hours after occupying the premises, and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed and the sewage discharged since the last meter reading. 
(b)  In the event a user in good standing, as to the payment of all charges, assessments and taxes properly assessed by the city to said user, is merely relocating and is to continue to receive the same water service or sewer service, or both, from the city, then the user shall not be assessed the administrative start-up fee as provided by section 50-2(d), for the first relocation. Any subsequent relocation by said user shall bear the administrative start-up fee. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 5, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-5. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  All water/sewer bills are due by the 20th day of the month. A nonpayment penalty of ten percent of the total amount owed will be added to the delinquent account on the 21st day of the month. 
(2)  Nonpayment by the first of the month from the date due will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 60 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate the agreement, and in such event, the water user shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Service scheduled for disconnection or which has been disconnected for nonpayment for service will be restored only after the past month bill(s) and current bill is paid in full and a service charge is paid. The service charge is hereby established in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Return check fee. A $25.00 or five percent of the face amount of the instrument, whichever is greater, service charge will be charged on all checks returned to the city for insufficient funds, account closed, etc. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 6, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 100-B, § 3, 7-6-1998; Ord. No. 442, § 1, 9-23-2010 ; Ord. No. 510, § I, 5-7-2015 ) 
Sec. 50-6. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this section by the discontinuance of water service and sewer service in the event any person shall continue to violate the provisions of this section after receiving verbal or written notice of the violation from the city. 
(d)  Whenever the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative determines that a person is violating or has violated any provision of this section and determines that the violation of this section will cause immediate damage or harm to the sewers, sewerage treatment process, equipment or treatment facilities of the city, or that the violation endangers the public health, safety or general welfare of the community, the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative shall have the power and authority to immediately revoke, verbally or in writing, any sewerage permit of the person violating any provision of this section or terminate that person's water service and sewer service, or both. 
(e)  Any person aggrieved by having any sewerage permit or water and sewer service terminated, or both, revoked by the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative, shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the city council. Such appeal shall be taken within five days from the date of the revocation by notifying the city clerk in writing and specifying the grounds of appeal. The city council shall, within five days after the receipt of the notice of appeal, fix a date and time for the hearing of the appeal and after due notice to the parties at interest, have a hearing on the appeal within ten days of the date the notice of appeal was received by the city and decide the same within a reasonable time. 
(f)  The city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative shall have the power and authority to reinstate any sewerage permit or allow the use of the city's water and sewer service if the person who had been violating the provisions of this chapter shall discontinue and cease such violations. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 7, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-7. - Complaints; adjustments. 
(a)  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(b)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer. However, if the meter does not over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, the consumer that made the request shall pay to the city the actual cost of making the test, which shall be billed to the consumer with the next water bill sent out by the city. If the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(c)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and/or from other proper data. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 8, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-8. - Location of mains or conduits. 
No person shall hereafter lay any main pipe for water or sewage, or any conduit for any purpose, in any street within four feet on each side of the centerline of any sewer, unless with the permission of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 9, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-9. - Fees. 
In addition to such payments or deposits as a petitioner may be required to make in connection with a water extension project, a petitioner shall also be required to pay water cut-on fees and other fees which the city council may from time to time establish. Such fees shall be paid in advance of water service being provided. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 10, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-10. - Minimum charges. 
(a)  The minimum charges, as provided in section 50-1, shall be made for each connection. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only. Except for fire protection, the city shall not, under any circumstance, furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(b)  A consumer using city water, or water from any other source, to fill a swimming pool of the consumer shall not be assessed the minimum charges for sewer service for the water used in the pool so long as said water is not discharged into the sewer system of the city. Each consumer claiming a swimming pool sewer charge exception shall certify in writing to the city clerk or other proper representative of the city the amount of water used in the swimming pool, the date the pool was filled, and that the swimming pool water has not been discharged into the sewer system of the city in order to qualify for the exception. The city council or a duly authorized representative shall make the final determination as to whether a consumer qualifies for the exception. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 11, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-11. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No charges, other than the fees referred to in sections 50-2 and 50-3, will be made for a five-eighths inch and three-quarters inch meter. A greater charge will be made for a meter of larger dimensions as outlined in section 50-3. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(e)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 12, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-12. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system. All applicants, by becoming consumers of the city, covenant and agree that, so long as they continue to be consumers of the city, they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 13, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-13. - Water lines—Size determined by city. 
The size of the water lines to be installed to provide water service shall be determined by the city or its engineers and such determination shall be based on the following factors, among others: 
(1)  The maximum length of the line that will be installed; 
(2)  Possible future extensions of a proposed line; 
(3)  Reasonable estimates of the maximum demands for water service that will be placed on a line; 
(4)  The present or future part the line in question will play in a fire protection program. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 14, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-14. - Same—Installation by city. 
All water lines which are to be made a part of the city water distribution system shall be installed by the city or its duly authorized agent and such lines shall be installed in accordance with such specifications as the city shall require and such lines when installed shall be the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 15, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-15. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities, and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  The city and any duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties subject to this chapter at any time without prior notice for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing and copying any records required to be kept in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city or its representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(c)  Extensions to the system may be made when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. Any extension to the system, whereby the city must acquire the right-of-way or easements, or both, shall only be done when authorized by the city council. 
(d)  The city and any duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identifications, shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the water or sewage works, or both, lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 16, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-16. - Taps by other than authorized persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an employee of the city in the performance of his duties as such, to tap into or make any opening in connection with the water mains or water lines of the city. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 17, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-17. - Separate meter requirements. 
(a)  Each lot, tract or parcel of land to be served by the city water system within or without the city limits shall be served through its own individual water meter. No restrictions shall be placed on the number or type of units served by said meter except as outlined herein. 
(b)  Each multifamily dwelling unit within or without the city limits shall be served by a separate water meter. No multifamily dwelling unit shall be served water through any meter through which water is furnished to another structure, building or dwelling unit. 
(c)  Each unit of a retail development which is intended to, or could, house separate units shall be served through its own individual water meter. 
(d)  Each unit of a single-story, multiunit, commercial or industrial development which is intended to, or could, house separate units shall be served through its own individual water meter. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to those lots, tracts, parcels of land, and dwelling units where water service is currently served by a single or master meter by the approval of the city council prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The city council, in its discretion, based upon a showing of need by the applicant and sufficient security for the anticipated fees, may grant master meters to applicants. Said master meters shall be charged at a rate determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 18, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 461, § 1, 12-15-2011 ) 
Sec. 50-18. - Multiple use where water service is served by a single or master meter. 
This section shall not apply existing developments currently served by a master meter prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The city council, in its discretion, based upon a showing of need by the applicant and sufficient security for the anticipated fees, may grant master meters to applicants. Said master meters shall be charged at a rate determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 19, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 461, § 2, 12-15-2011 ) 
Sec. 50-19. - Property owner liable for charges, procedure when tenant fails to pay. 
For nonresidential property, the property owner, in every instance where city water is used for nonresidential property, shall be liable to the city for the water or sewer charges, or both, in the amount fixed in this chapter, and if his nonresidential tenant shall fail to pay the charges when presented, then the bill shall be presented to the property owner or his agent, and on his failure or refusal to the pay the same, the water or sewer, or both, shall be at once cut off from his premises and no connection shall be made with such premises until all arrears, together with the cost of the connection shall have been paid to the city clerk. However, no property owner of single or multifamily residential property (including rental residential units) shall be liable for the indebtedness of a prior owner, prior occupant, or prior leasee, to the city for water or sewer services, or both, previously furnished to such residential premises. 
(Ord. No. 100-A, § 1, 1-17-1995) 
Sec. 50-20. - Discontinuance of service, notice required; no continuous flow of water, exception. 
Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the waterworks must give notice at the city hall, and they will be charged for the water until such notice. No continuous flow of water will be allowed, unless a special rate is fixed or a meter used. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 21, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-21. - Consumer to connect and provide fixtures. 
Persons taking water must keep their own water pipes, and all fixtures connected therewith, in good repair and protected from frost. They must provide a stopcock and wastecock, arranged so that the water can be drawn from them whenever and wherever there is danger of freezing. Water will not be furnished to any premises not provided with a stopcock and wastecock. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 22, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-22. - Responsibility for leaks and the expense incurred. 
All leaks which occur on the discharge side of the water meter are the responsibility of the property owner and not the water department of the city. Responsibility of the water department to maintain and repair water lines ends at the meter outlet couplings, and customers will be charged for water consumed due to any leak on the customer's side of the meter. Sewer charges may be subject to adjustment, provided the water department receives an affidavit from a licensed plumber, stating a leak existed and was repaired. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 23, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-23. - Buildings connected to water mains; plumbing systems in conformance with plumbing code. 
Every building, dwelling or other structure which is connected to the water mains of the city shall have installed therein plumbing systems, both water and sewer, in conformance with the terms and provisions of the plumbing code of the city and such plumbing systems shall meet all of the terms, specifications, requirements and conditions of the plumbing code. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 24, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-24. - Connections to water mains in accordance with the plumbing code. 
All connections to the water mains of the city shall be made in accordance with and undergo the inspections and tests as set forth in the plumbing code of the city and subject to payment of all inspection fees and other deposits, fees and charges provided therein and in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 25, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-25. - Application of sections 50-23 and 50-24. 
The requirements of sections 50-23 and 50-24 shall apply to additions, remodeling or other changes in the plumbing systems of existing structures as well as to new construction, and to structures located without the limits of the city as well as to those structures located within such limits. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 26, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-26. - City to furnish water during construction of new buildings, compliance with sections 50-23 and 50-24. 
During the construction of new buildings, dwellings and other structures, connections may be made and water furnished by the city and the requirements of sections 50-23 and 50-24 need not be complied with during such construction, but upon the completion of such construction, then the connection shall be cut off and water shall not be furnished until the requirements of sections 50-23 and 50-24 have been complied with. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 27, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-27. - Consumer to conform to city cross connection and backflow prevention requirements. 
All persons connected to or proposing to connect to the city public water supply system shall install and maintain a building water conveyance system which minimizes cross connections between potable and nonpotable water flows. As to the installation of new systems, or upon the alteration or improvement to an existing system, or where necessary to maintain the purity of the potable water within the city public water supply system, the consumer shall install and maintain backflow valves or devices designed to totally eliminate the hazard of backflow or back siphonage of nonpotable waters into the potable water system. Such backflow and back-siphonage prevention devices shall be of design and installation to conform with the requirements of this chapter. Within and without the corporate limits of the city, the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative of the utility department shall have the authority independent of the respective plumbing inspector to ensure that all consumers have installed and maintained adequate backflow and back-siphonage protection insofar as is necessary to protect the public water supply. This authority shall include the review, inspection and approval of new installation or alterations and the periodic review of existing systems. At the discretion of the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative, it may delegate this authority to the respective plumbing inspector or the chief building inspector. Such delegation does not terminate the right of the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative to make or have made independent inspections. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 28, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-28. - Fire sprinkler mains; double detector check valves required. 
All water mains within or without the city limits, constructed for the purpose of providing water to a fire sprinkler system, shall have a double detector check valve installed in line. The valve shall be installed in a concrete vault constructed as close to the city water main as is possible. The vault shall be constructed solely for the purpose of housing the valve and shall be approved by the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative. Provision, construction and maintenance of the double detector check valve installation shall be the responsibility of the owner and/or consumer. The rate schedule for water service for fire protection services shall be in the amounts fixed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 29, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-29. - Authority to disconnect service. 
(a)  Whenever the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative determines that a person is violating or has violated the cross connection provisions of this chapter and determines that the violation of such provisions will cause immediate damage or harm to the treatment process, equipment or treatment and distribution facilities of the city, or that the violation endangers the public health, safety or general welfare of the community, the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative shall have the power and authority to immediately terminate that person's water service until that person has ceased the violation. 
(b)  Charges for any discontinuance or resumption of water service shall be in the amounts fixed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 30, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-30. - Compliance with article provisions required. 
Water service shall not be extended to developed or undeveloped property either within the city or outside the city except in conformity with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 31, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-31. - Water lines to be placed within public rights-of-way or public easements. 
Water lines may be placed within public easements established for such purpose or within the right-of-way lines of streets and roads which have been certified as being a part of the public road or street system of either the city or county. The city council may authorize the placement of lines within other properly acquired rights-of-way or easements, or both. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 32, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-32. - Streets to be at final grade. 
A water line shall not be placed within a street right-of-way until the street for which such right-of-way was created has been constructed to final grade. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 33, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-33. - New subdivisions. 
The following rules shall govern the extension of water service into new subdivisions: 
(1)  Subdivisions within the city. A subdivision established within the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter before it shall be eligible to receive water service from the city. 
(2)  Subdivisions outside the city limits. From and after the date that a governmental jurisdiction adopts subdivision regulations for areas outside the corporate limits of the city a subdivision thereafter established in such areas shall comply with all applicable provisions of such subdivision regulations before it shall be eligible to receive water service from the city. In the event subdivision regulations are not adopted for areas outside the city, then all subdivision lots established after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived and which are seeking City water service shall comply with the lot area requirements found in the city's zoning and subdivision ordinances and regulations. In such cases, a certification of such compliance shall be obtained from the proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 34, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-34. - Service prohibited lots creating potential health and sanitation problems. 
When the lots requesting water service have been laid out in such a manner as might cause health and sanitation problems to develop when such lots are developed, the city water service shall only be extended to such lots after the owners of such lots have first devised a method of eliminating the danger of health and sanitation problems which shall meet with the approval of the county health department. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 35, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-35. - Maintenance and renewal projects—Compliance with provisions. 
All maintenance and renewal projects for either the water treatment and distribution system or the sewerage collection and treatment system which are not regulated by other chapters shall conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 36, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-36. - Same—Approval of city council required. 
Before an extension, renewal or maintenance project shall be undertaken, the city council shall be required to authorize the project. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 37, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-37. - Same—Application. 
Application for a project shall be in the form of a work order request, with the following conditions: 
(1)  A work order request shall be prepared in triplicate and shall be signed by the city council. 
(2)  The work order request shall contain all the pertinent facts about the proposed project and shall include a certification that sufficient funds are available to finance the project. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 38, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-38. - Permission required to make connections. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the chief building inspector for residential or commercial services and industrial services. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 39, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-39. - Classes of building sewer permits. 
(a)  There are two classes of building sewer permits: 
(1)  Residential; and 
(2)  Service to establishments producing commercial or industrial wastes. 
(b)  The city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this section. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the city sewer. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 40, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-40. - Installation costs borne by owner. 
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 41, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-41. - Separate sewer connections for every building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be construed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway. The front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city shall not be liable for any damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 42, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-42. - Old sewer connections to meet requirements. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the chief building inspector, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 43, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-43. - Construction to conform to codes. 
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. All work shall conform to all applicable regulations of the Federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and Water Pollution Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended, shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 44, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-44. - Sewer to be below basement floor. 
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 45, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-45. - Storm drains not to be connected to sanitary sewer. 
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the city, the mayor, or duly authorized representative for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 46, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-46. - Sewer connections to conform to codes. 
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials and the Water Pollution Control Federal Manual of Practice No. 9, as amended. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the described procedures and materials must be approved before installation. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 47, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-47. - Cleanout required at point of connection. 
(a)  A sanitary sewer cleanout shall be installed on all building sewers as near to the point at which city maintenance begins as is possible. This point shall be the curbline, the right-of-way line, the property line, or the easement line, whichever is applicable. Such cleanout shall be six inches in diameter and shall have a cleanout plug. 
(b)  The installation and cost of such cleanout shall be borne by the owner and/or developer at the time of development. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 48, 12-20-1993; Ord. No. 130, § 1, 4-7-1997) 
Sec. 50-48. - Chief building inspector to test connection. 
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the chief building inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the chief building inspector or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 49, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-49. - Safety precautions during construction. 
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded by the owner with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored by owner in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 50, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-50. - Persons to make connections—Specified. 
All sewer connections or taps shall be made exclusively by personnel of the city. No person shall make or install any sewer connection or tap into the sewer system of the city except personnel of the city. The mayor or a representative of the city, duly authorized by the city council, may authorize an owner, through a properly qualified person, to connect or tap onto the sewer. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 51, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-51. - Same—Penalty and license revocation for violation. 
Any unapproved person other than personnel of the city installing or making any connection or tap into the sewer system of the city shall be punished as provided in this chapter and, in addition, shall have his plumber's license, or other business license, under which he is operating, revoked. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 52, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-52. - Connections—To lines laid in street; responsibility for chokes. 
(a)  Sewer connections or taps hereinafter made by the city to sewer lines laid in the streets shall run from the sewer line to the curbline of the street. When such connections or taps are made on outfall or interceptor sewer lines, or any sewer line other than one laid in the street, such tap shall extend for a distance of not more than ten feet from the line connected with or tapped. 
(b)  The property owners or persons using sanitary sewer service shall be responsible for repairs due to sewer chokes when the sewer choke is beyond the curbline of the street or 20 feet from the line connected with or tapped, whichever distance is closest to the sewer line. The city will make repairs and charge the cost thereof to the property owner or person using sanitary sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 53, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-53. - Same—Fittings, equipment and supervision. 
(a)  All connections to sewer pipes comprising the sewer system of the city shall be made with an insertion type Y or T fitting under the supervision of the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative. 
(b)  All fittings and other equipment used in such connections shall be approved by the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative before use in making any connection. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 54, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-54. - Same—Refusal to make. 
No person shall, after having been duly ordered by the city council, upon recommendation of the city engineer, refuse or neglect to make proper connection between property owned and a public sewer, or to use same for sewerage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 55, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-55. - Size of sewers; grade and location of manholes. 
The city shall designate the size of all sewers and the grade and location of all manholes. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 56, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-56. - Easements for construction. 
Property owners using sanitary sewer service, as herein prescribed, shall furnish all right-of-way easements needed for sewer construction for their use thereof. The city council, in its discretion, for particular projects to advance the public welfare, may acquire rights-of-way or easements needed for the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 57, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-57. - Certain discharge regulations. 
(a)  No industry, commercial concern, person, or user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any waste material of any source into manholes in the city sewer system. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable as has been provided in accordance with this chapter. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(d)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer, is hereby required at the owner expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer where available, and elevation permits, in accordance with the provisions of this section, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 200 feet of the property line except where approved and adequate facilities now exist and are operating properly. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 58, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-58. - Toxic pollutants. 
Each industry, commercial concern, person, or user who discharges any toxic substance into the city sewer system which causes an increase in the cost of managing the effluent, or the sludge of the treatment works, shall pay for the increased cost. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 59, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-59. - Unpolluted waters not to be discharged to sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city engineer. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the city, mayor, or a duly authorized representative, or the city engineer, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. Discharge to a natural outlet is subject to the conditions of an NPDES permit to be issued to the discharger by the state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 60, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-60. - Discharge of incompatible substances. 
No industry, commercial concern, person, or user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any of the following described waters or wastes into the city sewer system: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, mineral oil, mineral grease, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, reduce sludge quality, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or greater than 9.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the sewage works; 
(4)  Solids or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, egg shells, fibers, lint, rubber, latex, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders; 
(5)  Any substances prohibited by the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), all amendments thereto, and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 61, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-61. - Discharge of certain other materials, wastes and practices. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative that such wastes will harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, reduce sludge quality, or will otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative shall be guided by the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), its amendments, and the regulations promulgated thereunder and will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of the sewage treatment plan, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or in such quantity that the temperature at the treatment works influent exceeds 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing mineral fats, wax, mineral grease, or animal or vegetable oils; whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances which may solidity or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 150 degrees Fahrenheit (zero and 65 degrees Celsius); 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and approval of the chief building inspector; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established, as necessary for the POTW to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(5)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(6)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residue) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant overload on the sewage treatment works or significantly increase the operating cost thereof; 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs; 
(7)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
(8)  In addition to the materials previously listed, any other materials or rates of discharge which may be defined by state or federal agencies of jurisdiction as being incompatible with existing or proposed sewage works, treatment facilities or treatment processes; 
(9)  Any wastes or sewage that contains more than ten milligrams/liter by weight of hydrogen sulfide, sulfites, sulphur dioxide or oxides of nitrogen. 
(b)  Limitations on wastewater discharges. No person shall discharge, convey or permit or allow to be discharged or conveyed to a public sewer any wastewater containing pollutants of such character or quantity that will: 
(1)  Not be susceptible to treatment by the treatment system; 
(2)  Interfere with the process efficiency of the treatment system, or reduces the sludge quality; 
(3)  Constitute a hazard to human or animal life, or to the stream or watercourse receiving the treatment plant effluent; 
(4)  Violate a pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement (as those terms are defined in 40 CFR 403.3(j) and 403.3(k) or amendments thereto which may be promulgated from time to time) applicable to the specific industrial users; 
(5)  Cause the treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or applicable receiving water standards of the state, local or federal government. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any user of the wastewater treatment system whereby wastewater of unusual strength or character is accepted into the system and specially treated subject to any payments of user charges as may be applicable. In no case shall a special agreement be entered into such that any federal industrial pretreatment regulation or other applicable federal or state regulation would be violated. 
(d)  No statement in this section is intended or may be construed to prohibit the appropriate agency from adding, deleting or changing specific requirements or from making specific requirements more restrictive where wastes are determined to be harmful or destructive to the facilities of the sewerage system, or to create a public nuisance, or to cause the discharge from any treatment facility operated by the city to violate effluent or stream quality standards imposed or as may be imposed by the state environmental protection division and/or the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 62, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-62. - Action required by city, its mayor, or any duly authorized representative. 
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections 50-58 through 50-61 and which, in the judgment of the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, sludge quality or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city, the mayor, or any duly authorized representative may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating wastes not covered by existing fees or sewer charges or such charges as may be set from time to time by the city council; 
(5)  Take such other appropriate action as may be found necessary to meet POTW pretreatment program requirements established in or pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f). 
(Ord. No. 100, § 63, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-63. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in section 1-12. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. If the person violating the provisions of this chapter is a corporation or company, the president shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in section 1-12. If the person violating the provisions of this chapter is a sole proprietor or individual, the sole proprietor or individual shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in the section 1-12. If the person violating the provisions of this chapter is a partnership, all the partners of such partnership shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in the section 1-12. If the person violating the provisions of this chapter is a firm, association, society or group with a president, the president shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in section 1-12; and if there is no president, then the individual in charge of the day-to-day operations of the firm, association, society or group shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided for in section 1-12. 
(b)  Any industry, commercial concern, person, or user which discharges any waste material of any source into manholes on the city sewer system, or discharges, or causes to be discharged, toxic substance without paying for the increased cost, or those incompatible substances, as described in section 50-60, shall be in violation of this article and subject to the maximum penalties allowed by section 1-12. Each pound or gallon of the incompatible substances discharged, or caused to be discharged, into the city sewer system shall be deemed a separate offense with each offense subject to the maximum penalty allowed by section 1-12. Further, the city, in its discretion, may decline to accept the discharge of any industry, commercial concern, person, or user that discharges, or causes to be discharged, any incompatible substance as outlined in section 50-60, and may quit providing sewage treatment to the violator until such time as the violator has demonstrated the ability to prohibit the discharge of incompatible substances into the sewer system. In order to facilitate the prevention of the discharge of the incompatible substances into the sewer system, and the utility to decline to accept such discharges, the city shall have the right to enter upon the private property of such violator and cut off access into the sewer system of the city. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, damage, fine, penalty or fee occasioned by the city by reason of such violation, including, but not limited to, any fee, penalty or fine assessed against the city by any state or federal agency as a result of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 64, 12-20-1993) 
Sec. 50-64. - Protection from tampering or damage; restoration of service after tampering or damage; penalties. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally, maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the water or sewage works. 
(b)  If a lock placed on a meter for nonpayment for service is removed or damaged, the city shall remove the meter from the service address. Service will be restored only after the past due bill(s), current bill, tampering fee, lock replacement fee and a service charge are paid in full. The tampering fee, lock replacement fee and service charge are hereby established in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  If a meter is tampered with after service has been disconnected for nonpayment for service, the city shall remove the meter from the service address. Service will be restored only after the past due bill(s), current bill, tampering fee, and a service charge are paid in full. The tampering fee and service charge are hereby established in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  Any person violating this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as prescribed in section 1-12 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 442, § 2, 9-23-2010 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 442 , § 2, adopted Sept. 23, 2010, changed the title of § 50-64 from protection from damage to protection from tampering or damage; restoration of service after tampering or damage; penalties. 
Secs. 50-65—50-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-87. - Title. 
This article shall amend the Water and Sewer Ordinance, and shall establish the standard specifications for water, sewer, and reuse line construction within and without the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-88. - Standard specifications for water and sewer construction. 
In order to set minimum standards for water and sewer construction within the corporate limits of the city, and as to water lines, water mains, sewer lines, sewer mains, and all other apparatus, parts, and equipment that will be used in connection with or become a part of the water system or sewer system, or both, for the city, the city council hereby adopts the standards for construction of water mains found in division 2 of this article, Construction of Water and Wastewater Lines. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-89. - The developer, owner, or contractor, or any combination thereof warranty period. 
(a)  As to any water lines, sewer lines, or both, that are to be accepted as a part of the city water system, sewer system, or both, the developer, owner, or contractor, or any combination thereof, shall warrant that said lines shall be free of defects in material and workmanship for a period of 12 months from the date of final acceptance by the city. Any such defects shall be immediately repaired by the warranting party at no cost to the city, and all such repairs shall be done to the specifications required under this article and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  In order to be sure that the developer, owner, contractor, or any combination thereof, can actually perform and will actually perform the warranty required under this article, the developer, owner, or contractor, or any combination thereof, shall agree to and provide either a guaranty agreement, a surety agreement, an escrow agreement, a cash bond, a letter of credit or other acceptable financial instrument, that obligates the warranting party to correct any defects in design, materials or workmanship during the 12-month period, and obligates a sum for said repairs during the period of at least equal to 20 percent of the cost of constructing and installing said line or lines. Said guaranty agreement, surety agreement, escrow agreement, cash bond, letter of credit or other financial instrument, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney, prior to acceptance If an issue arises as to the amount of costs that are to be warranted under said financial instrument, then the city engineer shall provide an estimated cost that shall be used as the basis for said agreements. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 3, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-90. - Payment of fees and charges. 
(a)  All fees and charges associated with the review of plans, inspection of work and any other matters relating to verifying compliance with this article shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(b)  All fees and charges established by this article are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid within ten days of the date of mailing, or if personally delivered, the date of delivery. Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 30 days shall be cause for immediate permit revocation or issuance of a stop work notice. Failure to pay fees or charges in the time specified above may result in late charges. All past due amounts shall bear interest at the same rate as would unpaid ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 4, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-91. - Administrative procedures discretionary. 
Section 50-88 adopts standards as to the construction of water and wastewater lines for the city. The water and wastewater superintendent shall be authorized to adopt all administrative procedures and policies relating to the review, inspection and/or maintenance of water or wastewater line construction. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 5, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-92. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
The city hereby adopts the following enforcement and penalty provisions relating to this article: 
(1)  Violations. If the water and wastewater superintendent or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with any provision of this article or any term or conditions of a permit, approved plat or development plan, he shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Said notice of violation may be issued prior to or concurrent with the issuance of a stop work order. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or agent of the owner of the property where the activity is taking place. 
(2)  Content of notice of violation. Each notice of violation shall contain the following: 
a.  The name and address of the owner, applicant, or other person responsible for the site where the violation occurred or is occurring; 
b.  The address or other description of the site where the violation occurred or is occurring; 
c.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
d.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to correct the violation; 
e.  The date for the completion of such remedial measures, after which further enforcement action will be taken; and 
f.  A statement of the penalty that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(3)  Stop work order. Upon learning or discovering a violation of this article or any approved site plan or permit issued pursuant to this article, the water and wastewater superintendent may immediately issue a stop work order which forbids all further work at the job site until the stop work order is withdrawn or otherwise removed. The stop work order shall be posted on the job site and mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the permit or approved site plan. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation have been taken or any violation has otherwise been corrected to the satisfaction of the water and wastewater superintendent; provided, however, the water and wastewater superintendent may withdraw or modify any stop work order to enable the applicant to take necessary remedial measures to cure any such violation. 
(4)  Failure of remedial measures. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more actions or penalties described in this section as appropriate may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed and/or the property where the violation occurred or is occurring. 
(5)  Withholding, modification, revocation, or suspension of approvals or pending approvals. The water and wastewater superintendent may at any time refuse to issue, revoke, modify, or suspend a plat, plan, or permit for the building or other development activity or improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in violation of this article until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the enforcement officer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(6)  Citation. The water and wastewater superintendent shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this article and to prosecute such violations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(7)  Penalty for violating article. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article, or any plat, development plan or permit issued pursuant to this article, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or both, for each such violation or failure to comply hereunder. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation or failure to comply that continues for more than one day shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 6, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-93—50-102. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION OF WATER AND WASTEWATER LINES 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Secs. 50-103—50-112. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Water Mains and Accessories 

Sec. 50-113. - General. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  The contractor shall furnish all equipment, labor and materials (unless otherwise agreed upon in writing) necessary to construct the water mains and perform all work specified or indicated on the drawings. The work shall include all necessary concrete work, diking, pumping, bailing, draining, flushing, soil erosion and sedimentation control, and testing. These specifications cover water mains and water service connections complete. 
(2)  The water mains shall be installed in the locations indicated on the drawings or as otherwise directed by the city. 
(3)  The contractor shall arrange his work so as to minimize interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and to avoid interruption of service of any existing utilities. The contractor shall furnish and maintain suitable bridges, footways or other means of access to or across intercepted streets, alleys, driveways and walkways, where necessary. 
(4)  The contractor shall be responsible for removing all water from excavations and trenches whether from surface or ground sources. 
(5)  The contractor shall guarantee all materials and workmanship for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance of the work. Per stipulations as stated in section 50-89(a), if during this period any material or workmanship, etc., proves defective, the developer or contractor shall repair same to the satisfaction of the city at their own cost and expense. 
(6)  In order to be sure that the developer, owner, contractor, or any combination thereof, can actually perform and will actually perform the warranty required under this division, the developer, owner, or contractor, or any combination thereof, shall agree to and provide either a guaranty agreement, a surety agreement, an escrow agreement, a cash bond, a letter of credit or other acceptable financial instrument, that obligates the warranting party to correct any defects in design, materials or workmanship during the 12-month period, and obligates a sum for said repairs during the period of at least equal to 20 percent of the cost of constructing and installing said line or lines. Said guaranty agreement, surety agreement, escrow agreement, cash bond, letter of credit or other financial instrument, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney, prior to acceptance. If an issue arises as to the amount of costs that are to be warranted under said financial instrument, then the city engineer shall provide an estimated cost that shall be used as the basis for said agreements. 
(7)  Changes to the standard specifications for water mains may be made by the city at any time. 
(b)  Related work. 
(1)  Subdivision IV: Excavation, Trenching and Backfilling. 
(2)  Subdivision V: Site Preparation, Restoration and Related Work. 
(c)  Applicable specifications and standards. The latest editions of the following specifications, standards and publications setting minimum requirements for quality, safety and performance of work and materials form a part of this specification as though fully repeated herein: 
(1)  ASTM: American Society of Testing Materials. 
(2)  ANSI: American National Standards Institute. 
(3)  AWWA: American Water Works Association. 
(d)  Record drawings. 
(1)  The contractor shall be responsible for maintaining a set of the approved design drawings which have been marked to reflect as-built conditions. These record drawings shall be kept at the site during working hours and shall be made available to the city inspector upon request. 
(2)  Final acceptance of water main construction will not be granted until as-built drawings have been received by the city. 
(3)  The record drawings shall show the as constructed location of, but not be limited to, all lines, manholes, valves, hydrants, blowoff valves, monuments, etc. 
(4)  Appurtenance locations shall be diminished to three permanent fixtures or objects. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 1, pt. 1), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-114. - Materials. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Materials to be incorporated into the work shall be new and unused, and shall conform to all applicable requirements of these specifications. Submittal and approval of all materials, shop drawings or samples shall be in conformance with these specifications. Any materials installed prior to approval by the city will be subject to rejection, and will be removed at the contractor's expense. 
(2)  All water mains six inch or larger pipe shall be ductile iron. Water mains two inches in diameter shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pressure rated pipe. Water service lines on the city's side of the meter shall be copper tubing. 
(3)  Water mains shall be located outside of paved areas. Locating water mains in paved areas will only be allowed when no other alternative exists. No two-inch PVC water mains will be allowed under roadways. Bore under existing roadways where possible to prevent pavement damage. 
(4)  Acceptance will be on the basis of inspection and the manufacturer's written certification that the pipe, fittings and appurtenances were manufactured and tested in accordance with the applicable standards. 
(5)  Any pipe, fittings and appurtenances used in the installation or repair of water mains or services shall be leadfree. 
(b)  Ductile iron pipe (DIP). 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe shall conform to AWWA C 151 (ANSI A21.51) and shall be a minimum of pressure class 350 or thickness class 50 unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings. Size will be as shown. All pipes shall be furnished in minimum lengths of 18 feet. Pipe and fittings shall be cement lined in accordance with AWWA C 104. Fittings shall be mechanical joint compact ductile iron and conform to AWWA C 153 with rated working pressure of 250 psi. Pipe and fittings shall be furnished with a bituminous outside coating. 
(2)  Joints shall be push-on type for pipe and standard mechanical joints for fittings with the exception of hydrant fittings. Fittings for bends and hydrants shall be mechanical joint with retainer glands. Hydrant tees used in lieu of retainer glands and harness rods on fire hydrants shall be equal to ACIPCO A10180 or U.S. Pipe U-592. Anchor couplings used in lieu of retainer glands and harness rods on fire hydrant leads shall be American A-10895 or approved equal. Joints shall conform to AWWA C 111. Provide and install the appropriate gaskets, nuts, and bolts for mechanical joints. Nuts shall be steel with American Standard Regular hexagonal dimensions, all as specified in ANSI B 17.2. 
All bolts and nuts shall be threaded in accordance with ANSI B 1.1, Coarse Thread Series, Class 2A and 2B fit. 
(3)  When flanged joints are indicated provide gaskets for flange joints made of one-eighth-inch thick cloth-reinforced rubber. Gaskets may be ring type or full face type. Provide bolts for flange connections. Bolts shall be steel with American Regular unfinished square or hexagonal heads. Nuts shall be steel with American Standard Regular hexagonal dimensions, all as specified in ANSI B 17.2. All bolts and all nuts shall be threaded in accordance with ANSI B 1.1, Coarse Thread Series, Class 2A and 2B fit. 
(c)  Polyvinyl chloride pressure rated pipe (PVC). 
(1)  Pipe for two-inch diameter water mains shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pressure rated pipe. The pipe shall conform to ASTM D 2241, shall have a SDR of 13.5 and a pressure rating of not less than 315 psi. The PVC material shall be designated as PVC 1120 and shall conform to ASTM D 1784. The joints shall be gasketed bell joints conforming to ASTM D 3139. 
(2)  All PVC pipe shall bear the NSF (National Sanitation Foundation) seal of approval for potable water use. 
(d)  Copper tubing. 
(1)  Copper tubing shall be ASTM B 88, Type K. Fittings shall be brass with compression connection inlets and outlets, ANSI B 16.26. 
(2)  Where required, adapters shall be brass ANSI B 16.18. Unions shall be cast bronze. Joints shall be compression type. 
(e)  Gate valves. 
(1)  Gate valves sizes three inches and larger shall be resilient seat wedge type and shall conform to the specifications of the American Water Works Association, designation C509, latest edition rated for 200 psi minimum working pressure. Gate valves shall be equipped with O-ring stem seals above and below stem trust collar. Gate valves for use on mechanical joint ductile iron pipe and slip joint ductile iron pipe shall have manufacturer's standardized mechanical joint ends. Gate valve body and bonnet shall be ductile or cast iron and shall be fusion bonded, interior and exterior, with epoxy coating which conforms to AWWA C550, latest edition. 
(2)  Water mains in which the valves are installed shall be tested as specified and the valve must remain water tight under the pressure in each direction. 
(3)  Valves shall open counter clockwise shall be designed for vertical installation; and shall be the nonrising stem type. 
(4)  Valves shall be equipped with valve boxes. Provide extension stem where required to bring the operating nut to within 36-inches of ground surface. 
(5)  All gate valves shall be manufactured by Mueller, M&H Valve or American Darling or any company producing valves of comparable quality per city approval. 
(6)  Gate valves 2½ inches in diameter and smaller shall be bronze, heavy duty, rising stem (2½ inches and smaller only), rated for 200 pounds WSP. Valves shall conform to Federal Specification WV-V-54, Class A, Type II, and shall be equal to Crane 428. 
(f)  Butterfly valves. Butterfly valves shall be resilient seated, short body design and shall conform to AWWA C-504 latest edition. Valves shall be Class 250 (250 psi bidirectional shutoff rating, 500 psi body hydrostatic shell test, fusion bonded epoxy coated interior and exterior, and maximum line velocity of 16 feet per second). Valves shall be Mueller Class 250 M.J. (14 inches through 48 inches), M&H Style 4500 M.J. (14 inches through 48 inches), or American Darling Class 250 B M.J. (14 inches through 48 inches) or any company producing valves of comparable quality per city approval. Certified test results shall be furnished with each valve. 
(g)  Tapping valves and sleeves. Tapping sleeves shall be cast or ductile iron of the split-sleeve, mechanical joint type. Valves shall be resilient seat gate valves sizes four inches through 12 inches, or double disc gate valves, sizes 14 inches through 24 inches furnished in accordance with the specifications in section 1, part 2, and section 2.05, gate valves with a flanged connection to the branch pipe. Tapping valves shall be Mueller Model H687 sizes four inches through 12 inches, H-667 sizes 14 inches through 24 inches, M&H style 3751-NRS sizes four inches through 12 inches or style 751 sizes 14 inches through 24 inches or American Darling no. 865 sizes four inches through 12 inches or 565 sizes 14 inches through 24 inches. Sleeves shall be Mueller Model H-615, M&H style 1174-01 or American Darling M.J. 4 inches through 48 inches or any company producing valves of comparable quality per city approval. 
(h)  Double check backflow preventers. 
(1)  Double check backflow preventers shall conform to the following standards: A.S.S.E. No. 1015, AWWA, C506, C.S.A. B64.5, FCCCHR of USC Manual section 10, U.L. Classified File No. EX 3185, and be accepted by IAPMO (UPC), SBCCI (Basic Plumbing Code). 
(2)  Shutoff valves for backflow preventers in sizes two-inch and smaller shall be full-port ball-type, with threaded connections and bronze bodies with copper content not less than 80 percent. Shutoff valves for backflow preventers in sizes 2½ inches and larger shall be full-port ball-type, or resilient-wedge gate-type, with flanged connections, and iron bodies with FDA-approved fusion bonded epoxy coating inside and out. 
(3)  Double check backflow preventers shall be watts 007 or 709 or approved equal. 
(i)  Double detector check valve assembly. Double detector check valve assemblies shall conform to the following standards: A.S.S.E. Standards No. 1015, AWWA Standard C 506; FCCCHR of USC Manual Section 10, U.L. Classified File No. EX 3185, and be listed under CSA B.64 Standard. 
(1)  All assemblies shall be standard equipped with epoxy coated UL/FM listed OS&Y resilient seat gate valves. Check valve bodies shall be epoxy coated cast iron. The bypass line unit shall consist of an approved double check backflow preventer and the meter which reads in cubic feet, gallons or whichever is appropriate. The double check backflow preventer and the meter shall conform to all applicable city standards (stated elsewhere). 
(2)  Double detector check assemblies shall be watts 709DDC or approved equal. 
(j)  Valve markers. Valve markers shall be four-feet-long concrete posts. They shall have a V stamped on one side. A brass disc should be cast into the marker immediately below the V. 
(k)  Corporation and curb stops. 
(1)  Corporation stops shall be manufactured by the Mueller Company, or approved equivalent, and shall have a tapered Mueller or Ford thread inlet (or their equivalent) and compression outlet. All three-quarter-inch and one inch corporation stops shall be Mueller catalog number H-15008 or Ford model F1000G or an approved equivalent. All 1½ inches and two-inch Corporation stops shall be Mueller catalog number 15013 or Ford model FB 1000G or an approved equivalent. Curb stops for water service connections shall have a compression connection on one end and an inside I.P.T. on the other end. Water service curb stops shall be Mueller catalog number H-15172, Mueller catalog number B-25170 or Ford catalog number B41 Series or approved equivalent. Ball-style curb stops shall include integral lock wings. 
(2)  Curb stops for two-inch blowoff assemblies shall have inside I.P.T. on both ends. They shall be Mueller catalog number H-10291, Ford catalog number B11-777 or Mueller catalog number B-20200 or approved equivalent. 
(l)  Fire hydrants. 
(1)  All fire hydrants shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C 502 for 150 psi working pressure. Hydrants shall be the compression type, closing with line pressure. The valve opening shall not be less than 4½ inches. 
(2)  In any case, no fire hydrant shall be placed on water mains having smaller than six-inch diameter. 
(3)  In the event of a traffic accident, the hydrant barrel shall break away from the standpipe at a point above grade and in a manner which will prevent damage to the barrel and stem, preclude opening of the valve, and permit rapid and inexpensive restoration without digging or cutting off the water. 
(4)  The means for attaching the barrel to the standpipe shall permit 360 degree rotation. 
(5)  Hydrants shall be fully bronze mounted with all working parts of bronze. Valve seat ring shall be bronze and shall screw into a bronze retainer. 
(6)  All working parts, including the seat ring, shall be removable through the top without disturbing the barrel of the hydrant. 
The operating nut shall match those on existing hydrants. The operating threads shall be totally enclosed in an operating chamber separated from the hydrant barrel by a rubber O-ring stem seal and lubricated by grease or an oil reservoir. A stop nut shall be positioned in the top operating mechanism of the hydrant so that the valve stem cannot contact the bottom of the shoe when the hydrant is fully open. 
(7)  Minimum depth of bury shall be 4.5 feet. Extension sections shall be furnished where necessary to bring hydrant to the proper elevation. Extensions shall be installed in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. The centerline of the 2½-inch connections shall be a minimum of 18 inches above finished grade. 
(8)  Hydrants shall be a nonfreezing design and provided with a simple, positive and automatic drain which shall be fully closed whenever the main valve is opened. 
(9)  Hose and pumper connections shall be breech-locked, pinned or threaded and pinned to seal them into the hydrant barrel. Each hydrant shall have two 2½-inch hose connections and one 4½-inch pumper connection, all with national standard threads and each equipped with cap and nonkinking chain. 
(10)  All outside surfaces of the barrel above grade shall be painted silver with enamel equal to Koppers Glamortex 501. 
(11)  Fire hydrants shall be Mueller A 421 M.J., M&H style 129 M.J. or approved equivalent. 
(m)  Valve boxes. All valve boxes and valve box risers shall be cast or ductile iron. Valve boxes shall be two piece heavy roadway types with inside diameter of barrel not less than five inches. Valve covers shall weigh a minimum of 13 pounds. They shall be the extension type with screw type adjustment and with flared base. The minimum thickness of metal shall be 3/16 -inch. The term "water" shall be cast on the cover. The boxes shall be of such length as will be adapted without full extension, to the depth of cover required over the pipe at the valve location. All valve boxes and valve box risers shall be manufactured in the United States only. 
(n)  Retainer glands. 
(1)  Retainer glands shall be ductile iron and shall be manufactured in the United States. All retainer glands on the project shall be the product of a single manufacturer. 
(2)  Retainer glands shall be provided at all mechanical joints, including fittings, valves, hydrants and other locations as shown on the drawings or as directed by the city. 
(3)  Retainer glands shall be one of the following types: 
a.  Set screw type. Set screw type retainer glands shall be ACIPCO A 90857, EBAA Iron Series 100, Union Foundry Figure 176, Tyler or approved equivalent. Compact/lightweight retainer glands shall not be allowed. The minimum working pressure and minimum weight, excluding set screws and gasket material, shall be as follows: 

 
b.  Wedge type. Wedge type retainer glands shall be MEGALUG, Series 1100 as manufactured by EBAA Iron, Inc., or approved equivalent. 
(o)  Locator wire. Locator wire shall be number 12 AWG solid plastic-coated copper wire. 
(p)  Casing pipe. 
(1)  The steel casing pipe shall be manufactured from steel conforming to ASTM A 139, grade B and be new and unused. Minimum size and thickness shall be as follows: 

 
(2)  The materials for casings under state highways shall be in accordance with the state department of transportation Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to determine the exact requirements of the state department of transportation. If there is a conflict between these specifications and the state department of transportation specifications, the latter shall take precedence. 
(q)  Stainless steel casing spacers. Spacers shall be bolt on style with a two piece shell made from T-304 stainless steel of a minimum 14-gauge thickness. The shell shall be lined with a ribbed P.V.C. sheet of a 0.090 inch thickness that overlaps the edges. Runners, made from UHMW polymer, shall be attached to risers at appropriate positions to properly locate the carrier within the casing and to ease installation. Risers shall be made from T-304 stainless steel of a minimum 14-gauge thickness and shall be attached to the shell by MIG welding. All welds shall be fully passiyated. All fasteners shall be made from T-304 stainless steel. Casing spacers shall be model CCS as manufactured by Cascade Waterworks Manufactured Company of Yorkville, Illinois, or approved equivalent. 
(r)  Bedding material. Embedment materials shall be angular graded crushed stone, one-fourth inch to three-fourths-inch in size with no more than five percent passing a no. 8 standard sieve in accordance with Class 1 materials as defined in ASTM D2321 section 5.1.1. 
(s)  Concrete thrust block. Concrete shall have a compressive strength of not less than 3,000 psi, with not less than 5.5 bags of cement per cubic yard and a slump between three and five inches. For job mixed concrete, submit the concrete mix design for approval. Ready mixed concrete shall be mixed and transported in accordance with ASTM C 94. Reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A 615, Grade 60. 
(t)  Meter boxes. 
(1)  Meter boxes shall be constructed of cast iron or plastic. 
(2)  Meter box covers shall be cast iron. 
(3)  If plastic boxes are provided, they shall be high density polyethylene. 
(4)  Water meter boxes are to be 12 inches by 18 inches with touch read holes in lids. 
(5)  Meter boxes and covers shall be manufactured in the United States only. 
(u)  Materials for structures. 
(1)  Provide materials for construction of manholes and other structures in accordance with the following: 
a.  Precast concrete sections shall meet the requirements of ASTM C 478. The minimum compressive strength of the concrete in precast sections shall be 4,000 psi. The minimum shell thickness shall be 1/12 of the inside diameter of the riser or the largest cone diameter. 
b.  Precast manhole cones shall be the eccentric type. 
c.  Seal joints between precast sections by means of rubber O-ring gaskets or flexible butyl rubber sealant. Butyl rubber sealants shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M198. Sealant shall be preformed type with a minimum nominal diameter of one inch. Butyl rubber sealant shall be equal to Kent Seal number 2 or Concrete Sealants CS 202. 
d.  Brick shall be whole and hard burned, conforming to ASTM C 32 Grade MS. Mortar shall be made of one part Portland cement and two parts clean sharp sand. Cement shall be Type 1 and shall conform to ASTM C 150. Sand shall meet ASTM C 53. 
e.  Cast iron manhole frames and covers shall meet the requirements of ASTM A 48 for Class 30 gray iron and all applicable local standards. All castings shall be tough, close grained, and smooth and free from blow holes, blisters, shrinkage, strains, cracks, cold shots and other imperfections. No casting will be accepted that weighs less than 95 percent of the design weight. Shop drawings must indicate the design weight and provide sufficient dimensions to permit checking. All castings shall be thoroughly cleaned in the shop. Frames and covers shall have machined horizontal bearing surfaces. 
(2)  Manhole frames and covers shall be equal to the following: 

 
(3)  Watertight-type traffic frames and covers shall have the same weight and dimensions as those specified in section 2.19(B). 
(4)  All manhole covers shall bear the standard city pattern and shall have the term "water" cast in the top. 
(5)  Manhole steps of polypropylene molded around a steel rod equal to products of M.A. Industries shall be used. 
(6)  Preformed rubber boots and fasteners equal to those manufactured by Kor-N-Seal or Press Seal Gasket Corporation shall be provided in the pipe openings in precast manhole sections. 
(7)  All grout shall be nonmetallic, nonshrink type. Cement shall be Type III. Grout shall meet the following requirements: 

 
The contractor shall furnish independent laboratory test results as evidence of full compliance with these requirements. Grout shall be mixed and placed in accordance with the recommendations of ACI, and the grout manufacturer's published recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 1, pt. 2), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-115. - Execution. 
(a)  Pipeline installation. 
(1)  Proper and suitable tools and appliances for safe and convenient handling and lying of pipe and fittings shall be used. Great care shall be taken to prevent the pipe coating from being damaged, particularly cement linings on the inside of the pipes and fittings. Any damage shall be remedied as directed. 
(2)  All pipe and fittings shall be carefully examined by the contractor for defects just before lying and no pipe or fittings shall be laid which is defective. If any defective pipe or fitting is discovered after having been laid, it shall be removed and replaced in a satisfactory manner with a sound pipe or fitting by the contractor at his own expense. 
(3)  No pipe shall be laid in water. The contractor will be required to operator pumps, if necessary, to remove water (whether from ground or surface sources) from the trench while pipe is being laid and joints are being made. When work is not in progress the ends of the pipe shall be closed to prevent water or other foreign material from entering the pipe. Valves installed on existing mains shall be kept closed until after the line is tested, disinfected and accepted for service. 
(4)  Pipe laid in trenches shall be laid true to line and grade on a firm and even bearing for its full length at depths and grades as indicated. Adequate precautions shall be taken to prevent floatation of pipelines prior to backfilling. Installation of ductile iron pipe in underground pressure piping systems shall conform to the requirements of AWWA C600. Excavation of trenches and backfilling around pipes shall conform to the requirements of subdivision IV, Excavation, Trenching and Backfilling. 
(5)  All water mains shall have a minimum of 48 inches of cover above the top of the pipe or 48 inches below edge of pavement, whichever is greater. All water mains 12 inches and larger shall have a minimum of 60 inches below edge of pavement, whichever is greater unless otherwise indicated by the city. Water mains shall be placed in the back five feet of city rights-of-way as applicable. 
(6)  Water mains shall maintain a minimum ten-foot edge to edge separation from sewer lines, whether gravity or pressure. If the main cannot be installed in the prescribed easement or right-of-way and provide the ten-foot separation, the separation may be reduced provided the bottom of the water main is a minimum of 18 inches above the top of the sewer. If neither of these two separation criteria is possible, the water main shall be installed below the sewer with a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches. Where water lines cross under gravity sewer lines, encase sewer line fully in concrete for at least ten feet on each side of the crossing. Lay water line which cross sewer force main and invert siphons at least two feet above the sewer lines; when joints in the sewer lines are closer than three feet horizontally from the water line, encase these joints in concrete. Do not lay water line in the same trench with gas lines, fuel lines, or electric wiring. No water main shall pass through or come in contact with any part of a sanitary sewer manhole. 
(7)  All elbows, tees, branches, crosses and reducers in pressure piping systems shall be adequately restrained against thrust. Underground pressure piping containing unharnessed push-on or mechanical joints or expansion joints shall be restrained by thrust blocks. The contractor may use forms or earth walls to mold the thrust blocks. When earth walls are used, they shall be cut true to shape and all excess earth removed. The work shall be conducted so that no loose earth will become mixed with the concrete. At the end of 24 hours, damp earth may be placed over the concrete to retain moisture. 
(8)  All lumps, blisters, excess coating, dirt and other objectionable substances shall be removed from the bells and spigots. Bells and spigots shall be wiped clean and dry. Bells shall be centered in the trench and spigots driven home. 
(9)  The contractor shall keep a transit and appurtenances on the job to be used for laying out the angles required for making bends and other works of this nature. 
(10)  Bends, valves and other points where deemed necessary shall be blocked and harnesses to resist thrust. This shall be accomplished by methods and means approved by the city. All forms used to form concrete for blocking shall be removed before backfilling. All fire hydrants shall be harnessed as directed by the city and concrete blocking will required to resist the thrust on fire hydrants. All stress points and ends of mains shall be inspected before backfilling. 
(11)  Blowoff valves shall be installed at terminus of all dead-end mains. Method of installation shall be approved by the city. 
(12)  Whenever pipe requires cutting to fix the lines or install fittings, the work shall be done in such a manner as to leave a smooth end at right angles to the axis of the pipe. Special care shall be exercised to guard against breaking or splitting of the existing piping. 
(13)  All cutting of ductile iron pipe shall be done with a cutting saw. All burrs shall be removed from the inside and outside edges of all cut pipes. 
(14)  Mechanical joints and restrained joints shall be made in strict accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions. The gaskets and follower rings shall be kept clean and carefully centered in the bell with the bolts and bolt holes always parallel with the centerline of the pipe. The coating and lining of the pipe shall not be damaged. The nuts on all bolts shall be started and tightened evenly around the entire circumference of the pipe. No one nut shall be tightened more than one-half turn tighter than the remainder of the nuts of the joint. When the joint is complete, the follower ring shall be equal distance from (parallel with) the face of the bell. Bolts shall not be over stressed and shall be tightened just enough to compress the gasket sufficient to prevent leakage. Just prior to assembly, the gasket shall be cleaned of all foreign material and shall be brushed with soapy water just before slipping the gasket over the spigot and into the bell of the pipes. The joint shall be in straight alignment during assembly. Any deflection required shall be made after assembly but before tightening bolts. Bolts shall be tightened with torque wrenches with the following torque loads applied: 

 
(15)  Push-on type joints shall be made in strict accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions. All joints shall be completely belled-up and all spigots shall be home. The gasket seat in the socket, the gasket and the plain end of the pipe to be entered shall be wiped clean before assembly. After the gasket has been inserted into the gasket recess, a thin film of lubricant shall be applied to the inside surface of the gasket and to the outside surface of the spigot end of the pipe to be jointed. After lubricating, the end of the pipe shall not be allowed to touch the bottom or side of the trench causing dirt to adhere to the joint surface. When pipe is cut in the field, the cut end of the pipe shall be beveled with a file or grinder. The joint shall be in straight alignment while pushing the pipe to make assembly. Any deflection required shall be made after the joint is assembled. 
(16)  Set screw type retainer glands shall be installed in strict accordance with the fitting manufacturer's instructions. After making up the mechanical joint as hereinbefore specified, the set screws shall be run down until they are in firm contact with the pipe. The set screws shall then be tightened once completely around the joint to approximately 40 foot-pounds torque. Finally, the set screws shall be tightened twice completely around the joint to the following torques: 
Three-inch through 12-inch glands: 80 foot-pounds. 
14-inch through 24-inch glands: 65 foot-pounds. 
(17)  Wedge type retainer glands shall be installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(18)  Retainer gland joints shall be made in straight alignment and any deflection required shall be made before tightening the joint bolts or set screws. 
(19)  Deflection of ductile iron pipe at joints for long radius curves or for avoiding obstacles shall be permitted only upon approval of the city. 
(20)  Where deflection of joints is permitted, such deflection shall be made in accordance with and shall not exceed limits provided in section 9b.5 and section 9c.4, as applicable, of the AWWA C600. 
(b)  Connections to water mains. 
(1)  Make connections to existing pipe lines wit tapping sleeves and valves, unless specifically shown otherwise on the drawings. 
(2)  Location. Before laying pipe, locate the points of connection to existing water mains and uncover as necessary for the city to confirm the nature of the connection to be made. 
(3)  Interruption of services. Make connections to existing water mains only when system operations permit. Operate existing valves only with specific authorization and direct supervision of the city. 
(4)  Tapping sleeves: 
a.  Prior to attaching the sleeve, the pipe shall be thoroughly cleaned, utilizing a brush and rag, as required. 
b.  Before performing field machine cut, the water tightness of the sleeve assembly shall be pressure tested. The interior of the assembly shall be pressure tested. The interior of the assembly shall be filled with water. An air compressor shall be attached, which will be inducing a test pressure as specified in this section. No leakage shall be permitted for a period of five minutes. 
c.  After attaching the sleeve to an existing main, but prior to making the tap, the interior of the assembly shall be disinfected. All surfaces to be exposed to potable water shall be swabbed or sprayed with a one percent hypochlorite solution. 
(5)  Connecting to existing side street mains: 
a.  Before taking existing side street mains out of service, taps for air removal shall be made at each high point along the section of existing main to be temporarily taken out of service. With the city's approval at each location, existing service lines may be used to expel air. 
b.  Close service line curb stops along the section or sections that will be dewatered and close all connecting main valves. 
c.  Take existing main out of service, cut and complete connection as detailed on the drawings. 
d.  Open appropriate valve and after expelling all air, return existing main to service and reopen all service line curb stops. 
e.  At all taps to remove air, install brass cap on corporation stop, backfill, and replace pavement where required. 
(c)  Hydrant installation. 
(1)  Prior to installation, inspect all hydrants for direction of opening, nozzle threading, operating nut and cap dimensions, tightness of pressure-containing bolting, cleanliness of inlet elbow, handling damage and cracks. Defective hydrants shall be corrected or held for inspection by the engineer. 
(2)  All hydrants shall stand plumb and shall have their nozzles parallel with or at right angles to the roadway, with pumper nozzle facing the roadway, except that hydrants having two-hose nozzles 90 degrees apart shall be set with each nozzle facing the roadway at an angle of 45 degrees. 
(3)  Hydrants shall be set to the established grade, with the centerline of the lowest nozzle at least 12 inches above the ground or as directed by the city. 
(4)  Each hydrant shall be connected to the main with a six-inch branch controlled by an independent six-inch valve. 
(5)  Hydrants shall be located as shown on the drawings or as directed by the city. 
(6)  Fire hydrants shall be installed at property line not to exceed five feet maximum of unless approved by the city. 
(d)  Valve and fitting installation. 
(1)  Prior to installation, valves shall be inspected for direction of opening, number of turns to open, freedom of operation, tightness of pressure-containing bolting and test plugs, cleanliness of valve ports and especially seating surfaces, handling damage and cracks. Defective valves shall be replaced before being installed. 
(2)  Valves, fittings, plugs and caps shall be set and joined to the pipe in the manner specified in section 4.01 except that 12 inch and larger valves shall be provided with special support, such as no. 57 crushed stone, concrete pads or a sufficiently tamped trench bottom so that the pipe will not be required to support the weight of the valve. Valves shall be installed in the closed position. 
(3)  A valve box shall be provided on each underground valve. They shall be carefully set, centered exactly over the operating nut and truly plumbed. The valve box shall not transmit shock or stress to the valve. The bottom flange of the lower belled portion of the box shall be placed below the valve operating nut. This flange shall be set on brick, so arranged that the weight of the valve box and superimposed loads will bear on the base and not on the valve or pipe. Extension stems shall be installed where depth of bury places the operating nut in excess of 30 inches beneath finish grade. The valve box cover shall be flush with the surface of the finished area or such other level as directed by the city. 
(4)  If valve boxes are installed concurrently with valves, the contractor shall be responsible for maintaining valve boxes until the project is complete. All lost or damaged valve boxes shall be replaced by the contractor, at the contractor's own expense. 
(5)  A concrete pad shall be required around each valve box, the top flush with the cover as detailed on the drawings. Precast valve pads will be allowed where approved by the city. Precast pads shall not be used on slopes or in ditches. If precast pads are used, the space between the valve box and the opening in the pad shall be filled with grout. 
(6)  In no case shall valves be used to bring misaligned pipe into alignment during installation. Pipe shall be supported in such a manner as to prevent stress on the valve. 
(7)  Where main valves are shown on the drawings adjacent to fire hydrants tees or intersection tees, install the valves no more than four feet from the tee unless shown or specified otherwise. 
(8)  Nonrestrained and push-on joints shall not be installed within 15 feet of restrained joints at valves or fittings, unless shown otherwise on the drawings or approved by the city. 
(e)  Jack and bore. 
(1)  The contractor shall provide to the city, for approval, a detailed plan for the methods proposed for the construction of the casing. These plans shall include the methods proposed for groundwater control and face protection. 
(2)  In general, jack and bore operations shall conform to the requirements of the state department of transportation as presented in its Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition. If a conflict between these specifications and the state department of transportation specifications exists, the more stringent specifications shall govern. 
(3)  Install the steel casing pipe by the dry boring method. Bore the hole and install the casing through the soil simultaneously by a cutting head on a continuous auger mounted inside the casing pipe. Fully weld lengths of casing pipe to the preceding section in accordance with AWS recommended procedures. After the boring and installation of the casing is complete, install a cleaning plug on the rig and clean the casing. 
(4)  After construction of the casing is complete, and has been accepted, install the pipeline in accordance with the detailed drawings and/or the specifications. 
(5)  Check the alignment and grade of the casing and prepare plan for approval to set the carrier pipe at proper alignment, grade and elevation. The carrier pipe shall be supported by stainless steel casing spacers to preclude movement within the casing. One spacer shall be placed not more than two feet from each end of the casing. Subsequent spacers shall be placed at six-foot to ten-foot intervals within the casing. 
(6)  Seal the ends of the casing with four-inch brick walls, plastered with Portland cement mortar and waterproofed with asphalt roofing cement or Link-Seal Model PL or approved equal. 
(7)  Provide all necessary bracing, bulkheads, and shields to ensure complete safety to all traffic at all times during the work. Perform the work in such a manner as to not permanently damage the roadbed or interfere with normal traffic over it. Begin the boring operation in a pit, sheeted and shored as necessary and begin at and proceed from one end. Observe all applicable requirements of state department of transportation regulations. Conduct the operations in such a manner that all work will be performed below the level of the roadbed. Coordinate and schedule all of the work with the state department of transportation. 
(8)  Complete all boring work at one particular location before boring work is started at another location. 
(9)  If the casing installation work is being conducted in an unsafe manner or in a manner detrimental to the over-passing roadway or to the safety of the traveling public, all operations of boring shall cease until the necessary corrections have been made. In the event that distress occurs to the roadway due to the boring; the contractor shall be required to submit a plan to repair the roadway. The plan must be acceptable to the state department of transportation and the city. 
(f)  Free boring. 
(1)  The contractor may construct a driveway crossing by the free bore method, in lieu of making a pavement cut, where indicated on the drawings and approved by the city. The free bore method shall be accomplished by the dry auger boring method without jetting, sluicing, or wet boring. 
(2)  The diameter of the free bore shall not exceed the pipe bell outside diameter or the pipe barrel outside diameter plus one inch, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Free boring is allowable only under residential driveways. Free boring is not allowed under commercial driveways or any roadways except when the pipe diameter is four inches or less. 
(4)  The contractor shall be responsible for any settlement of the roadway caused by the free bore construction activities. 
(5)  If the contractor elects to free bore and an acceptable installation does not result for any reason, the contractor shall install a casing pipe by the bore and jack method. 
(g)  Double check backflow preventer. 
(1)  A double check backflow preventer shall be provided immediately downstream from the customer's water meter. The backflow preventer shall be housed in a separate meter box or vault. 
(2)  One and one-half inch and smaller preventers require a minimum of six inches below, eight inches behind, eight inches in front of and three inches above the highest point on the device or its valves. 
(3)  Two inch and larger preventers require a minimum of 12 inches below, 12 inches behind, 24 inches in front of and three inches above the highest point on the device or its shut off valves. 
(4)  All backflow devices must be inline rebuildable. 
(5)  A minimum of six inches between the pit walls and the large devices' valves and three inches between the pit walls and the valves on the small devices is required. 
(6)  The dimensions given in subsections (g)(2) through (4) assume a standard shallow installation. If the depth exceeds 12 inches to the top of the device the other dimensions will need to be increased accordingly and be approved by the city. 
(h)  Double detector check valve assemblies. 
(1)  A double detector check valve assembly shall be installed in all fire mains and fire sprinkler service lines as close to the city main as is possible. The backflow prevention assembly shall be housed in an appropriately sized vault. 
(2)  Typically, a minimum of 12 inches below, 12 inches behind, 24 inches in front of and three inches above the highest point on the device or its shutoff valve is required. 
(3)  A minimum of six inches shall be provided between the pit walls and the outside edge of the devices' shutoff valves. 
(4)  The dimensions given in subsections (h)(1) through (3) assume a standard shallow installation. If the depth exceeds 12 inches to the top of the device the other dimensions will need to be increased accordingly and be approved by the city. 
(i)  Water meters and service lines. 
(1)  After the water main has been installed, tested and disinfected, water service connections shall be installed. A water service connection shall consist of a corporation tapped into the main, a copper service line to a lockable curb stop inside an approved water meter box, a meter and meter set fittings. 
(2)  All service lines crossing under existing pavement shall be installed by boring. All service line taps shall be made with city pressure on the main and any visible leaks shall be repaired. After each meter service has been completed, the entire assembly shall be flushed to remove any foreign matter. All service lines shall have a minimum bury depth of 36 inches under ditches and shoulders and 48 inches under the roadway. 
(j)  Valve markers. 
(1)  A continuous or properly spliced number 12 AWG solid plastic-coated copper wire shall be placed along all two-inch PVC pipe installations. 
(2)  The locator wire shall run from the breakway flange of the last fire hydrant to the galvanized pipe portions of the blow off assemblies and terminate in meter box. 
(3)  Care shall be taken during backfilling to prevent damaging or cutting of the locator wire. 
(4)  All splices shall be made by using copper wire U-bolt assemblies and then wrapping with electrical tape. 
(5)  Wire shall be wrapped around pipe such that at least four wraps are produced per length of pipe. 
(6)  In lieu of wrapping, the tracer wire may be strung along the top of pipe provided it is taped to the pipe every five feet to insure proper positioning during backfilling. 
(k)  Valve markers. 
(1)  Markers shall be installed with the top of the marker protruding 12 to 18 inches above the ground surface. Valve markers shall be located in a suitable location approved by the public utilities department engineering inspector during construction. 
(2)  A marker shall be located within 20 feet or less from all in-line valves and/or tapping valves. One marker may be used to reference the location of more than one valve provided the valves are within 20 feet of the marker. Valve marker is not required on fire hydrant valve. No marker is to be installed within three feet of direct line of operation of a fire hydrant. Valve marker shall be installed in ditch line being in direct line with water main. 
(3)  The brass disc shall be stamped with the distance between the valve and marker. The marker shall be installed such that the disc faces the valve. 
(l)  Field pressure testing. 
(1)  After the pipe has been installed, the complete pipe shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test. 
(2)  Except as hereinafter allowed, the line shall be tested in sections not to exceed the distance from one line valve to the next adjacent line valve. Testing two sections through an open intermediate valve will not be allowed unless adjacent line valves are less than 300 feet apart. In no case will leakage from two or more adjacent sections be averaged to determine that the total section meets the leakage test. Each section of line or valved section meets the leakage test. Each section of line or valved section of the line shall be tested as follows: 
a.  At all high points, where air release valves or fire hydrants have not been installed, the contractor shall install corporation cocks to expel the air as the pipe is slowly being filled with water. After the pressure and disinfecting tests have been completed, the corporation cocks shall be capped with brass caps and left in place. The location of said corporation cocks shall be marked on record drawings with dimensions measured from three permanent structures or by survey grade GPS. 
b.  A test pump shall be installed at the low point of the section being tested and the pipe shall be slowly filled with water. 
c.  After expelling all air at the high point, the corporation cocks shall be closed and the pressure increased to 250 psi at the test pump location. The test pressure shall be maintained within five psi for the duration of the test. 
d.  The volume of water required by the test pump to maintain this excess pressure, which will represent the leakage, shall not exceed 0.14 gallons per hour per inch diameter per 1,000 feet of pipe. 
e.  Excess pressure and leakage test shall be successfully conducted for not less than two consecutive hours. Provide an accurate pressure gauge with graduation not greater than five psi. 
f.  The contractor shall, at his own expense, locate and make repairs as necessary until the leakage is within the specified allowance. 
g.  All visible leaks shall be repaired regardless of the amount of leakage. The contractor shall furnish all labor, equipment and material necessary to conduct tests, and shall furnish and install all temporary plugs and valves necessary to isolate the test sections. Water for test purposes will be furnished by the city. 
(m)  Disinfecting pipelines. 
(1)  After successfully pressure testing each pipeline section, disinfect in accordance with AWWA C 651 for the continuous-feed method and these specifications. 
(2)  Chlorination: 
a.  Apply chlorine solution into the new water main. Retain chlorinated water for minimum of 24 hours. 
b.  After 24 hours, the owner shall assist the contractor in obtaining samples at every outlet. Samples of water shall contain at least 25 milligrams per liter free chlorine. Rechlorinate if required results are not obtained on all samples. 
c.  Provide the owner a minimum 24-hour notice to take samples. Weekends and recognized holidays shall not be included as part of the 24-hour notice. 
(3)  Disposal of chlorinated water: Reduce chlorine residual of disinfection water to less than one milligram per liter if discharged directly to a body of water, or to less than two milligrams per liter if discharged onto the ground prior to disposal. Treat water with sulfur dioxide or other reducing chemicals to neutralize chlorine residual. Flush all lines until residual are equal to existing system. 
(4)  Bacteriological testing: After final flushing and before the main is placed into service, the owner shall assist the contractor in collecting samples from the line to have tested for bacteriological quality. Testing shall be performed at a laboratory certified by the state. Rechlorinate lines until the required results are obtained. Provide the owner a minimum 24-hour notice to take samples. Weekends and recognized holidays shall not be included as part of the 24-hour notice. Contractor shall open all valves being a part of said system being tested upon approval of bacteriological testing. 
(n)  Guarantee against taste, odor or color. The contractor shall guarantee for a period of one year against taste, odor or color caused by pipe lining materials. The contractor shall at his own expense provide all necessary treatment to counteract any taste, odor or color. Bonafide complaints of taste, odor or color in the area served by the new mains shall be deemed caused by pipe lining materials. 
(o)  Backflow devices. 
(1)  All three-quarter-inch back flow prevention devices need to be inline repairable. 
(2)  All other devices need to be sized according to line size. 
(3)  All vaults have to be of size and specifications for back flow devices. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 1, pt. 3), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-116—50-143. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Reuse Water Mains 

Sec. 50-144. - Reuse mains. 
See Specifications for Construction of Nonpotable Reuse Water Line. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 2), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-145—50-171. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Sanitary Sewerage Systems 

Sec. 50-172. - General. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  The contractor shall furnish all materials (unless otherwise agreed upon), labor and equipment necessary to construct the sewers, and appurtenances indicated or shown on the drawings. The work shall include all necessary diking, pumping, bailing, draining, flushing, testing and erosion and sedimentation control. These specifications cover water mains and water service connections complete. 
(2)  The contractor shall so arrange his work as to cause a minimum of interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to protect and maintain power and telephone lines, gas and water piping, fences, building, drainage pipes and other structures, all as specified. 
(3)  The lines and grade of the sewer and the position of all manholes and other appurtenances are as shown on the drawings. The grade line as shown means the invert, or bottom of the inside of the pipe or manhole. The work shall be laid out by the contractor using bench marks and the other control points. 
(4)  The contractor shall be responsible for removing all water from excavations and trenches whether from surface or ground sources. 
(5)  Changes to the standard specifications for sanitary sewers may be made by the city at any time. 
(6)  The contractor shall guarantee all materials and workmanship for a period of one year from the date of final acceptance of the work. Per stipulations as stated in section 50-89(a), if during this period any material or workmanship, etc., proves defective, the developer or contractor shall repair same to the satisfaction of the city at their own cost and expense. 
(7)  In order to be sure that the developer, owner, contractor, or any combination thereof, can actually perform and will actually perform the warranty required under this division, the developer, owner, or contractor, or any combination thereof, shall agree to and provide either a guaranty agreement, a surety agreement, an escrow agreement, a cash bond, a letter of credit or other acceptable financial instrument, that obligates the warranting party to correct any defects in design, materials or workmanship during the 12-month period, and obligates a sum for said repairs during the period of at least equal to 20 percent of the cost of constructing and installing said line or lines. Said guaranty agreement, surety agreement, escrow agreement, cash bond, letter of credit or other financial instrument, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney, prior to acceptance If an issue arises as to the amount of costs that are to be warranted under said financial instrument, then the city engineer shall provide an estimated cost that shall be used as the basis for said agreements. 
(8)  Changes to the standard specifications for sewer may be made by the city at any time. 
(b)  Related work. 
(1)  Subdivision IV: Excavation, Trenching and Backfilling. 
(2)  Subdivision V: Site Preparation, Restoration and Related Work. 
(c)  Applicable specifications and standards. The latest editions of the following specifications, standards and publications setting minimum requirements for quality, safety and performance of work and materials form a part of this specification as though fully repeated herein: 
(1)  ASTM American Society of Testing Materials. 
(2)  ANSI American National Standards Institute. 
(d)  Record drawings. 
(1)  The contractor shall be responsible for maintaining a set of the approved design drawings which have been marked to reflect as-built conditions. These record drawings shall be kept at the site during working hours and shall be made available to the city inspector upon request. 
(2)  The record drawings shall show the as constructed locations of (but not be limited to) all manholes, stub-outs, service materials, cleanouts air release valves, etc. 
(3)  Final acceptance of sewer construction will not be granted until as-built drawings have been received by the city. 
(4)  Appurtenance locations shall be dimensioned to three permanent fixtures or objects. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 3, pt. 1), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-173. - Materials. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Materials to be incorporated into the work shall be new and unused, and shall conform to all applicable requirements of these specifications. Submittal and approval of all materials, shop drawings or samples shall be in conformance with these specifications. Any materials installed prior to approval by the city, will be subject to rejection, and will be removed at the contractor's expense. 
(2)  All pipes have to have a minimum of 48 inches of cover. 
(3)  All sanitary sewer lines have to be ductile iron piping (DIP). 
(4)  All service lines in right-of-way have to be six inches or larger. 
(5)  Only services lines may be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) unless specified by the city or other authority. 
(b)  Ductile iron pipe. Ductile iron pipe shall be utilized for all sewage force mains, stream crossings, highway crossings and other applications and where indicated or specified. All pipes shall be furnished in nominal lengths of 18 to 20 feet. 
(1)  Ductile iron pipe shall conform to AWWA C 151 and shall be thickness class 50 or pressure class 350 unless otherwise specified or shown on the drawings. Flanged pipe shall be minimum class 53. Pipe and fittings shall be cement lined in accordance with AWWA C 104 or must have a corrosion resistant inside coating which will also meet EPD corrosion-resistant standards. Fittings shall conform to AWWA C 110 with rated working pressure of 250 psi. Pipe and fittings shall be furnished with a bituminous outside coating. 
(2)  Unless shown or specified otherwise, joints shall be push-on type for pipe and standard mechanical joints for fittings. Joints shall conform to AWWA C 111. Flanged joints shall conform to AWWA C 115. 
(3)  Acceptance will be on the basis of inspection and the manufacturer's written certification that the pipe was manufactured and tested in accordance with the applicable standards. 
(c)  Polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe (sanitary service lines only). Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) service sanitary sewer pipe shall be integral bell rubber ring gasket joint pipe. The pipe and its joints shall meet the following minimum specifications. 
(1)  The pipe shall be produced to meet or exceed ASTM D 3034 SDR 35 standard. 
(2)  The PVC compound shall be produced in accordance with ASTM D 1784. 
(3)  Pipe joint shall be tested in accordance with ASTM D 3132. 
(d)  Detection tape. Detection tape shall be composed of a solid aluminum foil encased in a protective plastic jacket. Tapes shall be color coded in accordance with APWA color codes with the following legends: Sanitary Sewerage Systems, Safety Green, Caution: Sewer Line Buried Below. Colors may be solid or striped. Tape shall be permanently printed with no surface printing allowed. Tape width shall be permanently printed with no surface printing allowed. Tape width shall be minimum two inches when buried less than ten inches below the surface. Tape width shall be minimum three inches when buried greater than ten inches and less than 20 inches. Detection tape shall be equal to Lineguard Type III Detectable or Allen Systems Detectatape. 
(e)  Casing pipe. 
(1)  The steel casing pipe shall be manufactured from steel conforming to ASTM A 39, Grade B. Size and thickness shall be as follows: 

 
(2)  The materials for casing under state highways shall be in accordance with the state department of transportation Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to determine the exact requirements of the state department of transportation. If a conflict is found, the more stringent specification will prevail. 
(f)  Stainless steel casing spacers. Spacers shall be bolt-on style with a two-piece shell made from T-304 stainless steel of a minimum 14-gauge thickness. The shell shall be lined with a ribbed PVC sheet of a 0.090-inch thickness that overlaps the edges. Runners, made from UHMW polymer, shall be attached to risers at appropriate positions to properly locate the carrier within the casing and to ease installation. Risers shall be made from T-304 stainless steel of a minimum 14-gauge thickness and shall be attached to the shell by MIG welding. All welds shall be fully passiyated. All fasteners shall be made from T-304 stainless steel. Casing spacers shall be model CCS as manufactured by Cascade Waterworks Manufacturing Company of Yorkville, Illinois or approved equivalent. 
(g)  Materials for manholes. 
(1)  Provide materials for construction of manholes in accordance with the following: 
a.  Precast concrete sections shall meet the requirements of ASTM C 478. The minimum compressive strength of the concrete in precast sections shall be 4,000 psi. The minimum shell thickness shall be 1/12 of the inside diameter of the riser or the largest cone diameter. 
c.  Precast manhole sections shall be the eccentric type. 
d.  Seal joints between precast sections by means of rubber O-ring gaskets or flexible butyl rubber sealant. Butyl rubber sealants shall meet the requirements of AASHTO M 198. Sealant shall be a preformed type with a minimum nominal diameter of one inch. Butyl rubber sealant shall be equal to Kent Seal number 2 or Concrete Sealants CS 202. 
(2)  Brick shall be whole and hard burned, conforming to ASTM C 32 Grade MS. Mortar shall be made of one part Portland cement and two parts clean sharp sand. Cement shall be type 1 and shall conform to ASTM C 150. Sand shall meet ASTM C 53. 
(3)  Cast iron manhole frames and covers shall meet the requirements of ASTM A 48 for class 30 gray iron and all applicable local standards. All castings shall be tough, close grained, and smooth and free from blow holes, blisters, shrinkage, stains, cracks, cold shots and other imperfections. No casting will be accepted which weighs less than 95 percent of the design weight. Shop drawings must indicate the design weight and provide sufficient dimensions to permit checking. All castings shall be thoroughly cleaned in the shop. 
a.  Manhole frames and covers shall be equal to the following: 

 
b.  Watertight traffic type frames and covers shall have the same weight and dimensions as those specified in section 2.08C(1). 
c.  All manhole covers shall bear the standard "Flowery Branch Pattern" and have the term "Sanitary Sewer" cast in the top. 
(4)  Plastic steps. Manhole steps of polypropylene molded around a steel rod equal to products of M.A. Industries shall be used. 
(5)  Rubber boots. Provide preformed rubber boots and fasteners equal to those manufactured by Kor-N-Seal or Press Seal Gasket Corporation. 
(6)  All grout shall be nonmetallic, nonshrink type. Cement shall be Type III. Grout shall meet the following requirements: 

 
(7)  The contractor shall furnish independent laboratory test results as evidence of full compliance with these requirements. 
(8)  Grout shall be mixed and placed in accordance with the recommendations of ACI, and the grout manufacturer's published recommendations. 
(h)  Adaptor donuts and couplings. 
(1)  Adaptor donuts shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC), compressible seals designed for sealing joints between sewer pipes of different sizes and/or dissimilar materials. Adaptors shall provide a positive seal against infiltration and exfiltration and remain leak proof and root proof up to 4.3 psi. Donuts shall be equal to products of Fernco and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  Adaptor couplings shall be elastomeric plastic sleeves designed to connect pipes of dissimilar materials. Adaptor couplings shall provide a positive seal against infiltration and exfiltration and remain leak proof and root proof up to ten psi. The adaptor manufacturer shall provide stainless steel clamps and other required accessories. Couplings shall be equal to products of Fernco and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(i)  Bedding materials. 
(1)  Bedding materials shall be crushed stone unless shown or specified otherwise. 
(2)  Crushed stone bedding material shall meet the requirements of state department of transportation specification 800.01 for number 57 stone, group II (quartzite granite). 
(j)  Concrete for pipe encasement, encasement collars and force main blocking. 
(1)  Concrete shall have compression strength of not less than 3,000 psi. with not less than 5.5 bags of cement per cubic yard and a slump between three and five inches. For job mixed concrete, submit the concrete mix design for approval. Mix and transport ready-mixed concrete in accordance with ASTM C 94. Reinforcing steel shall conform to the requirements of ASTM A615, grade 60. 
(2)  All bends, tees and/or any place where concrete is to cover pipes, plastic is to be wrapped over the pipes first and must be inspected before cover is applied. 
(k)  Air release and air vacuum valves. 
(1)  Air release valves (type I). Valves shall be automatic air release valves designed to allow escape of air under pressure and close water-tight when liquid enters the valve. The valve shall have a maximum orifice diameter of 5/16 inch. The valve body shall be cast iron, designed to facilitate disassembly for cleaning and maintenance. The float shall be stainless steel; the valve seat and all working parts shall be of corrosion-resistant materials. Valves shall be equipped with the necessary attachments, including valves, quick disconnect couplings and hose, to permit back flushing after installation without dismantling the valve. Valves shall be recommended by the manufacturer for wastewater service. Air release valves shall be equal to APCO Valve Corporation, Val-Matic or G.A. Industries. 
(2)  Combination air valves (type II). Combination air valves shall consist of an air valve tapped into the body of an air and vacuum valve. Valves shall conform to the following: 
a.  Automatic air and vacuum valves. Valves shall be automatic air and vacuum valves designed to allow escape of air, close watertight when liquid enters the valve and allow air to enter in the event of a vacuum. The valve body shall be cast iron, designed to facilitate disassembly for cleaning and maintenance. The float shall be stainless steel; the valve seat and all working parts shall be of corrosion-resistant materials. Valves shall be equipped with the necessary attachments, including valves, quick disconnect couplings and hose, to permit back flushing after installation without dismantling the valve. Valves shall be recommended by the manufacturer for wastewater service. Air and vacuum valves shall be equal to APCO Valve Corporation, Val-Matic or G.A. Industries. 
b.  Air release valves. Valves shall be automatic air release valves designed to allow escape of air under pressure and close water-tight when liquid enters the valve. Valves shall have a two-inch NPT inlet and a maximum orifice diameter of 5/16 inch. The valve body shall be cast iron, designed to facilitate disassembly for cleaning and maintenance. The float shall be stainless steel; the valve seat and all working parts shall be of corrosion-resistant materials. Valves shall be equipped with the necessary attachments, including valves, quick-disconnect couplings and hose, to permit back flushing after installation without dismantling the valve. Valves shall be recommended by the manufacturer for wastewater service. Air release valves shall be equal to APCO Valve Corporation, Val-Matic or G.A. Industries. 
(3)  Single body valve. In lieu of subsections (k)(1) or (2) of this section, a single body, double orifice, sewage combination valve may be used. Materials of construction, orifice size, venting capacity and accessories shall meet the requirements of subsections (k)(1) and (2) of this section. Single body, double orifice valve shall be equal to APCO Valve Corporation. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 3, pt. 2), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-174. - Execution. 
(a)  Installing pipe. 
(1)  Utmost care shall be exercised in loading and unloading pipe, fittings and accessories, in order to avoid shock or damage to the material. Lifting shall be by hoist, fork lift or front end loader. Dropping will not be permitted. Pipe shall be distributed along or near the trench location. The contractor shall be responsible for the safe handling of all materials, and no damaged materials shall be used. 
(2)  Bedding for sanitary sewers shall be class B or greater. 
(3)  The pipe and fittings must be so laid in the trench that after the sewer is completed all small permissible defects in the pipe are at the top of the sewer, and so that the interior surface shall conform accurately to the grade and alignment. Pipe laying shall be done so as to disturb as little as possible the pipe previously laid, and unless otherwise directed the pipe shall be laid up grade between manholes. Before laying, the pipe shall be wiped clean of all dirt and foreign matter, and the joining surfaces of bells and spigots shall be clean and dry. 
(4)  As the work progresses, the interior of the pipes shall be carefully freed of all dirt and superfluous material of every description. A filled bag or other approved type of follower shall be used and shall be pulled through the line immediately after each joint is made in order to remove any joint material and debris that may be left on the inside of the pipe. If a bag type follower is used, a new one shall be provided for each day. 
(5)  Before being placed in the trench, each section of pipe shall be carefully examined for defects and the inside of the pipe shall be swabbed clean. The bottom of the trench shall be so shaped that the pipe will have a bearing on the earth along its entire length. The pipe shall not rest on native trench rock at any point (see subsection (a)(10) of this section). 
(6)  Ductile iron sewer pipe shall be laid to the line and grade of the sewer where it crosses above a stream, ravine or branch. Each joint shall be supported by a concrete pier. On each side of the body of water a four foot by four foot blocking is required unless a greater amount is deemed necessary. 
(7)  All pipelines are intended to be straight between manholes, and a circle of light shall be visible from one end to the other. Broken or cracked pipe shall be replaced with sound pipe, and any deposit, protruding joint compound, cement or packing shall be removed and the barrel of the sewer left clean for its entire length. All sewers shall be cleaned to remove all mud and debris prior to testing. 
(8)  Minimum slope for eight-inch and larger gravity sanitary sewer pipe shall be 0.5 percent and the maximum slope shall be 15 percent. 
(9)  When work is suspended or at night, the open ends of all pipe lines shall be promptly closed over in such a manner as will prevent the entrance of dirt, mud, animals or other objectionable matter. 
(10)  All sewers shall be bedded. Compact stone bedding material by tamping or slicing with a flat bed shovel. Prepare the trench bottom to support the pipe uniformly throughout its length. Provide bell holes to relieve pipe bells of all loads. If the trench is excavated to excessive width or depth, provide the next better class of bedding. Ductile iron pipe shall be installed where trench bottom consist of fill material. Bedding under pipe and manholes shall be compacted to a minimum of 85 percent of the maximum Standard Proctor density, unless shown or specified otherwise. Lay all gravity sewer pipes with minimum of class C bedding unless shown or specified otherwise. The various classes of bedding to be installed are as follows: 
a.  Class A: Excavate the trench to a depth of one-fourth the nominal diameter of the pipe below grade and lay the pipe to line and grade on concrete block. Place concrete to the full width of the trench and to a height of one-fourth the outside diameter of the pipe above the invert. 
b.  Class B: Excavate the bottom of the trench flat at the minimum depth directed below the bottom of the pipe barrel. Place and compact bedding material to the proper grade. Bedding shall then be carefully placed by hand and compacted to provide full support under and up to the centerline of the pipe. 
c.  Class C: Excavate the bottom of the trench flat at the minimum depth directed below the bottom of the pipe barrel. Place and compact bedding material to the proper grade. Bedding shall then be carefully placed by hand and compacted to provide full support under and up to a height of one-fourth the outside diameter of the pipe above the invert. 
(11)  Water mains shall maintain a minimum ten feet edge to edge separation from sewer lines, whether gravity or pressure. If the main cannot be installed in the prescribed easement or right-of-way and provide the ten feet separation; the separation may be reduced provided the bottom of the water main is a minimum of 18 inches above the top of the sewer. Should neither of these two separation criteria be possible, then the water main shall be installed below the sewer with a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches. If waterlines cross under gravity sewer lines, then encase the sewer line fully in concrete for a distance of at least ten feet on each side of the crossing. Lay waterline which crosses sewer force mains and inverted siphons at least two feet above these sewer lines. When joints in the sewer lines are closer than three feet horizontally from the water line, and then encase these joints in concrete. Do not lay waterline in the same trench with gas lines, fuel lines or electric wiring. No water main shall pass through or come in contact with any part of a sanitary sewer manhole. 
(b)  Jack and bore. 
(1)  The contractor shall provide to the city, for approval, a detailed plan for the methods proposed for the construction of the casing. These plans shall include the methods proposed for groundwater control and face protection. 
(2)  In general, jack and bore operations shall conform to the requirements of the state department of transportation as presented in their Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition. If a conflict between these specifications and the state department of transportation specifications exists, the more stringent specifications shall govern. 
(3)  Install the steel casing pipe by the dry boring method. Bore the hole and install the casing through the soil simultaneously by a cutting head on a continuous auger mounted inside the casing pipe. Fully weld lengths of casing pipe to the preceding section in accordance with AWS recommended procedures. After the boring and installation of the casing is complete, install a cleaning plug on the rig and clean the casing. 
(4)  After construction of the casing is complete, and has been accepted, install the pipeline in accordance with the detailed drawings and/or the specifications. 
(5)  Check the alignment and grade of the casing and prepare plan for approval to set the carrier pipe at proper alignment, grade and elevation. The carrier pipe shall be ductile iron and be supported by stainless steel casing spacers strapped to the pipe barrel, or some similar arrangement to preclude movement within the casing. One spacer shall be placed not more than two feet from each end of the casing. Subsequent spacers shall be placed not more than two feet from each end of the casing. Subsequent spacers shall be placed at six to ten foot intervals within the casing. One spacer shall be placed on the spigot end of each segment at the line marking the limit of insertion into the bell of the joint so that the spacer pushes the joint and relieves compression within the joint. Subsequent spacers shall be placed at six-foot intervals. 
(6)  Seal the ends of the casing with four inch brick walls, plastered with Portland cement mortar and waterproofed with asphalt roofing cement or Link-Seal Model PL or approved equal. 
(7)  All gravity sewer installations not utilizing stainless steel skids shall have the void between carrier and pipe casing filled with grout. Prior to grouting, the carrier pipe within the casing shall be pressure tested and then filled with water to prevent floatation. Grout shall be pumped through a pipe, gradually filling the void (between casing and carrier pipe) from the lower end to the upper end by slowly withdrawing the pipe as the void is filled. 
(8)  Provide all necessary bracing, bulkheads, and shields to ensure complete safety to all traffic at all times during the work. Perform the work in such a manner as to not permanently damage the roadbed or interfere with normal traffic over it. Begin the boring operation in a pit, sheeted and shored as necessary and begin at and proceed from one end. Observe all applicable requirements of state department of transportation regulations. Conduct the operations in such a manner that all work will be performed below the level of the roadbed. Coordinate and schedule all of the work with the state department of transportation. 
(9)  Complete all boring work at one particular location before boring work is started at another location. 
(10)  If, in the opinion of the city or state department of transportation the casing installation work is being conducted in an unsafe manner or in a manner detrimental to the over-passing roadway or to the safety of the traveling public, all operations of boring shall cease until the necessary corrections have been made. In the event that distress occurs to the roadway due to the boring; the contractor shall be required to submit a plan to repair the roadway. The plan must be acceptable to the state department of transportation and the city. 
(c)  Manhole installation. 
(1)  The excavation for manholes shall be sufficient to leave 12 inches in the clear between their outer surface and the embankment or the timber sheathing. Manholes shall be constructed where directed, or at the locations and in accordance with the details shown on the plans, and shall be of the Precast concrete type. Excavation in excess of the depths required for manholes shall be corrected by pouring a sub-foundation of 2,500 psi concrete. 
(2)  A Precast base section shall be installed on a firm stabilized foundation so prepared to prevent settlement and misalignment. Pipe openings shall be exactly aligned with the pipe entering and leaving the manhole. 
(3)  Rubber ring joints shall be carefully made in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and generally in the following manner. Bells shall be wiped clean, be free of all dirt or other matter, and liberally lubricated for receiving the spigot ends. The gasket groove and gasket shall be well cleaned and lubricated prior to placing. 
(4)  Inverts may be formed directly in the concrete of the manhole base; be built up of brickwork and mortar; consist of half tile laid in the concrete base; or be constructed by lying full section sewer pipe straight through the manhole and cutting out the top half after the concrete base is constructed and sufficiently set. Inverts shall have a minimum of two-tenths of a foot drop from the incoming to the outgoing pipe. 
(5)  Cast iron frames and covers shall be set in a bed of mortar and aligned to fit the top section of the manhole. If the difference in the desired top of the manhole elevation and the existing elevation is greater than 12 inches, then concrete grade rings in combination with brick and mortar shall be used to adjust the top to finished grade. Adjustment of the frame and cover with brick and mortar only shall be limited to a maximum of 12 inches. If the frame and cover is cast into the precast cone section, then adjustment shall be accomplished with concrete grade rings only. The cast iron frame for the manhole cover shall be set at the elevation and anchored to the masonry. Where manholes are constructed in paved areas, the top surface of the frame and cover shall be tilted to conform to the exact slope, crown and grade of the adjacent pavement. 
(6)  Manholes on sewers not within streets or alleys shall have the top of cover 12 to 18 inches above the surrounding ground surface or as indicated on the drawings. 
(7)  Pipeline connections to manholes shall be made with rubber boots. 
(d)  Drop manholes. Where the vertical distance between incoming and outgoing sewers exceed two feet, an outside drop connection shall be constructed as shown herein. 
(e)  Service pipe. 
(1)  Service line laterals shall be connected to the collection system by full line wyes or tees on new sewers and service sables when connecting to existing sewers. Service lines shall not protrude inside the barrel of the sewer main. Service line connections to manholes shall be kept to an absolute minimum. 
(2)  Service connections shall be connected to the public sewer where shown on the plans or where directed by the city public utilities inspector. The wyes or tees shall branch as detailed with the branch sitting at an angle of 45 degrees to the horizontal. Service pipe shall be six inches in diameter. 
(3)  The workmanship for the service connection shall be equal to that specified for the main sewers. The minimum slope for service laterals shall be 1.0 percent. 
(4)  A sanitary sewer cleanout shall be constructed at the point at which city maintenance terminates. This point shall be the right-of-way line, the property line, or the easement line whichever is applicable. 
(5)  Service lateral and cleanout pipe materials shall be either SDR 26 polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe or ductile iron pipe (DIP). If the cleanout is located in a driveway, parking area, etc., then the pipe materials shall be ductile iron. 
(6)  All cleanout plugs shall be made of brass and shall be placed at grade. 
(f)  Sewage force mains. 
(1)  All sewage force mains shall be ductile iron pipe, class 50 with Polybond Plus or Protecto 401 interior coating, and the corrosion-resistant inside coating shall meet EPD corrosion-resistant standards. 
(2)  Before being placed in the trench, each section of pipe shall be carefully examined for defects and the inside of the pipe shall be swabbed clean. The bottom of the trench shall be so shaped that the pipe will have a bearing on earth along its entire length, except at the joints. The pipe shall not rest on rock at any point. 
(3)  The force mains shall be placed in the indicated locations or where shown on the drawings. It must be kept clean and open ends plugged when pipe lying is not in progress. The inside of the pipe and bell and spigot shall be cleaned before jointing. 
(4)  The force main shall be laid on a continuous upgrade to avoid air pockets. An air relief valve must be installed at the peak when a downgrade cannot be avoided. The actual location of the high points shall be confirmed using a surveyor's level. 
(5)  Upon completion, the force main shall be tested to at least 150 psi. All joints shall be inspected under this pressure and any leakage or seepage shall be corrected. 
(6)  The force main discharge shall be at the highest point in the force main unless specifically approved by the city. 
(g)  Air relief valves. Air relief valves shall be provided on the sewage force mains where indicated. Each air relief valve installation shall include the air valve, a gate valve, a discharge elbow, pipe nipples, a connection to the force main and the manhole. Air relief valves shall be installed at the high points of the force mains or the locations indicated. Each valve manhole shall be precast as specified for sewer manholes. 
(h)  Sewer line testing. 
(1)  Infiltration test. 
a.  Infiltration of groundwater into sewer lines shall not exceed 100 gallons per inch of diameter per 24-hour day per mile of sewer. 
b.  Sewers shall be tested for infiltration in the following manner: Following a period of heavy rain, a test for infiltration into the sewers shall be made using suitable weirs in manholes selected by the city with upstream sewers plugged as directed. Three measurements shall be made at one hour intervals, and the average of three measurements shall be used to compute the amount of infiltration. The city inspector shall determine whether the ground is sufficiently saturated and whether the amount of rainfall is of sufficient quantity to permit the making of the test. In the event that sufficient rain does not occur before the date set for the final inspection, the contractor will be required to conduct tests at any time during the next 90 day period following the final inspection. 
(2)  Exfiltration test. 
a.  When weather conditions will not permit infiltration testing due to low groundwater table, exfiltration tests may be used. Leakage, under a five feet head, shall not exceed 100 gallons per day per inch of pipe diameter per mile. 
b.  The exfiltration test may be required by the city in lieu of or in addition to the infiltration test. 
(3)  Air testing. 
a.  After the pipe has been installed and backfilled, the sewer may be tested between manholes by a low pressure air test. 
b.  The air test may be required by the city in lieu of or in addition to the infiltration test. 
c.  Porous pipe material may be wetted before air testing to minimize loss of air through pipe walls. 
d.  The pipe shall be filled with air slowly to a constant pressure of 4.0 psi. The pressure shall then be maintained between 3.5 to 4.0 psi for not less than five minutes. 
e.  The sewer passes if the pressure does not drop over one pound in the five minute test. If the drop is more than one pound the necessary repairs must be made and the line retested. 
f.  The sewer is acceptable if the loss of air from 4.0 to 3.0 is not less than the time shown in the following table: 

 
Lines are to be TV'd for visual inspection by the contractor with an inspector from the city present. The inspection is to be recorded and a copy of the tape given to the inspector for city records and future reference use. 
(i)  Manhole testing. 
(1)  Exfiltration test. Manholes which have been backfilled around shall be tested for exfiltration. The minimum test time duration is one hour. Manholes shall be filled with water to the top of the ring. The maximum allowable exfiltration rate is two gallons/foot of depth/24 hours/foot of manhole diameter. 
(2)  Vacuum test. Vacuum testing of manholes for water tightness may be used in lieu of the exfiltration test prior to backfilling. After temporarily plugging pipe openings and installing the vacuum base on top of the cone, a vacuum of four pounds psi shall be drawn and the vacuum pump shut off. With the valves closed, the pressure shall be monitored for a time period of five minutes. At the end of the test period. If the vacuum drops no more than one pound, the manhole has passed the test. If the vacuum drops more than one pound the manhole has failed and the necessary repairs will be made and the manhole retested. 
(3)  Vacuum test may be done per the requirements of the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 3, pt. 3), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-175—50-201. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Excavation, Trenching and Backfilling 

Sec. 50-202. - General. 
(a)  Scope. This section covers the excavation, trenching and backfilling for all water mains, sanitary sewers and service laterals up to the point of connection to the building sewer, property line, and right-of-way or back of curb as applicable. 
(b)  Density tests. 
(1)  All trenches 12 inches or wider, as measured at the top, that are within roadways, or roadway rights-of-way, parking areas and areas to be paved shall be tested for conformance to specified compaction requirements. 
a.  These trenches shall be backfilled and compacted to their full depth. 
b.  Tests shall be made within each 400 square feet of trench areas for each one foot of lift above top of conduit. Tests taken in one-foot lifts shall be staggered. 
c.  Compaction shall not be less than that of the surrounding areas or 95 percent of the maximum dry density as determined by the Standard Proctor Test. The top 12 inches shall be compacted to a minimum of 98 percent of the maximum dry density. 
d.  Backfill within the state department of transportation right-of-way shall meet all requirements as stipulated in the Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards, as published by the state department of transportation. 
(2)  All trenches 12 inches or wider, as measured at the top, that are not within roadways, or other areas to be paved shall be compacted to not less than that of surrounding areas or 90 percent of the maximum dry density. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 4, pt. 1), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-203. - Excavation. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  The contractor shall perform all excavation in accordance with the most recent OSHA standards and to the depths required or as shown on drawings. During excavation, materials suitable for backfilling shall be piled a minimum distance of two feet from the banks of the excavation to avoid overloading and to prevent slides and cave-ins. Excavated materials not required for fill or backfill shall be removed from the site. Unless otherwise indicated or specified, all excavation shall be made by open cut. No tunneling shall be done. 
(2)  Excavation shall not be carried below the designated level except where special bedding is required due to unforeseen conditions, or is specified or shown on the drawings. Excess excavation below the designated level shall be backfilled with crushed stone and tamped. Excess excavation for manholes and other structures shall be filled with crushed stone or concrete to the required elevation. 
(3)  Trenches shall be only of sufficient width to provide a free working space on each side of the pipe. To prevent excess pressure on the pipe, the maximum width of pipe trench at the top of the pipe shall not be greater than two feet more than the pipe diameter. If this maximum width is exceeded for water or sewer pipelines, the contractor shall provide class A bedding. The top portion of the trench above four feet shall be excavated with sloping sides in accordance with OSHA standards to any width which will not damage adjoining structures, roadways, pavements, utilities or private property. If it is deemed necessary to excavate trench with vertical sides then OSHA approved shoring and sheeting methods shall be used. 
(4)  All water mains shall have a minimum of 48 inches of cover above the top of the pipe or 48 inches below edge of pavement, whichever is greater. All water mains 12 inches and larger shall have a minimum of 60 inches of cover above the top of the pipe or 60 inches below the edge of the pavement, whichever is greater unless otherwise indicated by the city. 
(5)  The trench bottom shall be made to conform as near as possible to the shape of the lower third of the pipe. Excavation shall be made for joints of all pipes, and shall be of sufficient depth to permit access to the joints for construction and inspection. In no case shall the joints be used to support the body of the pipe. Bell holes shall be excavated in the trenches so as to relieve pipe bells of all loads, but small enough to insure that support is provided throughout the length of the pipe barrel. 
(6)  Unstable soil shall be removed and replaced with crushed stone, which shall be tamped. 
(7)  Ground adjacent to all excavations shall be graded to prevent inflow of water. 
(8)  The excavation of the trench shall not advance more than 100 feet ahead of the completed pipe work. 
(9)  The contractor shall remove any water accumulated during excavation, whether from ground or surface sources. 
(10)  The inspector shall be notified immediately upon encountering site conditions at variance to those indicated and any active or inactive utility encountered not indicated on the drawings. No work shall be done to correct or incorporate unforeseen conditions until written instructions are issued. 
(11)  No trenches will be permitted to be left open overnight, on weekends, or on holidays. 
(b)  Rock excavation. 
(1)  All rock encountered shall be removed six inches below the bottom grade of the trench where pipe is being laid, and the trench built back to the correct grade with suitable select material thoroughly tamped into place, unless the contractor is specifically directed to place stabilization material. In the event rock excavation is required at the location of structures, the measurements for rock excavation will be limited to the width and depth as discussed in subsection (b)(4) of this section. No extra will be allowed for bank slope. 
(2)  No payment will be made for rock excavation without the measurements of the inspector at each location. When rock is encountered it shall, at the option of the contractor, be measured by one of the following methods: 
a.  The rock shall be stripped of earth and the inspector notified and given proper time to measure the rock before blasting. 
b.  With the inspector present, the contractor shall employ a track drill or other suitable rock drilling equipment to penetrate the overburden down to solid rock. The top of the rock elevation shall be determined by measuring the depth of the drill bit below the ground surface. 
(3)  Only natural rock giving a ringing sound and which cannot be excavated with a backhoe having a bucket curling force rated at not less than 18,300 pounds (comparable to Caterpillar Model 215), and occupying an original volume of at least one-half cubic yard. Shale or rotten stone or stratified rock that can be loosened by a pick, or by trenching equipment, shall not be construed as rock. 
(4)  Rock excavation shall be measured by the public utilities department engineering inspector and shall be the average actual length times a depth equal to six inches below the grade of the trench and the width shall be considered as 24 inches greater than the nominal diameter of the pipe being laid in the trench where rock is encountered. 
(5)  Blasting shall be permitted only with written approval of the probate judge. Blasting permits for each location shall be required. Blasting shall be done with the precautions specified by the state fire marshal. 
(6)  The contractor shall notify both the city and county fire departments prior to blasting operations. 
(7)  All blasting operations and all handling, storage and use of blasting materials shall be in strict accordance with federal, state and local ordinances and regulations and shall be approved by the state fire marshal. All blasting shall be performed under the supervision of an experienced blaster having qualifications and experience acceptable to the probate judge. Exposed structures shall be protected from the effects of blasts and blasts shall be covered with suitable mats. Blasts shall be restricted to the extent that no appreciable shock will be transmitted to existing structures, pipe lines, sewers, cables or other public or private facilities. The contractor shall be wholly responsible for any and all personal injury or property damage resulting from blasting. All rock excavation shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor. 
(c)  Sheeting and shoring. 
(1)  All excavations shall be properly shored, sheeted and braced or cut back at the proper slope to furnish safe working conditions, to prevent shifting of material, to prevent damage to structures or other work, and to avoid delay to the work, all in compliance with the most recent U.S. Department of Labor Occupational Safety and Health Administration 29 CFR part 1926 Occupational Safety and Health Standards-Excavations; Final Rule. Bracing shall be so arranged as not to place any strain on portions of completed work until the general construction has proceeded far enough to provide ample strength. 
(2)  Timber sheet piles shall be sharpened in a manner which will assist in holding them in true alignment during driving and the tops shall be protected with caps or other means to prevent damage by the driving equipment. Any pieces damaged or split below the point to cutoff shall be removed and replaced with undamaged pieces. 
(3)  Sheet piles shall be carefully located and driven straight and true to the desired elevation with secure interlocking for the entire length. Damaged piling or one with faulty alignment shall be withdrawn and new piling driven properly in its place. Jetting will not be permitted. Excavation shall not be carried in advance of the sheet piling. 
(4)  In general, sheeting for pipelines shall not be driven below the elevation, the sheeting shall be cut off at the top of the pipe and the remaining sheeting left in place. 
(5)  Sheeting and bracing shall be removed as the excavation is refilled in such a manner as to avoid caving in of areas or structures. Voids left by withdrawal of the sheeting shall be carefully filled by ramming. 
(d)  Backfilling. 
(1)  No backfilling shall be done over pipelines until all pipes have been inspected and approval received from the inspector, unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(2)  Trenches shall be backfilled with earth backfill materials placed evenly around and on both sides of the pipe in six inches maximum layers and tamped until pipe has cover of not less than 12 inches above top of pipe. The remaining backfill shall be placed evenly in 12-inch layers with compaction of each layer thoroughly to the specified compaction. Water settling shall not be permitted. Any trenches where settlement occurs shall be reopened, refilled and compacted, with the surface restored to the specified grade and compaction, and smoothed off. 
(3)  Prior to backfilling at manholes, structures and other accessories, all forms, trash and debris shall be removed. Backfill material shall be symmetrical on all in eight inch maximum layers. Each layer shall be moistened and compacted with tamps. 
(4)  Where pipes are in a fill section or are projecting into fill sections, ductile iron pipe shall be provided. Where material beneath the pipe is determined by the city to be unstable, then concrete foundation supports at each joint shall be provided. Where pipe is not structurally supported, unstable material shall be removed and trench stabilization provided. A pipe bed shall be constructed of no. 57 crushed stone and be compacted to at least 90 percent of the maximum dry density, unless otherwise specified. The material shall be placed evenly in six inch maximum layers to the proper subgrade unless otherwise directed by the city. After the trench has been stabilized, normal backfill and compaction operations shall resume as specified herein. 
(5)  Prior to final acceptance of the pipeline installations, the contractor shall refill all sunken trenches and excavations to final grade. 
(6)  Earth backfill shall be free of stone and boulders. Acceptable backfill material may be from excavation or borrowed. No rock will be allowed in the backfill within a distance of six inches from the pipe or the ground surface, and rock larger than six inches in the greatest dimension will not be permitted in any part of the trench. 
(7)  Immediately after ductile iron pipe has been jointed, selected backfill material shall be placed in six inch layers along each side of the pipe and firmly tamped into place to the pipe centerline elevation. Selected backfill material shall then be placed in 12 inch layers to a depth of 24 inches above the top of the pipe and firmly tamped into place. The remainder of the trench shall be backfilled with suitable material in layers not to exceed 12 inches in thickness and each layer shall be firmly tamped into place with suitable power tamping equipment to 90 percent of maximum density determined by ASTM D698. Soil testing by an independent testing laboratory approved by the city may be required in areas where it is determined that proper compaction has not been achieved. 
(e)  Subsurface obstructions. 
(1)  The drawings indicate underground facilities or obstructions that are known to exist according to the best information available to the city. 
a.  The contractor, as required by state law, shall call the Utilities Protection Center (UPC) (1-800-282-7411) and those utilities, agencies or departments that own and/or operate utilities in the vicinity of the construction work site to verify the location of, and possible interference with, the existing utilities, arrange for necessary suspension of service and make arrangements to locate and avoid interference with said utilities. Where these or unforeseen underground utilities are encountered, the location and alignment of the new facilities may be changed to avoid interference, upon written approval from the city. 
b.  Electronic pipe and cable finder. Furnish and have available at all times an electronic pipe detector, in good working order, to locate existing pipe lines or other obstructions. 
(2)  While excavating, backfilling and laying pipe, care must be taken not to remove, disturb, or injure any existing water, sewer, or gas pipes, or other conduits or structures. If necessary, the contractor, shall sling, shore up and maintain such structures in operation, and within a reasonable time shall repair any damage done to them. Before final acceptance of the work, he shall return all such structures to original condition. 
(3)  The contractor shall give sufficient notice to the interested utility of his intention of removing or disturbing any pipes, conduits, etc., and shall abide by their regulations governing such work. In the event that any subsurface structure becomes broken or damaged in the course of the work, the contractor shall immediately notify the proper authorities, and shall be responsible for all damage to persons or property caused by such damage. 
(4)  When pipes or conduits providing services to adjoining buildings are broken during the process of the work, the contractor shall repair them at once, or if repaired by the utility involved, shall pay the utility any charges for having such repairs made by the utility. 
(5)  The city will not be liable for any claim made by the contractor based on underground obstructions being different to that indicated in these contract documents or on the plans. 
(f)  Dewatering. 
(1)  Dewater excavation continuously to maintain a water level two feet below the bottom of the trench. 
(2)  Control drainage in the vicinity of excavation so the ground surface is properly pitched to prevent water running into the excavation. 
(3)  There shall be sufficient pumping equipment, in good working order, available at all times, to remove any water that accumulates in excavations. Where the pipe line crosses natural drainage channels, the work shall be conducted in such a manner that unnecessary damage or delays in the prosecution of the work will be prevented. Provision shall be made for the satisfactory disposal of surface water to prevent damage to public or private property. 
(4)  In all cases, accumulated water in the trench shall be removed before placing bedding or haunching, laying pipe, placing concrete or backfilling. 
(5)  Where dewatering is performed by pumping the water from a sump, crushed stone shall be used as the medium for conducting the water to the sump. Sump depth shall be at least two feet below the bottom of the trench; pumping equipment shall be of sufficient quantity and/or capacity to maintain the water level in the sump two feet below the bottom of the trench. Pumps shall be a type such that intermittent flows can be discharged. A standby pump shall be required in the event the operating pump or pumps clog or otherwise stop operation. 
(6)  Dewater by use of a well point system when pumping from sumps does not lower the water level two feet below the trench bottom. Where soil conditions dictate, the contractor shall construct well points cased in sand wicks. The casing, six to ten inches in diameter, shall be jetted into the ground, followed by the installation of the well point, filling casing with sand and withdrawing the casing. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 4, pt. 2), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-204—50-229. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VI. - Site Preparation, Restoration and Related Work 

Sec. 50-230. - General. 
(a)  Scope of work. 
(1)  This section covers all work required to prepare the site for pipeline construction as well as site restoration. Also, included in this section is miscellaneous work required to complete the overall project. 
(2)  This work includes but is not limited to pavement and sidewalk removal and replacement, erosion and sedimentation control, curb and gutter removal and replacement, grassing and refuse removal. 
(b)  Project photographs. The contractor shall provide project photographs. Before beginning the work photographs shall be taken of all areas to be disturbed by the contractor's operation. Said photographs shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to the commencement of any work. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 5, pt. 1), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-231. - Materials. 
(a)  Materials to be incorporated into the work shall be new and unused, and shall conform to all applicable requirements of these specifications. Any materials installed prior to approval by the city will be subject to rejection, and will be removed at the contractor's expense. 
(1)  Asphaltic concrete and related bituminous materials for roadway construction shall conform to the requirements of state Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition. Asphaltic concrete shall be type F. Type E will not be accepted. 
(2)  Concrete for concrete pavement shall conform to the requirements for the state department of transportation standard specifications. Reinforcement for concrete pavement shall also conform to the department of transportation standards. 
(b)  Grassing and erosion control materials shall conform to the requirements outlined by the state department of transportation standard specifications, latest edition. 
(c)  Stone riprap shall be sound, tough, durable stones resistant to the action of air and water. Slabby or shaley pieces will not be acceptable. Specific gravity shall be 2.0 or higher. Riprap shall have less than 66 percent wear and tested in accordance with AASHTO T-96. Unless shown or specified otherwise, stone riprap shall be type 1 riprap. The largest pieces shall have a maximum volume of two cubic feet. At least 35 percent of the mass shall be comprised of pieces which weigh 125 pounds or more. The remainder shall be well graded down to the finest sizes. Rock fines shall comprise a maximum of ten percent of the total mass. Rock fines are defined as material passing a no. 4 sieve. Riprap size shall conform to Georgia Department of Transportation Section 805.01 Stone Dumped Riprap, Type 1. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 5, pt. 2), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-232. - Execution. 
(a)  Clearing and grubbing. 
(1)  The location of the work shall be cleared of all trees, growth, debris, stumps and other objectionable matter before trenching. Special care shall be taken not to damage any adjacent or nearby shrubbery, tree, grass, fences, walks, utility lines, drainage structure, paving or other property. The contractor shall be responsible for such damage and shall replace all such property damaged with equally new property, all to the satisfaction of the property owner. Removal of trees and permanent structures along or in the trench space shall be done by the contractor, but only as directed. All construction activity shall be confined to the limits of the easements, right-of-way or public right-of-way unless the contractor obtains legal rights to use adjacent property from the private owners concerned. 
(2)  The contractor shall clear all permanent city public utilities right-of-way and remove obstructions along the pipeline for a sufficient area to provide adequate and safe work space. All debris shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor. 
(3)  Where the tree limbs interfere with utility wires, or where the trees to be felled are in close proximity to utility wires, the tree shall be taken down in sections to eliminate the possibility of damage to the utility. 
(4)  All fences adjoining any excavation or embankment that may be damaged or buried shall be carefully removed, stored, and replaced. 
(5)  All stumps, roots, foundations and planking embedded in the ground shall be removed and disposed of. Piling and butts of utility poles shall be removed to a minimum depth of two feet below the limits of excavation. 
(6)  Do not cut trees for the performance of the work except as allowed above and as absolutely necessary. Protect trees that remain in the vicinity of the work from damage from equipment. Do not store spoil from excavation against the trunks. Remove excavated material stored over the root system of trees within 30 days to allow proper watering of the root system. Repair any damaged tree not to be removed over three inches in diameter under the direction of an experienced nurseryman. All trees and brush that require removal shall be promptly and completely removed from the work area and disposed of by the contractor. No stumps, wood piles, or trash piles will be permitted on the work site. 
(b)  Temporary erosion and sedimentation. 
(1)  Temporary erosion and sedimentation controls shall meet the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, and local soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinances. The contractor shall acquire land disturbance permits from the city and/or county engineer or other appropriate governing authority, and shall pay any fees for said permits. The contractor shall be responsible for submitting to the city and/or county sufficient documents such that the city and/or county can acquire approval from the soil and water conservation district. All fines imposed for improper erosion and sedimentation control shall be paid by the contractor. A copy of the local soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinances is available. 
(2)  Description and working drawings shall indicate controls which will ensure that drainage from job site areas which will be denuded, stripped or modified of its natural existing or artificially established stabilization or protection against erosion shall pass through some type of filter system before being discharged. These areas shall be kept sufficiently moist to control dust. 
(3)  Silt dams, traps, barriers and appurtenances shall be installed, and shall be maintained in-place until no longer needed, and then removed. Hay bales which deteriorate, and filter stone which becomes dislodged shall be replaced with new materials. Detention ponds, if constructed, shall be maintained in a condition which will ensure that unfiltered water will not leave the pond. 
(4)  Materials used in temporary erosion and sedimentation control shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Silt fence shall meet the requirements of Section 171 Temporary Silt Fence of the Department of Transportation, State of Georgia, Standard Specification, latest edition. Silt fence fabric must be on the Georgia Department of Transportation Qualified Product List. 
b.  Hay bales shall be clean, seed free cereal hay type. 
c.  Netting shall be one-half-inch galvanized steel chicken wire mesh. Netting stakes shall be either steel rod not smaller than one-half-inch in diameter or shall be fir, southern pine or hemlock. 
d.  Filter stone shall be crushed stone conforming to Georgia Department of Transportation Table 800.01H, Size No. 3. 
(5)  Clean up and grassing operations shall be maintained within 2,000 feet of the pipe laying operation and shall occur within seven days after pipe has been installed. 
(6)  Land disturbance activity shall not commence until the land disturbance permit is issued and erosion control measures are in place. 
(c)  Construction within state highway, county roads and city streets. 
(1)  All storage of materials, excavation, backfilling, pavement removal and replacement, clean up and grassing shall be in strict accordance with the applicable state, county or city regulations. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to determine the exact requirements of the authority having jurisdictions over the right-of-way and no extra compensation will be allowed the contractor for meeting such requirements. No highway, road or street shall be closed to traffic without authorization from the proper authority. The contractor shall provide suitable lights, signs, barricades and flagmen to insure the safety of pedestrian and vehicle traffic and workmen and to protect the work. 
(2)  The contractor shall coordinate the closing of any street at least 72 hours in advance with the city. Prior approval from the following agencies is required if working within their permitted or maintained right-of-way: 

 
(3)  The contractor shall provide, erect and maintain all necessary barricades, suitable and sufficient lights and other traffic control devices; shall provide qualified flagmen where necessary to direct traffic; shall take all necessary precautions for the protection of the work and the safety of the public. 
(4)  Construction traffic control devices and their installation shall be in accordance with the Georgia Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. 
(5)  Placement and removal of construction traffic control devices shall be coordinated with the department of transportation, the county and/or the city a minimum of 48 hours in advance. 
(6)  Placement of construction traffic control devices shall be scheduled ahead of associated construction activities. Construction time in street right-of-way shall be conducted to minimize the length of time traffic is disrupted. Construction traffic control devices shall be removed immediately following their useful purpose. Traffic control devices used intermittently, such as "Flagman Ahead," shall be removed and replaced when needed. When working within state highway rights-of-way, provide trained and certified flag people who have completed a training program approved by the state department of transportation. 
(7)  Existing permanent traffic control devices within the construction work zone shall be protected from damage due to construction operations. All damaged traffic control devices requiring temporary relocation due to construction shall be located as near as possible to their original position. Their original position shall be measured from permanent reference points and recorded in a permanent log prior to relocation. Temporary locations shall provide the same visibility to affected traffic as the original position. Relocated permanent traffic control devices shall be reinstalled in their original positions as soon as practical following construction in the affected location. 
(8)  Construction traffic control devices shall be maintained in good repair, clean and visible to affected traffic for daytime and night time operation. Traffic control devices affected by the construction work zone shall be inspected daily. 
(9)  Construction warning signs shall be black legend on an orange background. Regulatory signs shall be black legend on a white background. Construction sign panels shall meet the minimum reflective requirements of the department of transportation. Sign panels shall be of durable materials capable of maintaining their color, reflective character and legibility during the period of construction. 
(d)  Removing and replacing pavement. 
(1)  Remove existing pavement as necessary for installing the pipe line and appurtenances. 
a.  The contractor shall replace with like materials at his expense all pavements, walks, and driveways, removed or damaged in connection with the work. Pavement repairs shall be smooth and unnoticeable and of the same elevation as the existing paving. In the removal of pavement, the contractor shall salvage all sound and undamaged materials and store them at a convenient location for reuse in pavement replacements. Any additional new rock, concrete, asphalt or other replacement materials shall in all cases conform to the city's specifications. Pavement replacement materials shall be furnished by the contractor. 
b.  Before removing any pavement, mark the pavement neatly paralleling pipelines and existing street lines. Space the marks the width of the trench. 
c.  Saw cut asphalt pavement along the marks using a rotary saw or other suitable tool. Break concrete pavement along the marks by scoring with a rotary saw and breaking below the score by the use of jack hammers or other suitable tools. 
d.  Do not pull pavement with machines until completely broken and separated from pavement to remain. 
e.  Do not disturb or damage the adjacent pavement. If the adjacent pavement is disturbed or damaged, remove and replace the damaged pavement. No additional payment will be made for removing and replacing damaged adjacent pavement. 
f.  Remove and replace sidewalks disturbed by construction for their full width and to the nearest undisturbed joint. 
g.  Remove and replace or tunnel under any curb disturbed by construction to the nearest undisturbed joint. 
(2)  Upon completion of backfilling and consolidation of the backfill, arrange to have the compaction tested by an independent testing laboratory approved by the city. After compaction testing has been satisfactorily completed, replace all pavements, sidewalks and curbs removed. Gravel roads and drives shall meet the requirements for graded aggregate sub-base. 
a.  Pavement restoration shall meet the requirements of the regulatory agency responsible for the pavement. Obtain agency approval of pavement restorations before requesting final payment. 
b.  Obtain the city's approval of restoration of pavement not the responsibility of a regulatory agency such as private roads and drives. 
c.  Complete pavement restoration as soon as possible after backfilling. 
d.  Prior to replacing pavement, make a final cut in the pavement 12 inches back from the edge of the previous cut line. Make the cut using a rotary saw. Remove pavement and base material to a depth of ten inches below finished grade. Construct an eight-inch-thick concrete (3,000 psi) bridge the full width of the pavement cut (i.e., trench width plus 24 inches). Apply tack coat and two inches of type F asphalt when concrete has cured. 
e.  Replace all street roadway pavement, driveways, sidewalks, and curbs with the same material and to the same dimensions as existing. 
f.  Should any pavement restoration or repairs fail or settle during the life of the contract, including the bonded period, promptly restore or repair defects. 
(3)  Concrete pavement removal and replacement shall conform to the applicable sections of the state department of transportation Standard Specifications for the Construction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition. 
(e)  Railroad crossings. Railroad crossings shall be made in accordance with all requirements of the affected railroad. It will be the contractor's responsibility to obtain all requirements from the railroads and furnish all labor and materials required to fulfill such requirements. The contractor shall furnish and install the casing under the tracks with whatever material and with whatever methods and under whatever regulations are required by the railroads. 
(f)  Stream and ditch crossing. 
(1)  At all points where banks of streams or drainage ditches are disturbed by excavation or where natural vegetation is removed, carefully compact backfill and place riprap to prevent subsequent settlement and erosion. 
(2)  Place riprap a distance of not less than ten feet upstream and downstream or ten feet each side of the stream in any disturbed area. Extend riprap from one foot below streambed to top of bank. Place to conform to the natural slope of the stream bank. 
(3)  The requirements of this section apply equally to construction along side a stream or drainage ditch as well as crossing a stream or drainage ditch. 
(4)  Imbed stone riprap by hand so as to form a compact layer at least 12 inches thick. Place riprap in such a way that the smaller stones are not segregated but evenly distributed. Place chinking stones in the crevices between the larger stones so that a dense, well graded mass is produced. 
(g)  Cleaning and maintenance. 
(1)  All surplus materials, tools, and temporary structures shall be removed by the contractor. The site of construction shall be left clean, to the satisfaction of the city. 
(2)  After the work is acceptable as a whole, the contractor shall maintain the surface of the unpaved trenches, adjacent curbs, sidewalks, gutters, shoulders, street paving, shrubbery, fences, sod, grass and other disturbed surfaces for a period of 60 days thereafter. 
(3)  Should any trenches in or outside paved areas settle below grade, they shall be promptly built back by the contractor, who shall furnish select backfill material for this purpose. 
(4)  All material and labor required for such maintenance and/or repairs shall be furnished by the contractor and the work shall be done in a manner satisfactory to the city. If it becomes necessary for the city to make any repair service to pipe, settling areas, or paving, cost plus 25 percent shall be charged to the contractor. 
(5)  The contractor shall be responsible for a period of one year for faulty workmanship and materials. 
(h)  Grassing. 
(1)  The contractor shall furnish all materials for and properly restore to the satisfaction of the city, all ground surfaces irrespective of the type, which may be disturbed in the progress of the work. 
(2)  This work shall include in general but without limitation, the spreading of topsoil, seeding, fertilizing and mulching required to restore disturbed areas as necessary for the proper completion of the work as may be required, directed or as specified herein. On all sod type lawns and other improved, well established grass areas, the sod/grass shall be carefully removed kept alive and replaced after the backfilling is finished. The contractor shall also remove all spoil from such areas as quickly as possible after the excavation is backfilled, and he shall leave the premises in as good of condition as before undertaking the work. It is the intent of these specifications to place seed over all disturbed areas, to place topsoil and seed where established lawn areas existed prior to construction, and to provide for sod removal/replacement. 
(3)  The requirements of the state department of transportation Standard Specifications for the Contraction of Roads and Bridges, latest edition, shall apply insofar as they are applicable. 
(4)  When directed, areas to be seeded shall be covered with a layer of topsoil where topsoil has been disturbed by the pipe laying operation. The topsoil shall be of sufficient thickness that when spread and compacted, a minimum of four inches will be available. Furnish natural topsoil of a good condition and tillable structure. Obtain topsoil as borrow from an outside source and from piles of uniform texture, drainage, and other characteristics so as to constitute a homogeneous soil meeting the requirements of the department of transportation, and approved by the city. No existing materials may be reused in this work unless approved. Furnish topsoil free from objectionable materials such as hard clods, stiff clay, sods, hardpan, partially disintegrated stone, or other materials that are not integrally a natural component of good agricultural soils and which are harmful to or unnecessary for successful plant growth. Do not place topsoil containing frost or in muddy condition. 
(5)  Seeding shall be performed using a properly proportioned mixture of inoculated seed approved for use in zone one as detailed in the department of transportation's standard specifications. Seeding shall only be permitted during the planting season listed for zone one. All seeded areas shall be uniformly mulched immediately after seeding. 
(6)  Replace existing grassed areas with grass of similar characteristics and appearance as a minimum the specifications requirements included herein. Areas not previously grassed shall be seeded with Bermuda grass according to the planting schedule and requirement outlined in the state department of transportation standard specifications. 
(7)  The subgrade for the areas to be seeded shall be brought to a uniform grade, free of stones larger than one inch. Where topsoil is required, the topsoil shall be uniformly graded, trimmed and raked free from unsuitable material, ridges, bumps or depressions. Over this area, spread agricultural lime at the rate of 40 pounds per 1,000 square feet, and spread fertilizer uniformly on the surface of the ground at the rate of 1,500 pounds per acre. Mix the lime and fertilizer uniformly into the top four inches of the soil by suitable harrows, rotary tillers or other approved equipment. 
(8)  On all well established and sod type lawns, the sod/grass shall be cut into rolls, carefully removed, kept watered and alive and replaced after backfilling has been properly completed. 
(9)  The contractor shall be responsible for maintaining all seeded areas including mowing, watering and reseeding defective areas until a satisfactory stand of grass is accomplished and final acceptance of the work by the city is obtained. Areas showing evidence of settlement or loss of topsoil shall be rebuilt and reseeded as required. 
(i)  Temporary toilet accommodations. If deemed necessary by the city, temporary toilet facilities shall be set up to meet all city, county and state regulations. 
(j)  Disposal of refuse. 
(1)  The refuse resulting from clearing and grubbing and all other operations shall be hauled to a disposal site secured by the contractor and shall be disposed of in accordance with all requirements of federal, state, county and municipal regulations. No debris of any kind shall be deposited in any stream or body of water, or in any street or alley. No debris shall be deposited upon any private property except with written consent of the property owner. In no case shall material be left on the project, shoved onto abutting private properties, or buried in the project. 
(2)  Burning on the project site shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 5, pt. 3), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-233—50-257. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VII. - Pump Stations 

Sec. 50-258. - General. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  The contractor shall furnish all materials (unless otherwise agreed upon), labor and equipment necessary to construct the sewers, and appurtenances indicated or shown on the drawings. The work shall include all necessary diking, pumping, bailing, draining, flushing, testing and erosion and sedimentation control. 
(2)  The contractor shall so arrange his work as to cause a minimum of interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic and to protect and maintain power and telephone lines, gas and water piping, fences, building, drainage pipes and other structures, all as specified. 
(3)  The lines and grade of the sewer and the position of all manholes and other appurtenances are as shown on the drawings. The grade line as shown means the invert, or bottom of the inside of the pipe or manhole. The work shall be laid out by the contractor using bench marks and the other control points. 
(4)  The contractor shall be responsible for removing all water from excavations and trenches whether from surface or ground sources. 
(5)  Lift stations will only be permitted on a case by case basis or when gravity sewer is unavailable to the property, or as determined by the city. 
(6)  Changes to the standard specifications for sanitary sewers may be made by the city at any time. 
(b)  Related work. 
(1)  Subdivision III: Sanitary Sewerage Systems. 
(2)  Subdivision IV: Excavation, Trenching and Backfilling. 
(3)  Subdivision V: Site Preparation, Restoration and Related Work. 
(c)  Applicable specifications and standards. The latest editions of the following specifications, standards and publications setting minimum requirements for quality, safety and performance of work and materials form a part of this specification as though fully repeated herein: 
(1)  ASTM American Society of Testing Materials. 
(2)  ANSI American National Standards Institute. 
(d)  Record drawings. 
(1)  The contractor shall be responsible for maintaining a set of the approved design drawings which have been marked to reflect as-built conditions. These record drawings shall be kept at the site during working hours and shall be made available to the city inspector upon request. 
(2)  The record drawings shall show the as constructed locations of, but not be limited to, all manholes, stub-outs, service materials, cleanouts air release valves, etc. 
(3)  Appurtenance locations shall be dimensioned to three permanent fixtures or objects. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 6, pt. 1), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-259. - Execution. 
(a)  The developer shall furnish, install and dedicate to the city the entire lift station/force main system. The system will be designed by the developer's engineer (professional engineer registered in the state). The design must be reviewed and approved by the city's engineer. 
(b)  The engineer shall locate the lift station to drain the largest possible subbasin. The city will investigate the service impact associated with future city needs within the subbasin, and the potential installation of additional force mains required to serve the subbasin that will drain to the lift station. If, in the city's opinion, an additional or larger force main is to be installed concurrently with the developer's project, the engineer will design and the city's engineer must approve the design of said additional mains. Where practical, all of the force mains will be installed in parallel and in the same ditch. 
(c)  Pump stations shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Pump station located above the 100-year floodplain. 
(2)  Furnish pump head calculations and system curve. 
(3)  Furnish automatic alternation of pumps to prolong life. 
(4)  Cables into or out of the wet well sealed watertight. 
(5)  Install three-phase voltage monitors on main power feed with output alarm relay. 
(6)  Install fused disconnect on main power feed. 
(7)  Furnish wet well buoyancy calculation based on a groundwater level approximately at grade level. 
(d)  Pump stations with a capacity less than 750 GPM shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Submersible pumps: 
a.  Flygt. 
b.  Yeomans. 
c.  KSB. 
(2)  All pumps must be supplied with a certified pump test curve from the manufacturer. 
(3)  Gorman-Rupp self-priming centrifugals will only be allowed on a case-by-case basis when other pumps are not available. 
(4)  All pumps must he able to pass a three-inch solid. 
(e)  Site layout. 
(1)  A buffer may be required around each lift station site. The city, at its discretion, may require a buffer dependent on the proximity of structures, type of development, size of pump station, or other factors which may indicate a need for additional buffer. Typically, this buffer is required in residential subdivisions, and shall be indicated on the final plat. In addition, a permanent easement, dedicated to the city, shall be provided to include the required fenced-in area, with an additional six inches extending beyond the fence on all sides. A permanent 20-foot access easement, dedicated to the city, shall be provided as well. 
(2)  Earth slopes around the pump station created by fill that are steeper than 3:1 must be stabilized with riprap. All fill slopes shall be compacted to not less than 95 percent of maximum density. A certified letter of compaction shall be provided to the inspector prior to final inspection. 
(3)  A minimum four-inch concrete pad (15 feet by 15 feet minimum) shall have five percent fall away from the wet well in all directions. Concrete must extend six inches past all fence posts the full perimeter. Reinforcing steel shall be used in the slab. Asphalt is not acceptable for the pad. 
(4)  Driveway. 
a.  All pump station sites shall be provided with a paved access road on a permanent easement dedicated to the city minimum 12-foot width concrete or asphalt paving is acceptable. 
b.  If an access road is over 50 feet in length, a vehicle turnaround will be required. For access roads less than 50 feet, a required turnaround will be determined on a case-by-case basis. Access road and vehicle turnaround area to be paved shall be a 12-foot minimum width. All turnarounds shall be 20 feet outside the fence, 16 feet deep with a 15-foot radius to the driveway. Concrete or asphalt is acceptable. 
(5)  Site plan shall show finished grade contour lines (two-foot intervals) in and around lift station and access road. Spot elevations shall be provided on station pad to show proper drainage. 
(6)  Site plan shall show all existing and proposed utilities. All utility meters must be properly mounted outside a fenced station. If gas is required gas pipe must be buried underground. 
(7)  Water meter shall be set at the right-of-way. 
(8)  A copper potable water service with an acceptable double check valve backflow prevention device must be provided. A frostproof yard hydrant with 50 feet of one-inch water hose with brass nozzle must be installed. 
(9)  Provide site lighting. 
(10)  Fenced areas for all stations are to be a minimum 30 feet by 30 feet. Fences are to be installed using eight-foot-high no. 4 chainlink wire with top rails and bottom tension wires; three strands of barbed wire at the top on angled extension arms; posts in three feet of concrete spaced ten feet apart. A two-foot length of chain that can be locked with No. 2 Master lock must be provided. Provide a 14-foot-wide gate on four-inch diameter posts. 
(11)  All ground surface not intended to be paved within pump station fenced area, shall be covered with a minimum four inches of graded aggregate base. Graded aggregate base to be per state department of transportation specifications. 
(12)  Spare parts. 
a.  Provide spare air and vacuum relief valve for force main (if applicable). 
b.  Provide two extra sets of seals per model of pump, two sets of wear rings, one vacuum pump, five float switches, and one motor starter. 
c.  Provide one spare fuse of each type used. 
(13)  Wet well/check valve vault. 
a.  The wet well shall be sized to prevent excessive cycling of the pumps. Starts shall be limited to one start per ten minutes unless otherwise recommended by the pump manufacturer. Size shall be as recommended by the pump supplier and shall be a minimum of eight feet in diameter. 
b.  Hatch doors shall be sized by the pump supplier to allow adequate clearance to easily remove the pumps. Hatches shall be aluminum with stainless steel hardware suitable for 150 pounds per square feet loading. Provide cylinders to prevent hatch from slamming shut and safety netting. 
c.  Check valve vaults for all stations shall be six feet by six feet precast concrete with one 48-inch by 48-inch double leaf aluminum hatch for four-inch and six-inch piping. Vault size shall be eight feet by eight feet for piping eight inches and above. 
d.  Storage shall be provided above the high-level alarm equal to three hour at design flow. Storage volume is calculated to be that volume between the high-level alarm and the lowest point of overflow (including basement elevations regardless of backflow valves in service lines). Said storage may consist of any combination of line capacity, manhole capacity, and wet well volume. No corrugated metal pipe may be utilized for storage. 
e.  Swing check valves: 
1.  Val-Matic Swing Flex. 
2.  GA Industries, Inc., Mars, PA. 
3.  American Darling. 
4.  Approved equal. 
f.  All pump stations shall have a plug valve and capped tee installed on the force main to allow for emergency connection by portable pumps. Plug valve shall be no less than three feet outside the pump station. A valve key shall be provided to the authority. 
g.  All piping in the wet well and check valve vault is to be flanged pipe to flanged pipe. No uniflange or megaflange types will be allowed. Solid sleeve flex joint shall be used between the wet well and valve vault. 
h.  Floats and probes shall be installed at the closest accessible location. 
i.  Steps are to be removed and grouted from wet well and check valve vault before station is accepted by the authority. 
j.  Wet well and discharge manholes are to be fiberglass or to be coated with a bitumastic coating or approved equal. 
k.  All pump stations shall comply with NFPA 820. 
(14)  Electrical specifications: 
a.  Three-phase power shall be provided for all pumps. No phase converters or single-phase power allowed. The power source may be 208 voltage, 240 voltage or 480 voltage. 
b.  All conduit shall be galvanized rigid conduit or MMC with threaded couplings. No threadless couplings shall be allowed. 
c.  No conduit runs or junction boxes are to be installed inside or on top of wet well. Splicing of cables inside the wet well will not be permitted. 
d.  When main fused disconnect switch or main circuit breaker is used, it shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Be of a type that can be locked in the on or off position. 
2.  The switch shall be U.L. listed for service entrance. 
3.  The enclosure shall be stainless steel. 
4.  The switch must be mounted inside the fenced area of the station. 
e.  Pump stations shall have factory installed six-digit nonresettable elapsed time meters to show individual pump running times to the one-tenth of an hour. A similar elapsed time meter shall be included to indicate simultaneous operation of pumps to the one-tenth of an hour. 
f.  All control wiring shall be stranded. No solid wire shall be allowed. 
g.  Pump control panel enclosure shall be NEMA 4X stainless steel. 
h.  Provide one RJ-11 telephone jack in the control panel. 
i.  A surge suppressor shall be provided at the power service entrance. The surge suppressor shall have voltage characteristics to match the power service. 
1.  The surge suppressor shall be in NEMA 4X enclosure and shall provide line to line, line to neutral, line to ground and neutral to ground protection modes as applicable for the power service. 
2.  The surge suppressor shall be provided with a disconnect. Minimum surge current rating shall be 100KA per phase per NEMA LS-1. The surge suppression system shall be duty cycle tested to survive 20KV, 10KA, IEEE C62.41 category surge current with less than five percent degradation of clamping voltage. The surge suppressor shall have minimum repetitive surge capacity of 2,500 impulses per mode and 5,000 impulses per phase. Status indicating lights and form C dry alarm contacts shall be provided. 
3.  The surge suppressor shall be UL listed and labeled under UL 1449 and UL 1283. 
Acceptable manufacturers are: 
(i)  Liebert. 
(ii)  Current Technologies. 
(iii)  United Power. 
(15)  All pump stations must he provided with backup power. This back-up power can be provided by independent dual power feed or diesel generators. 
(16)  Generator specifications: 
a.  Generator shall be furnished with a one-year service contract which covers all labor and material costs for normal maintenance and emergency repairs. 
b.  The standby generator shall be rated for continuous standby duty for the stations full load demand. The generator shall be sized to run all pumps simultaneously with staggered startups or as indicated in the drawings. The engine-generator set shall be rated for continuous standby duty operating in an ambient temperature of 40 degree C. The set shall have a standby power capacity sufficient to operate all pumps simultaneously with staggered startups and pump station auxiliary loads at 0.80 power factor, and shall operate at a speed not to exceed 1,800 rpm. It shall be rated 480/277 volt, as indicated, three-phase, four-wire, 60-Hertz. 
c.  Voltage regulation from no load to rated load shall be within plus or minus four percent of rated voltage for units up to and including 25 kw and within plus or minus three percent of rated voltage for units rated 30 kw or higher. 
d.  The frequency regulation shall not exceed three-Hertz from no load to rated load. Frequency variation shall not exceed plus or minus 0.3 Hertz for constant loads from no load to rated load. 
e.  Instantaneous voltage dip for all possible sequences of load application and motor starting for loads described in conditions of service shall not exceed 20 percent of nominal voltage. 
f.  The generator and associated appurtenances shall be housed in a weatherproof sound attenuated enclosure. Quiet site soundproofing shall be provided to reduce noise to 73 db at a distance of 23 feet (seven meters) for diesel powered generators. 
g.  Generator insulation shall be class B or F. Temperature rise shall be in accordance with NEMA Standard MG-1 for continuous duty at all output ratings. 
h.  Voltage regulator shall be an automatic, temperature compensated, solid state type with a manual adjustment range of plus or minus five percent of rated voltage. Exciter shall be a solid-state, static type or brushless rotating type utilizing rotating diode rectifiers. Minimum rating of exciter shall be according to NEMA Standard MG-1. 
i.  Generator lead terminal box shall be of ample size to accept and terminate connecting cables as indicated on the drawings. Generator leads shall be furnished with terminal connectors suitable for the customers connecting cables. 
j.  The engine shall be heavy-duty compression-ignition, cold-starting diesel type arranged for direct connection to an alternating current generator. It shall be a current model of a type in a regular production by a manufacturer regularly engaged in building this type of diesel engine. Engine shall have at least a published intermittent brake horsepower rating at specified generator speed required by generator at rated full load output and shall operate without undue heating, vibration, or wear. Engine shall operate satisfactorily on No. 2 diesel fuel. 
k.  Battery charger shall be automatic, two-rate type providing for equalizing charge and continuous taper charging. Output characteristics shall match requirements of battery furnished. Provided charger suitable for operation on 120 volt, single-phase, 60-Hertz current to be rated not less than six-amp direct current. Furnish battery charger with following features: 
1.  Direct current voltage regulation: plus or minus two percent for variations in line voltage of plus or minus ten percent. 
2.  Direct current voltmeter and direct current ammeter, each with suitable scales. 
3.  Automatic current limiting to prevent overloading due to engine cranking, shorted output or reversed battery connections. 
4.  Equalize charge rate with manually set timer. 
5.  Integral protection to prevent battery discharge through charger on loss of alternating current line voltage. 
6.  Terminal block with terminals for all external connections. 
l.  The entire standby generator set shall have a five-year warranty period from the date of commissioning. 
m.  Outdoor weather-protective housing with critical grade exhaust muffler shall be installed. The housing shall have hinged side access doors and a rear control door. All doors shall be lockable. All sheet metal shall be primed for corrosion protection and finish painted with the manufacturer's standard color. Vibration isolators as recommended by the generator set manufacturer shall be provided. The generator must be mounted far enough away from obstructions to allow all doors to be opened 90 degrees. All conduits shall be installed underground. 
n.  Generator shall be supplied with all auxiliary systems necessary for operation (e.g., batteries, battery charger, block heater, convenience receptacle, enclosure light, motorized dampers etc.). The auxiliary system shall be powered from load center with adequately sized 480 1 208 1 120 V transformer, installed in the enclosure. 
o.  Generator control panel shall be mounted with vibration isolators on the unit. Instruments shall be of direct-reading type, factory mounted and factory connected. Instruments shall be accurate within three percent. Provide panel with the following instruments gauges, features and alarms: 
1.  Three position manual-off-auto switch. 
2.  Manual starting switch. 
3.  Emergency shutdown switch. 
4.  Full automatic starting from pilot device initiating start when normal power fails. Automatic cranking shall be interrupted cycle type not affected by ambient temperature with overall time limit. A total of five cranking cycles shall automatically shut down engine after a time delay. 
5.  Automatic shutdown devices with manual reset and individual indicating lights for low oil pressure, high coolant temperature, engine over-speed, and failure of engine to start. Auxiliary contacts on all aforementioned shutdown devices to operate a remote generator failure alarm. 
6.  Gauges and instruments shall include fuel gauge, running time meter, lubricating oil gauge, coolant temperature gauge, voltmeter, and ampmeter. 
p.  The standby power system shall include an automatic transfer switch according to UL 1008. Transfer switch shall be rated for 100 percent of full load and shall have short circuit current rating as indicated. Switch shall be provided with indicators for all phases of operation and be equipped with a fully programmable timer for exercising the equipment. Provide silver plated load contacts with arcing tips and arc extinguishing devices. Provide the transfer switch with an internal manual operator, with the same transfer speed as the electrical operator. 
q.  Provide the automatic transfer switch with the following features: 
1.  Full phase relay protection with three voltage sensing relays. 
2.  Starting and load transfer to alternate source on a drop to 80 percent on any phase of normal voltage or one-Hertz frequency drop. Retransfer of load to normal source when voltage of all phases is restored to 90-95 percent. 
3.  Transfer to standby generator when generator voltage and frequency are 90 percent of rated values 
4.  Adjustable time delay, zero to two minutes, on transfer from alternate to normal. After transfer to the normal source, engine generator to run for adjustable time period to zero to five minutes before shutdown. 
r.  Generator shall be load tested at 100 percent full load on site for a period of four hours using resistive load banks. Notify the authority inspector prior to test, and provide certification letter from the manufacturer. Perform functional transfer tests simulating loss and return of utility power. 
s.  Three complete sets of O&M manuals and keys shall be provided for generator and automatic transfer switch. 
t.  Generator control system must include a programmable control device (exerciser) to allow automatic start-up and test functions. Test functions can be programmed for daily, weekly or monthly testing. Connections for remote monitoring of function and failure must be provided. 
u.  Pump stations are required to have continuous standby power. Generators shall be diesel powered with 100 gallons minimum fuel storage capacity or 24-hour operating time, which ever is greater. Fuel storage shall be accomplished by the use of corrosion-resistant double wall subbase fuel tank only; no underground storage will be allowed. A leak detection device shall be provided in the interstitial space for sensing fuel leakage. The device contact shall be connected to the generator control panel terminals for telemetry. 
v.  Generators can be obtained from the following manufacturers: 
1.  Cummins-Onan. 
2.  Kohler. 
3.  Approved equal. 
w.  Generator manufacturer will provide a 60-month comprehensive warranty to include parts and labor. 
x.  Provide the manufacturer recommended set of spare parts for the generator and the automatic transfer switch. These shall include, but not be limited to, one filter for each system, two spare injectors, fuel injection pump, one fuse of each rating, and two indicating lights of each type. Pack spare parts in suitable boxes, bearing label of the content and the equipment for which it is intended. 
y.  Transfer switches shall be in a NEMA 4 X enclosure and shall be supplied by the generator manufacturer. Acceptable manufacturers are: 
1.  Cummins-Onan. 
2.  ASCO. 
z.  A generator ground grid must be provided and connected to the pump station grounding system. 
(17)  Monitoring system. Provide pump station with autodialer monitoring system in a NEMA 4X rated, stainless steel, wall-mounted enclosure complete with mounting hardware. Provide conduit stub for future telemetry connection. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 6, pt. 2), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-260—50-281. - Reserved. 
Subdivision VIII. - Standard Details 

Sec. 50-282. - General. 
(a)  The following standard details have been included to expand upon and clarify the preceding written specifications. 
(b)  Engineers, architects, land surveyors and other design professionals are encouraged to include these details on their drawings as required. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 7), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-283—50-312. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IX. - Fats, Oils and Grease (FOG) 

Sec. 50-313. - General. 
(a)  Scope. 
(1)  These regulations are designed to prevent blockages and overflows of the sewer system resulting from discharges of FOG into the city sewer system and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for all facilities emitting FOG. 
(2)  The city has authority over sizing, location, maintenance, and material of grease traps and/or interceptors located within the city and/or discharge into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  These regulations shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG discharged into the city sewer system and/or private wastewater systems, including septic tanks. 
(4)  These regulations establish quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG, which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer system causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows and blockages. 
(5)  All installations shall conform to all stipulations as outlined in the Flowery Branch Fats, Oils, and Grease Ordinance that are not mentioned in this section. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subdivision, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
25 percent rule means the requirement for FOG interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the design hydraulic capacity of the FOG interceptor. 
Architectural or historical restrictions means a building or structure in the city that has special historical or esthetic interest or value as determined by the historic preservation commission and as located within the city local historic district. 
Backflow means a reversal of normal flow in a system caused by a negative pressure (vacuum or partial vacuum) in the supply piping or other condition that reverses the normal direction of flow. 
Baffle means a retention wall three-quarters the length of the chamber nearer to the outlet. 
Best management practices means a schedule of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the sewer system. These practices may vary by site, but produce the same reductions in fats, oils, and greases in the sewer system. 
Change in operations means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures of a food service establishment. 
Compliance inspector means a person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and or disposal facilities. 
Extreme economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of these regulations that exceeds $50,000.00. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the food preparation process, that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
Fixtures means a pot sink, prerinse sink, vegetable sink, meat sink, mop sink, soup kettles, wok stations, floor drains, automatic hood wash units, garbage disposals, trash compactors, dishwashers, and any other similarly functioning plumbing fixtures. 
Flow means volume of wastewater moving in a certain direction. 
Flow control device means a mechanism installed to control flow of hydraulic levels of FOG into an interceptor. 
FOG control program means to reduce and/or control the discharge of fats, oils, and grease into the sewer system by educating and regulating food service establishments located in the city or establishments located outside the city but which discharge FOG. 
FOG interceptor means a multi-compartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
FOG manifest means a document that the state permitted transporter must provide to the FOG generator as proof of services rendered. 
FOG wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the city authorizing the food service establishment or generator to discharge wastewater into the city facilities or into the sewer system. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means any person who prepares and/or packages food or beverage for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences so long as the private residence is not used to prepare or package food or beverage for sale. Food service establishments include but are not limited to, food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, catering services, bar/tavern, cafeterias, soda fountains, institutions both public and private, mobile food vehicles (coach), wing trailers, diners, grocery stores, bakeries, coffee shops, ice cream shops, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, schools, daycare center, and all other food service establishments not listed above either fixed or mobile as are or may hereafter be recognized by the health department and/or the state department of agriculture. 
Fresh air system fixtures means a system that provides free circulation of air, which will prevent contamination from back flow or back siphonage (e.g., compartment sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, meat sinks, vegetable sinks, work stations, mop sinks, etc.). 
Generator means any person including those outside the jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city boundaries. 
Georgia State Permitted Transporter means a transporter as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Governing body or authority means the City of Flowery Branch City Council. 
Grease trap means an inside mechanism no less than 100 pounds and no more than 300 pounds in size, with baffle and flow control installed before the master trap. 
Hot flushing means a situation prohibited in the city that occurs when the FOG interceptor is too close to a hot water using device so the water does not cool sufficiently in the interceptor to allow the FOG to coagulate and float to the top and FOG is instead carried out to the sewer system. 
Limited food preparation establishment means an establishment that is engaged only in reheating or serving of ready to eat food products and as a result, discharges wastewater containing less than 100 mg/l of FOG per operating business day. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
New construction means any structure, planned or under construction, where a sewer connection permit is required by law or regulation but has not been issued by the city. 
Nonhazardous manifest means a receipt that is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of FOG, liquids, or other wastes as required by the city. 
Plumbing Drainage Institute rating means interceptors that are tested, rated, and certified in conformance with Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute and by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute. 
Public works director means the public works director of the city public works department. 
Regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city including, but not limited to: the United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IV, Georgia and Washington, DC (EPA); the state department of natural resources (DNR); the state division of public health; the state environmental protection division (EPD); or any regulatory agency or body as may be established by federal, state, or local law. 
Remodeling or remodeled means a physical change or operational change in a structure that requires an issuance of or revision to a business license or a building permit. 
Septic tank means a hollow chambered tank without a baffle, T's, and flow control to restrict FOG from entering the city's sewer system. 
Shovel inspection means a FOG compliance inspector who uses a shovel to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Sludge means any solid, semi-solid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
Sludge judge inspection means a test in which the FOG compliance inspector uses an instrument, usually a clear hollow plastic tube, to pull and measure a core sample from the FOG interceptor to determine its condition. 
Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute—PDI-G101 means a comprehensive engineering and testing program developed to establish flow rates and FOG holding capacity for uniform rating of FOG interceptors. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids within a sample. 
Visual inspection means an in-person observation by a compliance inspector to determine if a shovel inspection and/or a sludge judge inspection is necessary to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, or gaseous, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature intended for disposal. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, and/or bacteriological parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters, that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
(c)  Design criteria. 
(1)  Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,500 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,500 gallons. If the calculated capacity using one of the following formulas exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following methods and grease interceptor size shall be the larger of the two results. 
a.  Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (S) × (25) × (Hr/12) 
S = Number of seats 
Hr = Maximum hours of daily operation (include preparation and cleanup) 
b.  Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (Sum of fixture flows) × (20) 

 
(2)  Undersink or inline grease interceptor requirements shall meet Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI-G101: 

 
(3)  Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the costs to provide additional measures if required by the director. The city reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 8, pt. 1), 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-314. - Execution. 
(a)  Requirements for interceptor and specific plumbing connections. 
(1)  All food service establishments shall only introduce pretreated wastewater acceptable to the city, under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging, directly or indirectly, into the city sewer system. 
(2)  No more than 100 mg/l of FOG shall be discharged per operating business day. The FOG generator shall bear all of the expense of proving compliance with the 100 mg/l threshold. 
(3)  Any food service establishment required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an appropriately designed and adequately sized FOG interceptor that has been approved by the public works director or designee. 
(4)  The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136. 
(5)  FOG interceptors shall be connected to the food service establishment's lateral sewer line after all fixtures which may introduce FOG have been connected and shall have fresh air connected, as defined in these regulations. Fresh air fixtures include but are not limited to sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixtures, which have a potential to introduce FOG. Wastewater from sanitary sewer fixtures and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the FOG interceptor. 
(6)  FOG interceptors shall not be connected to septic tanks. 
(7)  All food service establishments that have dumpster pad/trash compactor drains on site and are connected to the sewer system shall have a separate interceptor (no less than 1,500 gallons in size) installed and functioning at all times. The sloping area to the outside drain and the drain shall be covered either by the dumpster/compactor or a canopy to prevent inflow and infiltration of rainwater. 
(8)  Any drains that lead to the sewer system including, but not limited to, trench drains, enclosed dock drains, carwash drains, elevator drains, and other similar types of drains shall have an oil water debris interceptor of no less than 1,500 gallons and no more than 3,000 gallons in capacity. 
(b)  FOG interceptor. 
(1)  All interior FOG interceptors shall: 
a.  Be a minimum of 100 pounds in capacity as defined by the Plumbing Drainage Institute; 
b.  Be made of corrosion-resistant coated metal; 
c.  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
d.  Contain properly installed and functioning baffle walls and other flow control devices necessary to achieve the appropriate retention time; 
e.  Have at least a 30-minute interior retention time before gray water is discharged into the sewer system; 
f.  Tie all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
g.  Have 15-foot distance between the FOG interceptor and the last fresh air fixture and have a proper flow control device; 
h.  Have a temperature of discharge entering the interior FOG interceptor that does not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit; and 
i.  Be Plumbing Drainage Institute rated, accessible for inspection, and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications by a licensed plumber and not a representative and/or an apprentice of the licensed plumber. 
(2)  All exterior FOG interceptors shall: 
a.  Be a minimum of 1,500 gallons in capacity; 
b.  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
c.  Be constructed of reinforced materials suitable for loadbearing and watertight to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
d.  Be precast with a minimum of 3,000 psi concrete per applicable American Society for Testing and Materials standards with four to seven percent air entrapment; 
e.  Have an invert elevation of the inlet between three inches to six inches above the invert elevation of the outlet; 
f.  Contain a properly installed and functioning baffle wall and other flow control devices necessary to achieve an adequate time for FOG to properly separate but not to exceed 24 hours; 
g.  Contain inlet and outlet T's made of Schedule 40 PVC piping and at a 90 degree angle with a minimum diameter of the inlet and outlet piping to be six inches; 
h.  Include the outlet T six inches from the manhole cover; 
i.  Include T piping of the inlet and outlet that is within 18 inches of the bottom and at least five inches above the static liquid level of the tank; 
j.  Have the FOG interceptor set level on a consolidated, stable base so that no settling or tipping of the FOG interceptor can occur; 
k.  Connect all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
l.  Have the outlet discharge line from the FOG interceptor directly connected to a sewer line tapped into the collection main; 
m.  Have solid manhole covers to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
n.  Have two or more manholes for entry to each chamber of hydraulic liquid mass; 
o.  Be accessible for inspections and have no permanent or temporary structure or container placed directly over the FOG interceptor or installed in areas subject to traffic; and 
p.  Be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(3)  The contents of any fryer oil containers shall not be mixed with any other FOG interceptor waste or any other nontoxic or toxic substances. 
(Ord. No. 404, att. A(§ 8, pt. 2), 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-315—50-331. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SHORTAGE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 50-332. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City manager means the city manager of the City of Flowery Branch or his designee. 
Egregious violation means an unauthorized usage of water, as determined by the city manager, which may impede providing water for essential services. 
EPD means the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division or its duly authorized representative. 
Essential services means health care, sanitation, cooking needs and fire protection. 
Noncompliance means having violated water usage restrictions. Noncompliance begins with the first violation and expires 12 months from the date of the first violation. 
Outdoor water usage means lawn and garden watering; noncommercial car washing; filling of private swimming pools; noncommercial pressure washing of building exteriors, sidewalks, or driveways; or any other outdoor water usage as determined by the city manager and/or the EPD. 
Violation means a usage of water other than what is authorized under water shortage management. Each day of unauthorized water usage will constitute a separate violation. 
Water shortage management is a program by which the city may restrict the usage of water by any or all users of the water system in order to protect and manage water resources. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 1, 12-5-2007) 
Sec. 50-333. - Application. 
This article shall apply to all users of the city water system. Surcharges under this article shall be provided by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 2, 12-5-2007) 
Sec. 50-334. - Purpose and public notification. 
(a)  The purpose of this article shall be to install procedures to prevent threats to public health and safety arising from periods of water shortage and drought and to prevent acts that cause, or can be reasonably expected to cause, significant imminent harm to limited water resources. 
(b)  The public shall be notified that this article is in effect through the news media and by posting notice thereof on the city's bulletin board at city hall at least 24 hours prior to enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 3, 12-5-2007) 
Sec. 50-335. - Implementing water shortage management. 
(a)  Water shortage management shall be implemented if water usage restrictions are necessary to protect water resources or provide for essential services as determined by the city manager, to be consistent with the city's approved water conservation plan or as directed by the EPD, as may be specified in the Rules of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Chapter 391-3-30, or as otherwise directed. Water shortage management shall remain in effect until all factors are relieved and shall cease when the city manager determines that an adequate supply to fulfill public needs exists. The city manager's decision shall be subject to being approved or modified by the city council at the council's next meeting. The public shall be notified of the water use restrictions in effect under water shortage management through the news media and by posting notice thereof on the city's bulletin board at city hall at least 24 hours prior to enforcement of this article. 
(b)  The city manager may authorize water usage restrictions in order to accomplish water shortage management, as necessary to protect water resources. These restrictions may be imposed on any user of the city water system. 
(c)  The city manager may authorize the following penalties, as a result of a violation, egregious violation, or continued noncompliance with the provisions of this article, in order to accomplish water shortage management, as necessary to protect water resources: 
(1)  Water shortage management surcharges for noncompliance; and 
(2)  Water service termination. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 4, 12-5-2007) 
Sec. 50-336. - Water shortage management surcharges. 
(a)  For first violation of water shortage management restrictions. For the first violation of water shortage management restrictions, water customers in noncompliance with this article shall be assessed a surcharge of $50.00. 
(b)  For second and subsequent violation of water shortage management restrictions. For a second and subsequent violation of water shortage management restrictions, water customers determined to be in noncompliance shall have water supply terminated and be assessed a surcharge of $200.00. Water supply shall not be restored until payment of the surcharge and a reconnection fee as established by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 5, 12-5-2007) 
Sec. 50-337. - Extreme cases. 
(a)  In extreme cases of loss of services, the city manager may authorize closing valves in the water distribution system. When exercising this discretion, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Make water available to private consumers from fire hydrants that are equipped to dispense water to the consumers' private containers; 
(2)  Fully consider the needs of essential services; and 
(3)  If possible, avoid the interruption of fire protection. 
(b)  When determining extreme cases, the city manager shall consider: 
(1)  Loss of service; 
(2)  Available water supply; and 
(3)  The threat posed to the public health and safety by continued water usage. 
(Ord. No. 373, § 6, 12-5-2007) 
Secs. 50-338—50-362. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIAL WATER DISTRICT 

Sec. 50-363. - Amendment to the water and sewer ordinance to provide for the creation of a special water district. 
This article shall amend the Water and Sewer Ordinance, as amended, as provided by this article, and shall create a special water district serving those tracts or parcels of land designated as tracts A, F, and G as being more particularly shown upon plats or surveys attached to this article and incorporated herein to this article by reference thereto (hereinafter referred to within this article as the special water district area). The special water district area is also more specifically identified as being all those tracts or parcels of land identified within Ordinances 124, 125, 126, and 127 of the city which were duly passed on October 7, 1996, by the city council. The city council, by amendment to this article, may expand the special water district to include areas that are similarly situated to the special water district area, and which shall be subject to the same conditions provided by this article, and any amendments thereto, and subject to the same assessments, tapping fees, and water rates, as established by this article, or any amendment thereto. The city shall only accept any distribution lines within the special water district area subject to the conditions that said lines meet the construction specifications required by the city that an easement way for said lines be dedicated to the city, and that said lines be subject to the provisions of this article creating the special water district. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 1, 7-10-1997) 
Sec. 50-364. - Factfinding establishes the need for the special water district. 
The need for the creation of a special water district has been determined by the city council after proper investigation and factfinding as to the circumstances creating the need. The city council after proper investigation, and evidence provided by the city engineer, and by representatives of the City of Gainesville, Georgia, and from other sources, finds that the following facts create the need for the creation of a special water district. The special water district area, as more specifically described by section 50-363, is presently without water service. Likewise, similarly situated tracts or parcels of land, adjacent or contiguous to the special water district area, are also currently without water service, and therefore the city council finds that the special water district area may be expanded, by proper amendment to this article, in order to include similarly situated property in the future. Part of the property of the special water district area, being a part of tract A of the special water district area, as more specifically described by plats attached to this article, and incorporated by reference thereto, is currently being developed as a residential subdivision by cold stream development. In order to develop said subdivision, the preliminary plat of which has been previously approved, the developer has a need for water service to serve each of the proposed lots within the subdivision. The city engineer has determined that due to the location of the special water district area, that should the city construct a water transmission line from its present system to this area to provide water service to the area, that there would be insufficient water pressure within said transmission line to properly operate fire hydrants within the area which would be necessary to provide proper fire service to the area. Further, the City of Gainesville, Georgia, has a water transmission line within the right-of-way of Jim Crow Road, which would be capable of providing sufficient water at sufficient water pressure in order to provide water and fire service to the special water district area. The city council further finds that it serves the interests of the taxpayers of both the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, and the City of Gainesville, Georgia, and the consumers of water service of the water utility of each entity, to avoid duplication of transmission lines and duplication of water service within the same area. The City of Gainesville, Georgia, is willing to wholesale water to the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, upon the payment of certain impact fees, and at a wholesale rate as determined by the City of Gainesville, Georgia. Therefore, in order to provide sufficient water to supply the needs of the special water district area, and to have proper water pressure in order to serve the firefighting needs of the special water district area, the city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, finds that the creation of a special water district is appropriate and necessary, in that it will allow proper water service to the special water district area, and allow those receiving the benefit of the water service to bear the cost of the water service. Therefore, the city council finds that the consumers of the water service within the special waters district should pay the tapping fees, assessments and water rates created by this article within the special water district, in order that those consumers that receive the benefit of the water service, bear the cost of the water service. The city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, further finds that it is appropriate to accept any distribution lines for water within the special water district area conditioned upon said lines meeting the construction specifications of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, conditioned upon easements for said lines being dedicated to the city, and conditioned upon said lines being subject to the requirements of the special water district created by this article. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 2, 7-10-1997) 
Sec. 50-365. - Creation of special water district. 
(a)  A special water district is hereby created, subject to the conditions of subsection (b) of this section and section 50-366, consisting of the area designated as the special water district area as provided by 50-363. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, is hereby authorized by proper resolution to expand the special water district and the special water district area to include similarly situated property, but subject to the same conditions and assessments, tapping fees, and rates provided by this article. It is the intent of the city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, to include within said special water district, any and all tracts or parcels of land, and any and all consumers of water originally provided by the City of Gainesville, Georgia, at a wholesale cost to the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, including, but not limited to, the special water district area and all future similarly situated property as determined by the city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, to the extent that any lots, parcels of land or consumers are not indicated on the plats describing the special water district area, and said land or consumers are receiving the wholesale water described herein, then said property and consumers are specifically included within said special water district. 
(b)  The creation of this special water district is subject to the following two conditions: 
(1)  The first condition is the express dedication of any distribution water lines, with said lines meeting the (construction) specifications of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, within the special water district area, and the acceptance of said distribution water lines by the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
(2)  The second condition is that said distribution water lines shall be subject to the special water district created by this article, and consumers of the water service within the special water district shall be subject to the tapping fees, assessments, and water rates for the special water district as also provided by this article. Should this article, or any part thereof, be declared invalid or unconstitutional for any reason, then the responsibility and duty of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, to maintain, repair, and replace the distribution water lines shall be invalid and void, and the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, shall be under no obligation to provide water service to the special water district area. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 3, 7-10-1997) 
Sec. 50-366. - Grant of easements along said distribution water lines. 
All owners of water distribution lines (not including the water transmission lines of the City of Gainesville, Georgia) within the special water district and the special water district area, besides constructing said distribution lines in accordance with the (construction) specifications of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, shall also grant to the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, a 20-foot easement (with the centerline of said easement being the actual location of the distribution water lines) for the purpose of maintaining, repairing and if needed, replacing the distribution water lines subject to the special water district. The grant of said easement shall also be a condition of the creation of the special water district, and the responsibility of the City of Flowery Branch to maintain, repair, and if needed, replace, said distribution lines. The owner of the water distribution lines in the grant of said easement, shall grant a perpetual easement for right-of-way to go in, upon, along, across and through the 20-foot width area along the distribution water lines for the purpose of maintaining, repairing, renewing and overlaying the distribution water lines. The City of Flowery Branch shall also have the right of ingress and egress on the land included within the easement for the purposes of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, renewing, and replacing under said land said water lines, and other necessary apparatus, fixtures and appliances; together with the right at all times to enter upon said lands for the purposes of inspecting said distribution water lines, and making repairs, alterations, and extensions thereon, thereunder, thereto and therefrom; together with the right to cut away and keep clear of said distribution water lines, all trees and other obstructions that may now or hereinafter in any way interfere or be likely to interfere with the proper operation of said distribution water lines; also the right of ingress and egress over said lands to and from said lines. To the extent that any person brings a condemnation claim as to said easements, then any judgments in favor of said person and against the City of Flowery Branch as to said easements shall be subject to the assessment procedures and being paid by said assessments of this special water district as provided by this article. All such amounts required to be paid by the City of Flowery Branch by any such judgment, including all expenses and costs incurred by the City of Flowery Branch, including attorney's fees, shall be subject to be paid by assessments as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 4, 7-10-1997) 
Sec. 50-367. - Maintenance, repair and replacement of the distribution lines. 
Subject to the terms and conditions of this article, the City of Flowery Branch is willing to accept distribution water lines within the special water district and within the special water district area, and as dedicated to it subject to the conditions of this article. The City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, agrees to use due diligence and care to maintain and timely repair said distribution lines, to the best of its ability. In the event of a leak, or in order to maintain or repair any part of said distribution lines, if it becomes necessary to shut off the water supply to said lines temporarily, then the City of Flowery Branch is authorized to close any valve in any of the mains of the water system, or at the point of delivery of the water, as may be necessary for the protection of said water works system, or to meet the exigencies of the situation. The City of Flowery Branch shall in no way be held liable or accountable for any bursting, breakage, or accident of any kind that may occur, and any resulting consequential damages therefrom, to any person or consumer of water from said lines, due to any attempt of repair by the City of Flowery Branch. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 5, 7-10-1997) 
Sec. 50-368. - Tapping fees; rate schedule; assessments. 
(a)  Each consumer subscribing to use the water service provided by the City of Flowery Branch within the special water district and in the special water district area shall pay a tapping (connection) fee of $1,400.00 times the number of taps (connections) desired for water service. This tapping (connection) fee of $1,400.00 is for the installation of a five-eighths-inch water meter. Larger meters shall have a tapping (connection) fee as follows: 

 
Larger sizes shall bear a tapping fee as agree to between the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, through its governing entity, and the applicant. The water meters shall remain the property of the City of Flowery Branch. The tapping (connection) fee is not a deposit, but is partial reimbursement to the city for its costs and expense in providing water within the special water district, a service line, a meter, and labor. All tapping fees shall be paid into the water and sewer operation fund. This section shall take precedence and govern over the Water and Sewer Ordinance of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as amended, regarding tapping (connection) fees in the special water district. 
(b)  The fee charges for water shall be as follows: 
(1)  Rate schedule for all water users: 

 
(2)  Minimum demand charges by meter size including base charge: 

 
Larger sizes subject to negotiation. 
This rate schedule shall take precedence and control over the rate schedule as set by the Water and Sewer Ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as amended, and shall control water rates within the special water district and in the special water district area. 
(c)  If necessary, as determined by the city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, each property owner or consumer or property that receives the benefit of receipt of water from the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia in the special water district may be subject to additional assessments as set by the city council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia to pay for all of its expenses incurred by the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, in providing water service in the special water district including, but not limited to, all labor charges, all equipment charges, all taxes incurred, water charges, all materials needed for maintenance, repair, or replacement, including, but not limited to, pipes, gaskets, mains, joints, cement, asphalt, culverts, and any other necessary materials, all professional fees incurred, including, but not limited to, accounting, engineering, and legal fees, all judgments against the City of Flowery Branch due to claims of condemnation due to the easements necessary for the maintenance, repair and replacement of distribution water lines, including any such costs and expenses (including attorney's fees) as to said easements, tapping, connection, and impact fees, as well as any other charges assessed against the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia by any other governmental entity, and any other costs and expenses incurred by the City of Flowery Branch as to providing water service within the special water district. The payment of the assessment shall be due at the same time as all other service charges or fees charged by the City of Flowery Branch to the property owner or consumer of the water, or to the property, unless the city council shall set a different date of payment. The assessment may appear on the service bill sent to the property owner or consumer by the City of Flowery Branch. Failure to receive notice of the assessment due shall in no way relieve the property owner, or the consumer of the water, from making payment on the due date of the other service charges and fees, as well as the assessment. Should the property owner or consumer of the water fail to pay any assessment due hereunder, the water service shall be discontinued until such sums are paid in full. Upon the failure of the property owner or any consumer receiving water to make payment of the assessment, the water service shall be interrupted, and in that event a reconnection charge shall be assessed as provided by the Water and Sewer Ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as amended, and collected with all arrearages due, including all service charges, fees and assessments, before the water service will be restored. The City of Flowery Branch shall also have any other remedy or penalty, or both, provided by the Water and Sewer Ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as amended. The city council, in its discretion, may increase or decrease the amount of the assessment in order to pay for the charges and expenses incurred by it in providing water service in the special water district. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 6, 7-10-1997) 
Sec. 50-369. - Applicability. 
All other provisions of the Water and Sewer Ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as amended, that are applicable to water service, except where in conflict with the specific provisions dealing with the special water district, shall apply and be applicable to and concerning the special water district, the area served by the special water district, and to the property owners and consumers within the special water district. However, in the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article regarding the special water district, and the Water and Sewer Ordinance for the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as amended, being applicable to water service, then the provisions of this article concerning the special water district shall be controlling only as to the area within the special water district and the property owners and consumers of water within said special water district. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 7, 7-10-1997) 
Secs. 50-370—50-396. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-397. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Sewer Use Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-398. - Purpose, scope and policy. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works (generally referred to as the city water reclamation facility). This article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to all nonresidential users; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(b)  This article also sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 4031). The objectives of this article are as follows: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; 
(6)  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination Systems permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-399. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the water and wastewater superintendent shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the water and wastewater superintendent may be delegated by the water and wastewater superintendent to other city personnel, employees, agents, contractors or representatives. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 2.1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-400. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD—Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
CFR—Code of Federal Regulations 
COD—Chemical Oxygen Demand 
EPA—U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPD—Environmental Protection Division 
GPD—gallons per day 
Mg/l—milligrams per liter 
NPDES—National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW—Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA—Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC—Standard Industrial Classification 
TSS—Total Suspended Solids 
USC—United States Code 
(Ord. No. 402, § 2.2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-401. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority means the environmental protection division, a part of the state department of natural resources. 
Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a limited liability company: a member of the company. 
(4)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his designee. 
(5)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (4) of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the entity, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471. 
Environmental Protection Agency or EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Georgia Environmental Division or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307 of the Act. 
Governing body or authority means the city council. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b) and (c), or (d) of the Act. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composted same collect, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b or c of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program, any placement assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contract (which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and contract for feasibility, engineering, and design studies) do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
Nonresidential user means users who, per the standards and specifications, are required to install sample stations in the wastewater discharge line before the wastestream reaches the main line. 
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) code means the standard used by federal statistical agencies in classifying business establishments. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock, company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or other). 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Private facility means a sewage treatment facility providing sewage disposal to property owned only by a single owner. Examples would include a facility serving a single residential property, a single industrial site, or a facility serving a mobile home park where all lots are owned by a single owner. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means absolute prohibitions against discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 50-431. 
Public facility means a sewage treatment facility providing sewage disposal to more than one property owned by different owners. Examples would include a facility serving an industrial park with several owners, or a facility serving a subdivision with separate homeowners. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means treatment works, as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Septic tank waste means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage means human excrement, toilet water and gray water (e.g., water from household showers, sinks, laundry operations, dishwashing operations, etc.). 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 GPD or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling, and broiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in this article. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Surcharge means a fee associated with any pollutant in excess of the allowable amounts defined in this article that is discharged to the city water reclamation facility. The fee is calculated based on the pounds of pollutant discharged to the POTW. Any sample found to be in excess of allowable amounts may warrant a fine in addition to being surcharged. 
Suspended solids means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Wastewater means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. 
Water and wastewater superintendent means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is in charge with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative or designee. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 2.3, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-402—50-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 50-431. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams which a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 7.6, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater than one inch in diameter; 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 87 degrees Fahrenheit (30 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case cause wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, no biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the water and wastewater superintendent in accordance with this article; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to live, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plants' effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the water and wastewater superintendent; 
(13)  Sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the water and wastewater superintendent in wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l; 
(18)  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter; or 
(19)  Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 3.1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-432. - Private sewage disposals. 
(a)  Privately owned private sewage treatment facilities, such as those serving a single residential property, industrial site, or a facility serving a mobile home park where all lots are owned by a single owner, are permitted in the city subject to the approval of the city council. All proposed private facilities that require permitting under the federal Clean Water Act shall require written approval from by the city prior to submittal of the permit application to a federal or state agency. 
(b)  Sewage treatment facilities that serve more than one property owner shall be allowed only as publicly-owned and operated systems. Any permits for such facilities shall be issued to the city as the appropriate government agency. Public facilities that are privately owned are not permitted. 
(c)  If no public sewer is available within 300 feet of the property line, the property owner may install a privately owned septic tank to treat the sewage from a single residential property of which he owns. Before commencement of construction of a septic tank, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the city and the state department of community health or its designee. 
(d)  No septic tanks will be allowed in the city at the time of the application unless: 
(1)  There is no existing public sewer within 300 feet of subject property; or 
(2)  Prior approval is given by the city council to other exigent circumstances with respect to the particular piece of property to be served. The term "exigent circumstances" is defined as something arising suddenly or out of current events; any event or occasional combination of circumstances calling for immediate action or remedy; or a pressing necessity. All fees related to the installation and maintenance of private facility or new private sewer systems are the sole responsibility of the owner and not the city. 
(e)  The type, capacities, location and layout of private facilities shall comply with all requirements of the city and/or the state department of community health. This includes the design and installation of dry sewers for all new developments located within one mile of existing or proposed public sewer lines of the city. 
(f)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private facilities in a sanitary manner, as determined by the state and county health officers and the city, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  The owner of a failed private facility or private sewer system failure must connect to the public sewer within 60 days of failure and/or receipt of written notification from the city manager or his designee and must abandon the private system and ensure no improper disposal or leakage of waste, if the property line in which the system lies is within 300 feet of a public sanitary sewer line of the city. The state department of community health or its designee is responsible for determining whether or not a private facility or private sewer system has failed. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 3.2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-433. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the water and wastewater superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment stand is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the water and wastewater superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user must obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 3.3, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-434. - State pretreatment standards. 
State pretreatment standards located at the state environmental protection division, a part of the state department of natural resources, are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. Compliance with this article does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 3.4, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-435. - Local limits. 
(a)  The following instantaneous maximum pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits: 

 
(b)  The limits listed in subsection (a) of this section apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The water and wastewater Superintendent may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. Any pollutants or amounts discharged in excess of the limits set forth in this section shall be subject to a surcharge and/or fine. All fees are specified in the surcharge resolution. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 3.5, 7-1-2009; Ord. No. 449, § I, 6-2-2011 ) 
Sec. 50-436. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 3.6, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-437. - Dilution. 
No user shall over increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The water and wastewater superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 3.7, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-438—50-457. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 50-458. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 50-431 within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the water and wastewater superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to water and wastewater superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibilities of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 4.1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-459. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the water and wastewater superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The water and wastewater superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on his property and at his expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the water and wastewater superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand. All interception units shall of type and capacity approved by the water and wastewater superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. Additional requirements for fats, oils and grease interceptors as well as outside storage areas are specified in article VI of this chapter. 
(d)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 4.2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-460. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
At least once every two years, the water and wastewater superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The water and wastewater superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the water and wastewater superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharges practices, including no routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the water and wastewater superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 50-549; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspections and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measure from containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measure and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 4.3, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-461. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the water and wastewater superintendent, and at such times as are established by the water and wastewater superintendent. Such waste shall not violate division 2 of this article or any other requirements established by the city. The water and wastewater superintendent shall require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits and provide a waste-tracking form for every load. 
(b)  The water and wastewater superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The water and wastewater superintendent may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The water and wastewater superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial wastes is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at location designated by the water and wastewater superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the water and wastewater superintendent. The water and wastewater superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The water and wastewater superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 4.4, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-462—50-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 

Sec. 50-491. - Wastewater analysis. 
When requested by the water and wastewater superintendent, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within three days of the request. The water and wastewater superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 5.1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-492. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No nonresidential users shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the water and wastewater superintendent, except a user that has filed in a timely application pursuant to section 50-493 may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The water and wastewater superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 50-601 through 50-603. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 5.2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-493. - Wastewater discharge permitting—Existing connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 30 days after said date, apply to the superintendent for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 50-495, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 60 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the water and wastewater superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 5.3, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-494. - Same—New connections. 
Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such a permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 50-495, must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 5.4, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-495. - Wastewater discharge permit application. 
All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. The water and wastewater superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 50-544(b); 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number of employees and hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the water and wastewater superintendent to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 5.5, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-496. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to ensure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry to the person who manages the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 402, § 5.6, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-497. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
The water and wastewater superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a completed wastewater discharge permit application, the water and wastewater superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The water and wastewater superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 5.7, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-498—50-517. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 

Sec. 50-518. - Wastewater discharge permit—Duration. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed one year from the effective date of the permit. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-519. - Same—Contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the water and wastewater superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed one year; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with section 50-522, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
(3)  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spilled control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the water and wastewater superintendent to ensure compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-520. - Same—Appeals. 
The water and wastewater superintendent shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the water and wastewater superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. The following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the water and wastewater superintendent fails to act within 15 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decisions must do so by filing a complaint with the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.3, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-521. - Same—Modifications. 
The water and wastewater superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permit discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.4, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-522. - Same—Transfer. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee give at least 45 days advance written notice to the water and wastewater superintendent and he approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the water and wastewater superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  Failure to provide advance written notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.5, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-523. - Same—Revocation. 
(a)  The water and wastewater superintendent may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for a good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the water and wastewater superintendent in writing of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior written notification to the water and wastewater superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to section 50-522; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the water and wastewater superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey of the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.6, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-524. - Same—Reissuance. 
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 50-495, a minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.7, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-525. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
The city has the authority to regulate all entities that contribute wastewater to the POTW, including those located in neighboring jurisdictions. The city has the right to take legal action to enforce the terms of this division or to impose and enforce pretreatment standards and requirements directly against noncompliant discharges. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 6.8, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-526—50-543. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 50-544. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the water and wastewater superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the water and wastewater superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described in subsection (a) of this section shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling the analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the water and wastewater superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 50-553. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorization representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the completion date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 50-545. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 50-496. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-545. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 50-544(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the water and wastewater superintendent no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the water and wastewater superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-546. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the water and wastewater superintendent a report containing the information described in section 50-544(b)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 50-496. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.3, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-547. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the water and wastewater superintendent, but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 50-496. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the water and wastewater superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in section 50-554, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  At the discretion of the water and wastewater superintendent, the city reserves the right to sample and analyze user discharge in lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.4, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-548. - Reports of changed conditions. 
(a)  Each user must notify the water and wastewater superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 45 days before the change. The following conditions shall apply: 
(1)  The water and wastewater superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharger permit application under section 50-495. 
(2)  The water and wastewater superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 50-497 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 50-521 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(b)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of five percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.5, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-549. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the water and wastewater superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the water and wastewater superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measure to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in event of a discharge described in subsection (a) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.6, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-550. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the water and wastewater superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the water and wastewater superintendent within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the water and wastewater superintendent monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the water and wastewater superintendent samples between the user's initial sampling a when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.7, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-551. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  The city prohibits the discharge of hazardous waste to the sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the water and wastewater superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: as identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 108 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 50-548. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring and reporting requirements of sections 50-544, 50-546, and 50-547. 
(c)  Discharges are exempt from the requirements of subsection (a) of this section during a calendar month in which a user discharges no more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(d)  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as hazardous waste, the user must notify the water and wastewater superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(e)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(f)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.8, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-552. - Analytical requirements. 
All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in questions, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.9, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-553. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling as infeasible, the water and wastewater superintendent may authorize the user of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(c)  At the discretion of the water and wastewater superintendent, the city reserves the right to sample and analyze user discharge in lieu of requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.10, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-554. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United State Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.11, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-555. - Recordkeeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person taking the samples; the dates analysis were performed; who performed the analysis; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analysis. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user of the city sanitary sewer system, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the water and wastewater superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 7.12, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-556—50-573. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 50-574. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling. 
(a)  The compliance inspectors shall inspect user establishments on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis. All user establishments may be inspected four or more times per year. Inspection shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of pollutants that would exceed the instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits in section 50-435. Inspection shall include all fixtures, equipment, processing, and internal and exterior storage areas, and shall include a review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from a facility. The water and wastewater superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this division and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the water and wastewater superintendent access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(b)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the water and wastewater superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(c)  The water and wastewater superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(d)  The water and wastewater superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expenses. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated 98 percent to ensure their accuracy. 
(e)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the water and wastewater superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(f)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the water and wastewater superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 8.1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-575. - Search warrants. 
If the water and wastewater superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit to order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the water and wastewater superintendent may seek issuance of a (search warrant from the appropriate court holding jurisdiction). 
(Ord. No. 402, § 8.2, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-576—50-598. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 50-599. - Confidential information. 
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring program, and from the water and wastewater superintendent inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the water and wastewater superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, process, or methods of production entitled to protection as tread secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for users related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 9, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-600. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
The water and wastewater superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, where in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOC, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the water and wastewater superintendent believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that have caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or have resulted in the water and wastewater superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation which the water and wastewater superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation of implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 10, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-601. - Notice to comply letters, fines and schedules. 
(a)  Notice to comply (NTC), notice of violation and fines. 
(1)  If the water and wastewater superintendent determines that the user is not meeting the requirements set forth in this division, he shall immediately issue to the owner/operator of the establishment a certified notice to comply (NTC). The NTC shall include a description of the any deficiencies, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Failure to report changes in operation or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
b.  Failure to properly maintain the interconnections and interceptor as applicable; 
c.  Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; 
d.  Failure to obtain or renew the discharge permit in a timely manner; 
e.  Failure to properly maintain storage areas and equipment resulting in release of potential illicit discharges to the municipal separate stormwater system (MS4) or nearby streams; or 
f.  Any other violations of this division or state law that requires correction by the user establishment. 
(2)  The NTC shall also include an immediate course of action the user shall be required to take to come into compliance. The NTC may include a mandatory compliance schedule to which the user establishment must comply or be subject to additional enforcement such as fines and/or have their permit revoked. Failure to comply with the NTC will result in the issuance of a notice of violation (NOV) and the user will have five days to become compliant or be issued a fine. If the user establishment has not complied with the terms of the NOV, a second NOV will be issued along with a fine. If the establishment does not comply with the terms of the second NOV, a third NOV and fine will be issued by the compliance inspector along with additional actions may be taken up to and including the withholding of utility services. 
(b)  Amounts due paid in full. The city shall not issue a wastewater discharge permit until such time as all amounts owed by the user to the city, due are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the water and wastewater director may issue an order suspending or revoking the wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  Compliance schedule and retrofit of interconnections/storage areas. Upon determination that a user establishment is noncompliant with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of these regulations, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install pretreatment facilities, the water and wastewater superintendent may also issue and require the establishment to abide by a compliance schedule. The issuance of a compliance schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, requirements for installation of a pretreatment facility, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, installation of covers, berms and wastewater connections to the public sewer system, payment of fees, and/or other provisions to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(d)  Fees. The water and wastewater superintendent shall not issue a wastewater discharge permit until such time as all amounts owed by the food service establishment to the city, are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the water and wastewater superintendent may issue an order suspending or revoking the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 11, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-602. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Permit suspension and revocation. The water and wastewater superintendent may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that an establishment: 
(1)  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a noncompliance letter or compliance schedule order; 
(2)  Destroys, removes, conceals, or knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city; 
(3)  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with these regulations; 
(4)  Falsifies, tampers with, destroys, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to these regulations; 
(6)  Causes interference, a sewer blockage, or a sanitary sewer overflow in the sewer system, violates maintenance requirements, violates any condition or limit of its wastewater discharge permit, or violates any provision of these regulations; or 
(7)  Refuses to accept a notice by personal service or certified mail. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  When the water and wastewater superintendent has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension or revocation, he shall review findings and give written notice thereof by certified mail to the user setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds for suspension or revocation deemed to exist. 
(2)  Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the water and wastewater superintendent becoming final, the user shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing prohibited pollutants or amounts directly or indirectly into the city sewer system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the establishment. Any owner or responsible management employee of the user establishment shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. Upon an order of revocation by the water and wastewater superintendent becoming final, the user shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing prohibited pollutants or amounts directly or indirectly to the city sewer system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the establishment. 
(3)  An order of permit suspension or revocation issued by the city shall be final in all respects on the 16th day after it is mailed to the establishment. 
(c)  Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations of the sewer system. Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer lockage, sanitary sewer overflows, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city sewer system and/or equipment, or to the operation of those facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for all costs required to clean and/or repair the facilities and/or equipment, together with expenses incurred by the city to resume normal operations. A service charge of 25 percent of the city costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the city for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and recordkeeping. The total amount shall be payable within 45 days of invoicing by the city. Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines (not less than $500.00 per occurrence), penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(d)  Termination of water service to the user establishment. The city, by order of the city manager or his designee, may physically terminate water service to any property as follows: 
(1)  If so ordered in any order of suspension or revocation of a permit or upon the failure of a person not holding a valid wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the city sewer system after the issuance of a final order or suspension or revocation; and 
(2)  All costs for physical termination of the water service shall be paid by the owner or operator of the user establishment as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(e)  Emergency suspension order. The city may, by order of the city manager or his designee, suspend water service when the water and wastewater superintendent determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause sanitary sewer overflows, sewer blockages, interference to the city sewer facilities, or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any user notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing prohibited pollutants or amounts to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 12, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-603. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the water and wastewater superintendent may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the city council, and shall be entitled to a hearing before the council within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city council, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 13, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-604. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by these regulations, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with this article. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon a second conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the municipal court of the city. 
(c)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $1,000.00 in addition to a maximum of six months in jail and any other penalty or punishment imposed by the municipal court of the city. 
(d)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by its Charter, this article, state law, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 14, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-605. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The water and wastewater superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the water and wastewater superintendent to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The water and wastewater superintendent may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this article, a previous wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the water and wastewater superintendent. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of the adopted International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC), zoning ordinance and/or any other local code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 15, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-606. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. For the purposes of this section, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(1)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (b) of this section are met. 
(2)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the water and wastewater superintendent within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days; 
d.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
e.  The period of noncompliance including exact dates and times of, if not correct, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
f.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(3)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(4)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination of any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(5)  Users shall control production of all discharges, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 50-431 or the specific prohibitions in section 50-431(b) if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purpose of this section: 
a.  The term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are subject to the following provisions: 
a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior written notice to the water and wastewater superintendent, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit verbal notice to the water and wastewater superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; the steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. Water and wastewater superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-cause basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(3)  If the bypass is prohibited, and the water and wastewater superintendent may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavailable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (c)(2) of this section. 
(4)  The water and wastewater superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the water and wastewater superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions described in subsection (3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 16, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-607. - Wastewater treatment rates. 
Wastewater treatment rates shall be in an amount as established by resolution of the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 17, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-608. - Payment of charges. 
(a)  Each applicant requiring a wastewater discharge permit shall pay a fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. Said fee shall be included in the monthly sewer bill. 
(b)  The city may adopt reasonable fees by resolution of the city council for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such application; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Surcharge fees and/or fines; and 
(6)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(c)  All fees established by these regulations are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing, or if personally delivered, the date of delivery. Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 90 days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 402, § 18, 7-1-2009) 
Secs. 50-609—50-634. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FATS, OILS AND GREASE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 50-635. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Fats, Oils, and Grease Regulations of the city. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 1, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-636. - Purpose, scope, and policy. 
(a)  These regulations are designed to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of the city sewer system while preventing blockages and overflows of said sewer system resulting from discharges of FOG into the city sewer system and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for all facilities emitting FOG. 
(b)  By enactment of these regulations, the city intends to exercise its authority over sizing, location, maintenance, and material of grease traps and/or interceptors located within the city and/or which discharge into the city sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  The provisions of these regulations shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG discharged into the city sewer system and/or private wastewater systems, including septic tanks. 
(d)  These regulations establish quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG, which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer system causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows and blockages. 
(e)  These regulations may be supplemented by the regulations set forth in article V of this chapter, the Sewer Use Ordinance (Ordinance No. 402). 
(Ord. No. 403, § 2, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-637. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to water quality shall be as defined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in the city's adopted building codes and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the adopted state building codes. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
25-percent rule means the requirement for FOG interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG solids accumulation does not exceed 25 percent of the design hydraulic capacity of the FOG interceptor. 
Architectural or historical restrictions means a building or structure in the city that has special historical or aesthetic interest or value as determined by the historic preservation commission and as located within the city local historic district. 
Backflow means a reversal of normal flow in a system caused by a negative pressure (vacuum or partial vacuum) in the supply piping or other condition that reverses the normal direction of flow. 
Baffle means a retention wall three-quarters the length of the chamber nearer to the outlet. 
Best management practices means a schedule of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the sewer system. These practices may vary by site, but produce the same reductions in fats, oils, and greases in the city sewer system. 
Change in operations means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures of a food service establishment. 
Compliance inspector means a person authorized by the city to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and or disposal facilities. 
Extreme economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of these regulations that exceeds $50,000.00. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a by-product of, the food preparation process, that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
Fixtures means a pot sink, prerinse sink, vegetable sink, meat sink, mop sink, soup kettles, work stations, floor drains, automatic hood wash units, garbage disposals, trash compactors, dishwashers, and any other similarly functioning plumbing fixtures. 
Flow means volume of wastewater moving in a certain direction. 
Flow control device means a mechanism installed to control flow of hydraulic levels of FOG into an interceptor. 
FOG control program means to reduce and/or control the discharge of fats, oils, and greases into the city sewer system by educating and regulating food service establishments located in the city or establishments located outside the city but which discharge FOG into the city sewer system. 
FOG interceptor means a multicompartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
FOG manifest means a document that the state permitted transporter must provide to the FOG generator as proof of services rendered. 
FOG wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by the city authorizing the food service establishment or generator to discharge wastewater into the city sewer system. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means any person who prepares and/or packages food or beverage for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences so long as the private residence is not used to prepare or package food or beverage for sale. Food service establishments include but are not limited to, food courts, food manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, catering services, bar/tavern, cafeterias, soda fountains, institutions both public and private, mobile food vehicles (coach), wing trailers, diners, grocery stores, bakeries, coffee shops, ice cream shops, lounges, hospitals, hotels, nursing homes, churches, schools, daycare center, and all other food service establishments not listed above either fixed or mobile as are or may hereafter be recognized by the health department and/or the state department of agriculture. 
Fresh air system fixtures means a system that provides free circulation of air, which will prevent contamination from back flow or back siphonage (e.g., compartment sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, meat sinks, vegetable sinks, work stations, mop sinks, etc.). 
Generator means any person including those outside the jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within the city boundaries. 
Georgia state permitted transporter means a transporter as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Governing body or authority means the City of Flowery Branch City Council. 
Grease trap means an inside mechanism no less than 100 pounds and no more than 300 pounds in size, with baffle and flow control installed before the master trap. 
Hot flushing means a situation prohibited in the city that occurs when the FOG interceptor is too close to a hot water using device so the water does not cool sufficiently in the interceptor to allow the FOG to coagulate and float to the top and FOG is instead carried out to the sewer system. 
Limited food preparation establishment (LFPE) means an establishment that is engaged only in reheating or serving of ready to eat food products and as a result, discharges wastewater containing less than 100 mg/l of FOG per operating business day. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
New construction means any structure, planned or under construction, where a sewer connection permit is required by law or regulation but has not been issued by the city. 
Nonhazardous manifest means a receipt that is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of FOG, liquids, or other wastes as required by the city. 
Plumbing Drainage Institute rating means interceptors that are tested, rated, and certified in conformance with the Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute and by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute. 
Regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of the city including, but not limited to: the United States Environmental Protection Agency, Region IV, Georgia and Washington, DC (EPA); the state department of natural resources (DNR); the state division of public health; the state environmental protection division (EPD); or any regulatory agency or body as may be established by federal, state, or local law. 
Remodeling or remodeled means a physical change or operational change in a structure that requires an issuance of or revision to a business license or a building permit. 
Septic tank means a hollow chambered tank without a baffle, T's, and flow control to restrict FOG from entering the city's sewer system. 
Shovel inspection means a FOG compliance inspector who uses a shovel to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Sludge means any solid, semi-solid or liquid de-cant subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
Sludge judge inspection means a test in which the FOG compliance inspector uses an instrument, usually a clear hollow plastic tube, to pull and measure a core sample from the FOG interceptor to determine its condition. 
Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute—PDI-G101 means a comprehensive engineering and testing program developed to establish flow rates and FOG holding capacity for uniform rating of FOG interceptors. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids within a sample. 
Visual inspection means an in-person observation by a compliance inspector to determine if a shovel inspection and/or a sludge judge inspection is necessary to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, or gaseous, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature intended for disposal. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, and/or bacteriological parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters, that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
Water and wastewater superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent of the city water and wastewater department. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 3, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-638. - Transporters of nonhazardous commercial waste. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. sets forth a permitting scheme for transporters of commercial waste and provides a regulatory method for the clean and sanitary removal of commercial waste. 
(b)  O.C.G.A. § 12-15-23 specifically authorizes local governments to enforce compliance with the provisions of the state law described in this section. O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq., as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended, is therefore adopted by reference as if set out fully in this section. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 4, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-639. - Best management practices. 
All persons disposing of FOG shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Disposal of FOG shall use all of the following best management practices: 
a.  Dispose of FOG in covered collection containers; 
b.  Place food scraps from dishes into trashcans and garbage bags and dispose of properly; 
c.  Avoid disposing of food scraps in garbage disposers to help maintain interceptor volume; 
d.  Allow FOG to cool first before it is skimmed, scraped, or wiped off of all preparation and servicing surfaces; 
e.  Prewash dishes and pans with cold water before putting them in the dishwasher; 
f.  Cover the kitchen sink drain with screening and empty debris into the garbage as needed; 
g.  Cover the floor drain with a fine screen and empty into the garbage can as needed; and, 
h.  Recycle used fryer oil. 
(2)  Disposal of FOG shall not use any of the following practices: 
a.  Pouring FOG down the drain; 
b.  Putting food scraps down the drain; or 
c.  Running hot water over dishes, pans, fryers, works, and griddles to rinse FOG down the drain (also known as hot flush). 
(Ord. No. 403, § 5, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-640. - Requirements for interceptor and specific plumbing connections. 
(a)  All food service establishments shall only introduce pretreated wastewater acceptable to the city, under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging, directly or indirectly, into the city sewer system. 
(b)  No more than 100 mg/l of FOG shall be discharged per operating business day from any limited food preparation establishment. The FOG generator shall bear all of the expense of proving compliance with the 100 mg/l threshold. 
(c)  Any food service establishment required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an appropriately designed and adequately sized FOG interceptor that has been approved by the water and wastewater superintendent or his designee. 
(d)  The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136. 
(e)  FOG interceptors shall be connected to the food service establishment's lateral sewer line after all fixtures which may introduce FOG have been connected and shall have fresh air connected, as defined in these regulations. Fresh air fixtures include but are not limited to sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixtures, which have a potential to introduce FOG. Wastewater from sanitary sewer fixtures and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the FOG interceptor. 
(f)  FOG interceptors shall not be connected to septic tanks. 
(g)  All new construction must place their grease containment structure under permanent cover (e.g., roof) surrounded by curbing that is a minimum of four inches high. In addition, all newly constructed FSEs shall have dumpster pad/trash compactor drain on site that is connected to a sanitary sewer system interceptor (no less than 1,500 gallons in size). The sloping area to the outside drain and the drain shall be covered either by the dumpster/compactor or a canopy and standard size curb to prevent inflow and infiltration of rainwater. All existing FSEs with a record of violations for ineffective management of FOG must install a connection to a properly designed sanitary sewer system interceptor and install a permanent cover (e.g., roof) surrounded by curbing that is a minimum of four inches high at the discretion of the water and wastewater superintendent. 
(h)  Any new and existing drains that lead to the city sewer system, including, but not limited to, trench drains, enclosed dock drains, car wash drains, elevator drains, and other similar types of drains, shall have an oil-water-grit interceptor of no less than 1,500 gallons and no more than 3,000 gallons in capacity. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 6, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-641. - FOG interceptor physical specifications and requirements. 
(a)  All preexisting interior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of 100 pounds in capacity as defined by the Plumbing Drainage Institute; 
(2)  Be made of corrosion-resistant coated metal; 
(3)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(4)  Contain properly installed and functioning baffle walls and other flow control devices necessary to achieve the appropriate retention time; 
(5)  Have at least a 30-minute interior retention time before gray water is discharged into the sewer system; 
(6)  Tie all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(7)  Have 15 feet distance between the FOG interceptor and the last fresh air fixture and have a proper flow control device; 
(8)  Have a temperature of discharge entering the interior FOG interceptor that does not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit; and 
(9)  Be plumbing drainage institute rated, be accessible for inspection, and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications by a licensed plumber and not a representative and/or an apprentice of the licensed plumber. 
(b)  All exterior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of 1,500 gallons in capacity; 
(2)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(3)  Be constructed of reinforced materials suitable for load bearing and water tight to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(4)  Be precast with a minimum of 3,000 psi concrete per applicable American Society for Testing and Materials standards with four to seven percent air entrapment; 
(5)  Have an invert elevation of the inlet between three inches to six inches above the invert elevation of the outlet; 
(6)  Contain a properly installed and functioning baffle wall and other flow control devices necessary to achieve an adequate time for FOG to properly separate but not to exceed 24 hours; 
(7)  Contain inlet and outlet T's made of Schedule 40 PVC piping and at a 90 degree angle with a minimum diameter of the inlet and outlet piping to be six inches; 
(8)  Include the outlet T six inches from the manhole cover; 
(9)  Include T piping of the inlet and outlet that is within 18 inches of the bottom and at least five inches above the static liquid level of the tank; 
(10)  Have the FOG interceptor set level on a consolidated, stable base so that no settling or tipping of the FOG interceptor can occur; 
(11)  Connect all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(12)  Have the outlet discharge line from the FOG interceptor directly connected to a sewer line tapped into the collection main; 
(13)  Have a solid manhole cover to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(14)  Have two or more manholes for entry to each chamber of hydraulic liquid mass; 
(15)  Be accessible for inspections and have no permanent or temporary structure or container placed directly over the FOG interceptor or installed in areas subject to traffic; and 
(16)  Be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(c)  The contents of any fryer oil containers shall not be mixed with any other FOG interceptor waste or any other nontoxic or toxic substances. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 7, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-642. - Design criteria. 
(a)  Outdoor grease interceptors shall not have a capacity of less than 1,500 gallons nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. No matter what the calculated capacity using the following formulas, the minimum interceptor size shall be 1,500 gallons. If the calculated capacity using one of the following formulas exceeds 3,000 gallons, then multiple units in series shall be installed. The size of a grease interceptor shall be approximated by the following methods and grease interceptor size shall be the larger of the two results. 
(1)  Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (S) × (25) × (Hr/12) 
S = Number of seats 
Hr = Maximum hours of daily operation (include preparation & clean up) 
(2)  Interceptor capacity (gallons) = (Sum of fixture flows) × (20) 

 
(b)  Preexisting under-sink or in-line grease interceptor requirements shall meet Plumbing and Drainage Institute Standard PDI-G101: 

 
(c)  Grease interceptor designs represent minimum standards for normal usage. Installations with heavier usage require more stringent measures for which the user is responsible and shall pay the costs to provide additional measures if required by the water and wastewater superintendent. The city reserves the right to evaluate interceptor sizing on an individual basis for facilities with special conditions, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formula. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 8, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-643. - Maintenance requirements for new and existing fees. 
(a)  The depth of FOG (floating and settled) in the FOG interceptor shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the interceptor. 
(b)  General requirements for FOG interceptors. In order to maintain FOG interceptors, all food service establishments shall remove the sludge, floating materials, solids, and wastewater, and shall scrape all excessive solids from the walls, floor, baffles, and all pipe work and shall pump interior and exterior FOG interceptors dry as set forth in these regulations and as required by the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(1)  FOG interceptors shall be kept free from any inflow/infiltration such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., as such inflow reduces the effectiveness of the FOG interceptor, thereby increasing the need for more frequent cleaning; 
(2)  To ensure that the FOG interceptor can be maintained properly, the FOG interceptor needs to be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance, function, and inspection of the interceptor; 
(3)  A state permitted transporter shall perform all maintenance of FOG interceptors. All state permitted transporters working in the city shall have an active state waste transporter's permit and the city transporters permit in the manner and form set forth by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. Transporters working in the city are required to leave a copy of a nonhazardous waste manifest with the food service establishment. Maintenance schedules may vary based on individual circumstances to protect the sewer system; 
(4)  The FOG compliance inspector has the authority to change the FOG interceptors cleaning cycles for any FOG generator at any time; 
(5)  The discharge or introduction of any additives to the sewer system is unlawful and prohibited. The direct introduction of additives into the biological agents such as enzymes, bacteria, and/for degreasing agents; 
(6)  The FOG generator shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the FOG interceptor waste by a Georgia state permitted waste transporter and maintenance of records of disposal as specified in this section. All waste removed from each FOG interceptor must be disposed of at an appropriate disposal facility designed to receive such waste; 
(7)  No FOG interceptor pumpage shall be discharged to the sewer system as otherwise prohibited in these regulations; 
(8)  Every FOG interceptor shall be required to have a state nonhazardous waste manifest. The state nonhazardous waste manifest must be complete with all information required by these regulations and state law; and 
(9)  Mechanical FOG interceptors are prohibited in the city. 
(c)  Exterior FOG interceptors. Maintenance of exterior FOG interceptors shall be performed at least once every 90 days. Skimming, decanting, and/or any reintroduction of water into exterior FOG interceptors shall not be allowed under any conditions. 
(d)  Interior FOG interceptors. Interior FOG interceptors' maintenance shall be performed once every 30 days, and all of the fresh air and/or safe way plumbing fixtures shall be connected. In-house cleaning of interior FOG interceptors is prohibited. To ensure proper FOG interceptor maintenance, interior FOG interceptors shall be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance of the interceptor. Interior FOG interceptors shall be easily accessible with a minimum clearance of 36 inches. Interior FOG interceptors are prohibited in all new development and redevelopment construction projects. 
(e)  Interior and exterior FOG interceptor records. All food service establishments shall maintain records of the date and time of all cleaning and maintenance. Every FOG interceptor manifest shall be placed in a logbook, folder, or three-ring binder notebook. This book shall be made available on demand by the compliance inspector during inspection. All records of at least three years shall be kept on-site and available or off-site but available within 24 hours. These records shall include: 
(1)  A logbook of FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device cleaning and maintenance; 
(2)  A record of best management practices being implemented, including employee training; 
(3)  Copies of records and manifests of waste transporting interceptor contents; 
(4)  Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral sewer line; and 
(5)  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the FOG interceptors. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 9, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-644. - Notification of spills by the food service establishment. 
(a)  In the event that any food service establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the food service establishment has reasonable opportunity to know that its discharge shall exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or these regulations, the food service establishments shall immediately notify the compliance inspector or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or sanitary sewer overflows, the food service establishment shall immediately notify the compliance inspector or his designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit. 
(b)  All food service establishments shall provide written notification of this oral or telephonic notification to the compliance inspector at the address specified in the permit no later than five working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)  Such notification shall not relieve a food service establishment of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor will such notification relieve a food service establishment from payment of any fees or imposition of any other liability which may be authorized by these regulations or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 10, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-645. - FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  Food service establishments proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater that contain FOG into the city sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit annually or cease ongoing operation until such permit is obtained. In addition to any other penalties authorized by law, failure to obtain such a permit shall subject the food service establishment to the potential of the disconnection of water service, until such permit is obtained. 
(b)  FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of these regulations and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by ordinance or resolution of the city council. The city in accordance with these regulations and applicable law shall have the authority to enforce the conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits. 
(c)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit shall be issued upon: 
(1)  Receipt of a complete application; 
(2)  Compliance with these regulations; 
(3)  Compliance with the applicable provisions of this article, and 
(4)  The proper installation and maintenance of a FOG interceptor that complies with the applicable provisions of this Code. In the event that the food service establishment complies with the applicable provisions of these regulations, a permit will be issued or denied within 30 days of compliance with this article. If the permit is not issued or denied within the timeframe specified herein, the permit shall be deemed issued and approved. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 11, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-646. - FOG wastewater discharge permit applications. 
(a)  All food service establishments are required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit and shall complete and file with the city prior to commencing or continuing discharges, an application for a wastewater discharge permit in a form prescribed by the city along with any applicable fees. The applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, assessor's parcel number, description of the food service establishment, operation, cuisine, service activities, and, as applicable, clients using the applicant's services; 
(2)  Whichever is applicable, the name and address of any and all principals/owners/major shareholders of the food service establishment, articles of incorporation, most recent report of the Secretary of State, and a copy of the owner's business license; 
(3)  Name and address of property owner or lessee and the property manager for the property where the food service establishment is located; and 
(4)  Any other information specified in the application form. 
(b)  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control devices, FOG interceptors, or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
(c)  Other information related to the applicant's business operations and potential discharge may be requested to properly evaluate the permit application. 
(d)  After evaluation of the data furnished, the city may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in these regulations and as otherwise determined by the water and wastewater superintendent or his designee to be appropriate to protect the city sewer system. 
(e)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit and application fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by action of the governing authority. Payment of the application permit fee must be received by the city at the time of filing the application for the permit. A food service establishment shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to any permit renewal. 
(f)  An application shall not be considered complete until all the information required by this section is provided to the compliance inspector or designee. The compliance inspector shall have 15 business days from receipt of such information to advise a food service establishment that an application is not complete. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 12, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-647. - FOG wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any of the following conditions or limits: 
(1)  Limits on discharge of FOG (100 mg/l) which may cause or contribute to sanitary sewer overflows and/or sewer blockages. 
(2)  Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of FOG interceptors and other FOG control devices. 
(3)  FOG interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule. 
(4)  Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device. 
(5)  Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices. 
(6)  Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests. 
(7)  Requirements to self-monitor the discharge to the sewer system and periodically assess and report on the condition of the sewer lateral. 
(8)  Requirements for the food service establishment to construct operate and maintain, at its own expense, a FOG control device and sampling facilities. 
(9)  Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the compliance inspector to protect the city sewer system or as specified by other regulatory agencies. 
(10)  Other terms and conditions, which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 13, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-648. - FOG wastewater discharge permit modification of terms and conditions. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be modified by the compliance inspector if there is a change in: 
(1)  The generator's current or anticipated operating data; 
(2)  The city current or anticipated operating data; 
(3)  In the requirements of regulatory agencies, which affect the city; 
(4)  A determination by the compliance inspector or his designee that such modification is required to comply with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  The food service establishment may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change and the reasons for the change. The compliance inspector shall review the request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing within 30 days of receipt of the request. 
(c)  The food service establishment shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least 45 days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, not to exceed 45 days. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 14, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-649. - Permits for new and existing facilities, grandfathering, and effective date. 
(a)  New/renovated facilities. Food service establishments, which are newly proposed, constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated, shall be required to install a properly sized, exterior-only FOG interceptor according to the requirements set forth in these regulations and such FOG interceptors shall be permitted and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the food service establishment. Interior FOG interceptors are prohibited in all new development and redevelopment projects. 
(b)  Existing facilities. The city requires all existing food service establishments to install, operate, and maintain a FOG interceptor that complies with the requirements set forth in these regulations. All food service establishments shall repair or replace any noncompliant plumbing or the existing FOG interceptor within 90 days of written notification by the city if any one or more of the following conditions exist or occur: 
(1)  The facility is found to produce any product that creates FOG as a byproduct; 
(2)  The facility does not have a FOG interceptor; 
(3)  The facility has an undersized, irreparable, improperly configured, or defective FOG interceptor; 
(4)  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by the city; 
(5)  The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership or expansion; 
(6)  The existing facility does not have plumbing connection to a FOG interceptor in compliance with the requirements of the city; or 
(7)  If a food service establishment changes its business name. 
Additional time to repair or replace any noncompliant plumbing or the existing FOG interceptor may be given by the water and wastewater superintendent on a case-by-case basis. 
(c)  Grandfathering. If an existing food service establishment is housed in a structure that because of its architectural or historical restrictions the owner will suffer extreme economic hardship in order to upgrade the existing FOG interceptor, then the establishment may keep the current FOG interceptor in place provided that all fresh air fixtures must be tied into the current FOG interceptor. In the event that any remodeling of such a food service establishment is undertaken or if the food service establishment changes ownership, then a FOG interceptor that complies with all applicable requirements of this code shall be installed unless provided a written exemption from the water and wastewater director. 
(d)  Notification of planned changes. All food service establishments shall notify the FOG Compliance Manager at least 90 days in writing in advance prior to any change of ownership, facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. All food service establishments shall submit any information requested by the city for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the food service establishment's FOG discharge to the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 15, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-650. - FOG wastewater discharge permit duration and renewal. 
FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued annually. At least 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit, the user shall apply for renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 16, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-651. - Exemption from FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment, but still must obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 17, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-652. - Nontransferability of permits. 
(a)  FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under these regulations are for a specific food service establishment, for a specific operation, and create no vested rights. 
(b)  No permit holder shall assign, transfer, or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under these regulations nor use any such permit for or on any modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. All food service establishments shall submit any information requested by the city for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the food service establishment's FOG discharge to the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 18, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-653. - Payment of charges. 
(a)  Each applicant requiring a wastewater discharge permit shall pay a fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council which shall be maintained on file with the city clerk. Said fee shall be included in the monthly sewer bill. 
(b)  The city may adopt reasonable fees, established by resolution of the city council, for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's FOG pretreatment program which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such application; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; and 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(c)  All fees established by this section are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid within 30 days of the date of mailing, or if personally delivered, the date of delivery. Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after 90 days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 19, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-654. - Inspections and authority to enforce regulations. 
(a)  Authority to inspect. 
(1)  The compliance inspector or designee shall inspect food service establishments on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis. All food service establishments may be inspected four or more times per year. Inspection of a FOG interceptor shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the city sewer system against the accumulation of FOG in an amount that would exceed the 25-percent rule. Inspections shall include one or more of the following activities: 
a.  Monitoring of wastewater discharges; 
b.  Inspection of FOG interceptors and dumpster areas; and/or 
c.  Review of FOG manifests and other records. 
(2)  Inspection shall include all fixtures, equipment, food processing, and internal and exterior storage areas, and shall include a review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from a facility through the FOG interceptor. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not to be limited to: 
a.  Failure to report changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
b.  Failure to properly maintain the FOG interceptor; 
c.  Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; 
d.  Failure to obtain or renew the FOG wastewater discharge permits in a timely manner; 
e.  Failure to properly maintain storage areas and equipment resulting in release of potential illicit discharges to the municipal separate stormwater system (MS4) or nearby streams; or 
f.  Any other violations of these regulations or state law that requires correction by the food service establishment. 
(b)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of these regulations or where the compliance inspector or designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises, a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code, the compliance inspector or designee is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform any of the duties imposed by the applicable provisions of this code. If such building, structure, or premises is occupied, the inspector shall present credentials to the occupant and shall request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure, or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law for entry and may include immediate revocation of water service. In the event of an emergency involving actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow, the inspector may access adjoining businesses or properties that share a sewer system with a food service establishment in order to prevent or remediate an actual or imminent sewer overflow. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 20, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-655. - Notice to comply letters, fines and schedules. 
(a)  Notice to comply (NTC), notice of violation and fines. If the compliance inspector determines that the FSE is not meeting the requirements set forth in this article, he shall immediately issue to the owner/operator of the FSE a certified notice to comply (NTC). The NTC shall include a description of the code being violated and the immediate course of action the food service establishment shall be required to take to come into compliance. The NTC may include can a mandatory compliance schedule to which the FSE must comply or be subject to additional enforcement such as fines and/or have their FOG permit revoked. Failure to comply with the NTC will result in the issuance of a notice of violation (NOV) including an order that the FSE must pump out the grease trap within five calendar days letter of noncompliance or be issued a fine. If the FSE has not complied with the terms of the NOV, a second NOV will be issued along with a $500.00 fine. If the FSE does not comply with the terms of the second NOV, a third NOV and $500.00 fine will be issued by the compliance inspector and grease trap will be immediately pumped out by the city's pumping contractor at the FSE owner's expense. 
(b)  FOG discharge permit. The city shall not issue a FOG discharge permit until such time as all amounts owed by the FSE to the city, due are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the water and wastewater superintendent may issue an order suspending or revoking the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  Compliance schedule and retrofit of FOG interceptors/storage areas. Upon determination that a food service establishment is noncompliant with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of these regulations, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a FOG interceptor, the compliance inspector may also issue and require the food service establishment to abide by a compliance schedule. The issuance of a compliance schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, requirements for installation of a FOG interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, installation of covers, berms and wastewater connections to the public sewer system, payment of fees, and/or other provisions to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(d)  Fees. The water and wastewater superintendent or his designee shall not issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit until such time as all amounts owed by the food service establishment to the city, due are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the compliance inspector may issue an order suspending or revoking the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 21, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-656. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Permit suspension and revocation. The water and wastewater superintendent may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that a food service establishment: 
(1)  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a noncompliance letter or compliance schedule order; 
(2)  Destroys, removes, conceals, or knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the city; 
(3)  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with these regulations; 
(4)  Falsifies, tampers with, destroys, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to these regulations; 
(6)  Causes interference, a sewer blockage, or a sanitary sewer overflow in the sewer system, violates FOG interceptor maintenance requirements, violates any condition or limit of its FOG wastewater discharge permit, or violates any provision of these regulations; or 
(7)  Refuses to accept a notice by personal service or certified mail. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  When the compliance inspector has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension or revocation, he shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the food service establishment setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the city council. The hearing date shall be not less than 15 calendar days or more than 45 calendar days after the mailing of such notice. At the suspension or revocation hearing, the food service establishment shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(2)  The written decision and order of the city council shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at the food service establishment's business address. Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the compliance inspector becoming final, the food service establishment shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly into the city sewer system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the food service establishment. Any owner or responsible management employee of the food service establishment shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. Upon an order of revocation by the compliance inspector becoming final, the food service establishment shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to the city sewer system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the food service establishment. 
(3)  An order of permit suspension or revocation issued by the city shall be final in all respects on the 16th day after it is mailed to the food service establishment. 
(c)  Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations of the sewer system. Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer lockage, sanitary sewer overflows, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to the city sewer system and/or equipment, or to the operation of those facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for all costs required to clean and/or repair the facilities and/or equipment, together with expenses incurred by the city to resume normal operations. A service charge of 25 percent of the city costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse the city for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and recordkeeping. The total amount shall be payable within 45 days of invoicing by the city. Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to the city violating its discharge requirements established by any regulatory agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by the city, including regulatory fines (not less than $500.00 per occurrence), penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(d)  Termination of water service to the food service establishment. The city, by order of the city manager or his designee, may physically terminate water service to any property as follows: 
(1)  If so ordered in any order of suspension or revocation of a permit or upon the failure of a person not holding a valid FOG wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to the city sewer system after the issuance of a final order or suspension or revocation; and 
(2)  All costs for physical termination of the water service shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food service establishment as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(e)  Emergency suspension order. The city may, by order of the city manager or his designee, suspend water service when the compliance inspector or designee determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause sanitary sewer overflows, sewer blockages, interference to the city sewer system, or may cause the city to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any food service establishment or other generator notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the city sewer system. 
(f)  Emergency suspension hearing. As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five business days following the issuance of such order, the city manager or his designee shall hold a hearing to provide a food service establishment the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The city manager or his designee shall issue a written decision and order within two business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at that food service establishment's business address. This decision shall either lift the emergency suspension order or suspend or revoke the permit subject to the suspension and revocation appeal process set forth in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 22, 7-1-2009) 
Sec. 50-657. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by these regulations, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with this article. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period, measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the municipal court. 
(c)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a 12-month period, measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than $1,000.00 in addition to a maximum of six months in jail and any other penalty or punishment imposed by the municipal court. 
(d)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit the city from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by its Charter, this article, state law, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 403, § 23, 7-1-2009) 
APPENDIX A-1 - HISTORIC DISTRICT SIGN ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Ordinance No. 441 , the historic district sign ordinance of the city, as adopted by the City Council on Sept. 23, 2010. Amendments to provisions are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be and is known and may be cited as the "Flowery Branch Historic District Sign Ordinance." 
Sec. 1.2. - Purpose and Intent. 
Signs play an important role in the attractiveness and appearance of Flowery Branch's Historic District. The design, size, number, and placement of signs contribute to the overall environment of the building, street, and district. Because signs strongly influence the perception of the establishment, building, street view, and the historic district, there is a public interest in ensuring that signs are well designed and carefully placed and properly maintained in accordance with the overall desired character of the Flowery Branch Historic District. 
This ordinance supplements existing sign regulations of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance No. 348 Article 24) with sign regulations specifically designed to ensure compatibility and pedestrian scale of all signage in the Flowery Branch Historic District. 
Sec. 1.3. - Applicability. 
This ordinance shall apply within the Historic District in the City of Flowery Branch, as designated by ordinance (Ordinance No. 376) and as may be amended from time to time. 
If a particular property is added to the City of Flowery Branch Historic District, as established in Ordinance No. 376, said property shall automatically be subjected to the requirements of this ordinance. If a particular property is lawfully removed City of Flowery Branch Historic District, as established in Ordinance No. 376, said property shall no longer be required to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
If the City of Flowery Branch designates a historic property by ordinance after the effective date of this ordinance, development within said property designated a historic landmark or historic property shall require compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 1.4. - General Provisions. 
No sign shall be permitted, erected, established, or allowed to be erected or established, within the area governed by this ordinance, unless it is in conformity with this ordinance. It shall be unlawful to erect any sign in the area governed by this ordinance unless a certificate of appropriateness is granted by the Historic Preservation Commission, except as may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to authority of this Ordinance or the city's Historic Preservation Ordinance (Ordinance No. 375) to issue certain sign permits, exemptions, and temporary sign permits without the approval of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
Sec. 1.5. - Definitions, Interpretations, and Conflicts. 
(a)  Definitions. Definitions of the types of signs and sign-related definitions shall be as defined in Article 24, Sec. 24.3, of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. Definitions of terms related to historic preservation shall be as defined in the Flowery Branch Historic Preservation Ordinance (Ordinance No. 375). Definitions of terms related to historic preservation provided in the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22 shall also apply in the administration of this ordinance and shall control in the event of a conflict in the interpretation of definitions applicable in the administration of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Interpretations of Terms Not Defined. If a particular word, term, or phrase is not defined in the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or state law referenced in this ordinance, and such term is not explicitly defined herein or implicit in the provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to interpret the meaning of the term in question using customary dictionary definitions or other appropriate means. 
(c)  Additional Interpretations. Where this ordinance uses the term "shall," it shall be considered mandatory to comply with a provision using that term. Where this ordinance uses the term "should," it shall be considered a guideline (strongly recommended but discretionary as to whether the provision using that term is complied with). In cases where an applicant wants to establish a sign in a manner that is inconsistent with a guideline or other statement using the word "should," it shall be the responsibility of an applicant to demonstrate why the guideline cannot be complied with. In this sense, guidelines can form the basis for decision-making under the terms of this ordinance and may be used to disapprove sign permit applications. Similarly, when the term "should" is used, the Historic Preservation and Zoning Administrator (whichever has jurisdiction over the determination) are authorized to waive the applicability of one or more guidelines or statements using the word "should." 
(d)  Relationship to State Law. This ordinance shall not be construed as providing authority for actions which are not specifically authorized by the Georgia Historic Preservation Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.). 
(e)  Remedy for Conflicts. In the event that this Ordinance conflicts with the provisions of the City's Historic Preservation Ordinance (Ordinance No. 375), the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. In the event of any other conflicts between this Ordinance and other municipal ordinances, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 1.6. - Relationship to Zoning Ordinance Provisions for Signs. 
(a)  Exempted Signs. Signs that are exempted by Sec. 24.7 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall be similarly exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance, and no Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for any such exempted signs. 
(b)  Prohibited Signs. Signs that are prohibited by Sec. 24.8 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall be prohibited in the area subject to this Ordinance. 
(c)  Maintenance and Removal of Signs. Provisions regarding the maintenance and removal of signs as specified in Article 24 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall continue to apply to all signs that are regulated by this Ordinance. 
(d)  Nonconforming Signs. Sec. 24.5 and Sec. 24.6 of the City of Flowery Branch zoning ordinance, regarding nonconforming signs, shall apply to signs that do not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Permitted Signs. The regulations specifying the types and numbers of signs, as provided in Article 24 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, shall be inapplicable and superseded by the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Dimensional Requirements. Height, setback, and area requirements for signs by zoning district, as provided in Article 24 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, shall be inapplicable and superseded by the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(g)  Special Event and Temporary Signage. Sec. 24.26 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall continue to apply, and property owners in the Flowery Branch historic district may apply for permits for temporary signs and special events, except that gas or air-filled advertising device shall not be allowed. 
(h)  Permits and Codes. Provisions that require a permit for signs, and the process of considering sign permits, as provided in Sec. 24.12 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, shall continue to apply. 
Sec. 1.7. - Content of Signs Not Regulated. 
The content of signs is not regulated by this ordinance, and the content of the message to be conveyed shall not be considered in making decisions pursuant to this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 2. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2.1. - Proportionality. 
Signs shall be sized in proportion to the building. Notwithstanding the maximum areas allowed under the terms of this ordinance, an individual sign may be disapproved if it is found to be excessive or non-proportional in relation to the building on which it is placed or which it serves. 
Sec. 2.2. - Sign Materials. 
(a)  Exposed surfaces of signs must be constructed of or appear to be constructed of metal, glass, stone, concrete, brick, cloth, or wood, or similar approved material. If synthetic materials are authorized, they shall have the same finished appearance as the materials specified here. 
(b)  Sandblasted wood signs are not prohibited but may or may not be considered appropriate. 
(c)  Plastic substrate, plywood or unfinished wood are not appropriate materials for signs and shall not be permitted. 
Sec. 2.3. - Professional Fabrication. 
Hand written, hand painted, hand made or other unprofessionally fabricated signs may be disapproved. 
Sec. 2.4. - Shape. 
Signs should typically be square or rectangular; provided, however, this shall not prevent the Historic Preservation Commission from approving individual signs that may be circular or some other shape, or shaped like a particular object (e.g., a sign in the shape of a shoe for a shoe store). 
Sec. 2.5. - Illumination of Signs. 
(a)  Internally illuminated signs, and internally illuminated awnings are not appropriate in the historic district and shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Neon lighting is not permitted in the area subject to this ordinance. 
(c)  No animated, flashing or electronically changeable copy signs shall be permitted. 
(d)  No colored lights shall be used. 
(e)  If signs are illuminated, they shall be externally lit. Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded or recessed so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or sidewalk (see figure). 

ARTICLE 3. - TYPES OF SIGNS PERMITTED; REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3.1. - Generally. 
Signs not specifically described in this Section shall be prohibited. For a summary of the requirements of this Article, see Table 3.1. 
Sec. 3.2. - Wall Signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall be mounted flush against the facade of the building adjacent to the front entryway of the unit (see figure). 
(b)  Appropriate locations for wall signage on buildings with more than one story shall be in the lintel space which separates the storefront from the upper floor, and the space above the transom in the storefront, where one exists (see figure). Wall signs should be located on flat, unadorned parts of the building facade, somewhere above storefront display windows (where they exist) and below second-story windows (where they exist). If the building facade or storefront has a lintel strip or signboard, the wall sign should be placed directly on it. Wall signs should be located centrally on the facade. Sign boards should not exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet in height. 
(c)  Wall signs should be attached through joints in the masonry rather than the brick itself. 
(d)  No sign shall be permitted that, when mounted flush against the facade of the building, protrudes more than six (6) inches from the facade, without the specific approval of the Historic Preservation Commission. 

  

  
;b;Table 3.1;\b;;eol;;b;Summary of Specific Sign Requirements;\b;;eol;;b;(Refer to specific sections for requirements);\b> 

 
;b;Table 3.1;\b;;eol;;b;Summary of Specific Sign Requirements;\b;;eol;;b;(Refer to specific sections for requirements);\b> 
(e)  There is a maximum of two (2) wall signs per building facade of the leasable space. 
(f)  Wall signs, individually or in total allowed, shall not exceed more than thirty (30) percent of the wall area on which they are displayed, or one and one-half (1.5) square feet per linear feet of leased building frontage of the business or establishment, whichever is greater. 
Sec. 3.3. - Canopy and Awning Signs. 
(a)  Storefront awnings (see figure) should be positioned either above the display window and below the transom window(s), or above both the display and transom windows but below the sign board area, cornice, or spandrel, where these architectural features exist. Signs should be silk-screened or sewn onto the awning fabric, and they should be placed on the valance of the awning. Signs on canopies should be located on the primary face or top edge (or front-angled or sloped part) of canopies. 
(b)  Canopy signs shall have a ground clearance of no less than eight feet above the lowest ground elevation (see figure). 
(c)  Canopy signs shall cover no more than sixty-five (65) percent of the area of the side faces (awning flaps) of the canopy and no more than forty (40) percent of the front (or front-angled or sloped) face of the canopy. 
Sec. 3.4. - Window Signs. 
(a)  Window signs (see figure) may be displayed on or in display windows on the ground floor. Window signs in upper facade windows are generally not encouraged and should be justified by the applicant. 
(b)  When window signage is provided, painting is recommended. Applied vinyl letters are discouraged but may be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(c)  No window advertising sign shall extend from one window to another. 
(d)  In no case shall any window sign be installed above the level of second floor windows. 
(e)  Window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area of the business or establishment, or 32 square feet total of window signage for any single business or establishment, whichever is greater. 
(f)  The number of window signs for any individual business or establishment is not limited by this ordinance but limitations may be imposed via the certificate of appropriateness. 

(g)  Window signs should be placed approximately three and one-half (3.5) feet above the sidewalk. 
(h)  Window signs should not extend within eighteen (18) inches from the top or bottom of the display window glass. 
Sec. 3.5. - Projecting Signs. 
(a)  Projecting signs are permissible (see figure), but the Historic Preservation Commission may restrict them if other alternatives (wall, window, door, and awning) signs are also present or proposed. If a projected sign is authorized, it shall meet the specifications of this section. 
(b)  Projecting signs are typically placed near the entry door. 
(c)  Projecting signs shall project perpendicularly from the building. 
(d)  Projecting signs shall be secured in place with a frame mount assembly. 
(e)  Projecting signs do not necessarily have to be entirely stationary; they may suspended from an awning or similar type structure or affixed to a bracket-mount to the building or structure in a manner where the sign face sways; such motion shall not make a swinging sign a prohibited animated sign. 
(f)  Any sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy (including awnings), shall be located perpendicular to the wall surface of a building. 
(g)  All projecting signs shall have a ground clearance of no less than eight (8) feet above the lowest ground elevation. 
(h)  Such signs shall project no more than thirty-six (36) inches from the building face. 
(i)  Projecting signs shall be limited to one (1) per business or establishment. 
(j)  No projecting sign shall exceed an area of nine (9) square feet per sign face. 
(k)  Projecting signs shall not be illuminated. 
(l)  If applicable, projecting signs shall obtain an encroachment permit from the City Council. 
Sec. 3.6. - Door Signs. 
(a)  Signs on doors should be located on or in the glazing of the doors. Painting of letters is preferred. Vinyl letters are discouraged but permitted. 
(b)  There shall be no more than two (2) door signs for any individual business or establishment. 
(c)  The maximum area for any individual door sign shall be one and one-half (1½) square feet. 
(d)  There shall be a maximum of three (3) square feet total area of door signs allowed for any single business or establishment. 
Sec. 3.7. - Display Boards. 
(a)  One display board shall be permitted per establishment, subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
(b)  Moveable display boards, when displayed within a window on the ground floor display boards shall not count as window signs in terms of maximum allowable window sign area. 
(c)  Display boards that are permanently placed on a wall (e.g., a wall mounted display box) shall count as wall signs in terms of maximum allowable wall sign area, but they shall not be counted in terms of the maximum number of wall signs allowed. 
(d)  Display boards shall not exceed an area of four (4) square feet per sign face. 

Sec. 3.8. - Permanent Principal Use Ground Signs. 
(a)  Ground signs shall only be permitted in the front yard of properties containing a detached, single-family residence that has been converted to office, institutional, retail, service, or commercial use, and/or a commercially designed building with an appropriate landscaped front yard area. 
(b)  The maximum height of any ground sign which may be permitted pursuant to this ordinance shall be eight (8) feet. 
(c)  Except for temporary signs permitted by the Zoning Administrator, any permanent ground sign permitted pursuant to this ordinance shall be supported by at least two (2) wooden posts, no less than four inches by four inches. However, the Historic Preservation Commission may allow single post signs and metal posts, if deemed more compatible with the building, property, and/or surroundings. 
(d)  No more than two (2) ground signs shall be permitted per property frontage. 
(e)  No ground sign shall exceed an area of thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face. 
(f)  If two ground signs are erected, the second sign shall be no larger than eight (8) square feet in area. 
Sec. 3.9. - A-Frame Signs. 
(a)  Movable sandwich signs, also called A-frame signs, may be used in the historic district, limited to one per business or establishment. 
(b)  Such sign(s) which shall be temporarily placed on the ground in front of the business, may only be used during hours the business is open, and shall be removed from the ground when the business or establishment is not open to the public. 
(c)  No such sign shall exceed a height of four (4) feet about the ground. 
(d)  No such sign shall exceed an area of eight (8) square feet per sign face. 
Sec. 3.10. - Historic Markers. 
(a)  Historic markers do not count for purposes of maximum wall signage limitations of this ordinance. 
(b)  Historic markers should be made of cast metal or other durable materials. 
(c)  They should be securely attached to the building and should lay flat against the building wall. 
(d)  They should be located at eye level and should be positioned near a building entrance or another area of high visibility. 
Sec. 3.11. - Temporary Signs. 
One temporary ground sign or wall sign per lot or per property frontage, unlighted, is permitted during the time when a space, unit, building, or land is for sale, rent, or lease, not exceeding six square feet of area, nor a height of six feet if placed on the ground. 
One additional temporary ground sign or wall sign per lot or per property frontage, unlighted, not exceeding four square feet of area, nor a height of four feet if placed on the ground, is permitted. 
Sec. 3.12. - Special Event Signage. 
Property owners in the historic district may apply for permits for special events and associated signage, as provided in Sec. 24.26 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, except that gas or air-filled advertising device shall not be allowed. 
ARTICLE 4. - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 4.1. - Applications Involving Buildings with Multiple Tenants or Uses. 
No permits shall be issued for buildings involving more than one use or tenant unless and until a uniform sign plan for the multi-use or multi-tenant building has been submitted and approved by the Historic Preservation Commission and the Zoning Administrator. The uniform sign plan shall indicate how all signage will be consistent or well coordinate in terms of lighting, colors, fonts, composition of materials, location in relation to the building, and proportions. Upon approval of a uniform sign plan, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to issue sign permits (upon application) for individual signs upon being deemed consistent with the approved master signage plan, without the need to obtain a certificate of appropriateness. 
Sec. 4.2. - Buildings with More than One Building Frontage or Facade. 
Buildings with more than one frontage or facade should generally have lesser amounts of signage on the secondary building frontage than on the primary (or most frequently used) building frontage. 
Sec. 4.3. - Criteria for Certificates of Appropriateness Generally. 
In determining the appropriateness or location of new signs proposed to be placed within the boundaries of the historic district, the Historic Preservation Commission may apply the criteria specified for certificates of appropriateness as provided by the City's Historic Preservation Ordinance (see Section 5.7 of Ordinance No. 375). 
Sec. 4.4. - Specific Criteria for Signs. 
In addition to criteria specified generally for certificates of appropriateness by the City of Flowery Branch's Historic Preservation ordinance (see Section 5.7 of Ordinance No. 375), the Historic Preservation Commission may consider the following criteria which are specifically applicable to signs: 
(a)  The size, scale and design of the sign shall be compatible with the size, scale and design of the property, building or site upon which it is to be located. 
(b)  The sign's materials shall be compatible with the period and style of the property, building or site. 
(c)  The sign's location shall not obscure any significant architectural features of the building or site. 
(d)  The sign's installation shall not irreparably damage any cornice, ornament or similar architectural detail and shall be the least damaging method feasible for the property, building or site. 
The Historic Preservation Commission is authorized to apply additional guidelines for the composition, design and placement of signs, including but not limited to a listing of typeset fonts or lettering standards, and colors, if such guidelines are adopted by resolution of the Flowery Branch City Council. 
For any sign within the area governed by this ordinance which is authorized to be administratively approved by the Zoning Administrator, the criteria established in this section and as referenced in this section may be used as a basis for making administrative decisions to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove sign permits. 
Sec. 4.5. - Signs Consistent with Uniform Sign Plans. 
Any sign permit application if consistent with an approved uniform sign plan, is exempt from individual approval by the Historic Preservation Commission, and the Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue sign permits after application, provided they are consistent with the uniform sign plan. 
ARTICLE 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 5.1. - Administration. 
This Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator, and the provisions of Article 42 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 
Sec. 5.2. - Appeals. 
Any decision by the Zoning Administrator or Historic Preservation Commission with regard to this Ordinance may be appealed pursuant to Article 39 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 5.3. - Variances. 
Variances shall be permitted to be granted upon application, in accordance with the same procedures as those specified in Sec. 24.29 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. The City Council in considering whether or not to grant variances to the terms of this Ordinance shall consider the criteria for granting sign variances as specified in Sec. 24.29 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 5.4. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
The provisions of Article 43 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall be applicable to violations, enforcement procedures, and the assessment of penalties to violations, enforcement, and penalties regarding this Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 6. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 6.1. - Repealer. 
Ordinance No. 288, City of Flowery Branch Cotton Historic and Railroad Historic Districts Sign Ordinance, adopted September 23, 2003, and all other conflicting ordinances and parts thereof are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 6.2. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 6.3. - Effective Date. 
The effective date of this ordinance shall be immediately upon its adoption by the Council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
Appendix A - HISTORIC DISTRICT ORDINANCE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 376 
AN ORDINANCE REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 225, WHICH ESTABLISHED HISTORIC DISTRICTS, AND ADOPTING A NEW ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A HISTORIC DISTRICT; DESCRIBING THE BOUNDARIES OF SUCH HISTORIC DISTRICT; LISTING EACH PROPERTY AND PROPERTY OWNER OF RECORD IN THE DISTRICT; REQUIRING A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS TO BE OBTAINED FROM THE CITY OF FLOWERY BRANCH HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION PRIOR TO ANY MATERIAL CHANGE IN APPEARANCE OF PROPERTY WITHIN THE HISTORIC DISTRICT, REQUIRING THAT THE HISTORIC DISTRICT BE SHOWN ON THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP OF THE CITY OF FLOWERY BRANCH; PROVIDING THAT PROPERTY OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS BE NOTIFIED OF THE NEED TO OBTAIN A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS FOR ANY MATERIAL CHANGE IN APPEARANCE WITHIN THE DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICT; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND FOR ALL OTHER LAWFUL PURPOSES. 
WHEREAS, counties and municipalities are authorized pursuant to the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-21 to enact ordinances providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art having a special historical, cultural or esthetic interest or value; and 
WHEREAS, the City of Flowery Branch adopted Ordinance No. 225 in 2001, which designated two historic districts pursuant to the Historic Preservation Act of 1980, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; and 
WHEREAS, the City has undertaken a thorough review of its historic preservation program, including a new historic resources survey and professional recommendations that the boundaries of the historic districts established by Ordinance No. 225 be reconstituted in a manner that combines the two historic districts into a single historic district, and which removes from the historic district certain noncontributing properties; and 
WHEREAS, the reconstituted historic district is a geographically definable area constituting a visibly perceptible section of the municipality which contains structures and sites which have special character and special historic and aesthetic values; and 
WHEREAS, structures and sites within the proposed historic district represent one or more periods or styles of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
WHEREAS, the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26 establishes requirements for the content of ordinances designating historic properties or historic districts; and 
WHEREAS, the City of Flowery Branch has adopted Ordinance No. 375, which establishes a Historic Preservation Commission, provides for the designation of local historic districts and properties, and specifies the contents for any local ordinance designating historic properties or historic districts; and 
WHEREAS, the contents of Ordinance No. 375 are consistent with the aforementioned state and local requirements; and 
WHEREAS, a formal report of nomination has been prepared which describes the historic, cultural, architectural, or esthetic significance of the proposed historic district, and said report has been submitted to the Historic Preservation Division of the Department of Natural Resources, which has been allowed 30 days to prepare written comments concerning the report; and 
WHEREAS, the Flowery Branch Historic Preservation Commission has forwarded the City Council a copy of the formal report of nomination and recommended that the Flowery Branch City Council approve the reconstituted historic district boundary; and 
WHEREAS, on June 12 and July 10, 2008, the Flowery Branch Historic Preservation Commission and Flowery Branch City Council held a public hearing on this ordinance, notice of which was provided as prescribed by law and being published in the Gainesville Times on June 23, 24, and 25, 2008. 
NOW THEREFORE, THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FLOWERY BRANCH HEREBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Ordinance No. 376, the historic district ordinance of the city, as adopted by the City Council on August 20, 2008. Amendments to provisions are indicated by parenthetical history notes following the amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

SECTION 1. - TITLE. 
This ordinance is known and may be cited as the "Historic District Ordinance" of the City of Flowery Branch. 
SECTION 2. - PURPOSE AND INTENT. 
This ordinance is adopted with the purpose and intention of implementing the city's comprehensive plan and the purposes articulated in the City of Flowery Branch Historic Preservation Ordinance, Ordinance No. 375, as may be amended from time to time. 
SECTION 3. - DEFINITIONS. 
The meaning of terms used in this Ordinance shall be the same as those provided in definitions found in the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22, and the City of Flowery Branch Historic Preservation Ordinance, Ordinance No. 375, as may be amended from time to time. 
SECTION 4. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICT AND BOUNDARY DESCRIPTION. 
There is created and designated in the City of Flowery Branch a historic district with boundaries shown and described on Exhibit "A," which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
SECTION 5. - DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC DISTRICT ON OFFICIAL ZONING MAP. 
The boundary of the historic district shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of the City of Flowery Branch, which has been adopted pursuant to the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, Ordinance No. 348, as may be amended from time to time. 
SECTION 6. - OWNERS OF PROPERTY WITHIN THE HISTORIC DISTRICT. 
The name or names of the known owner or owners of each property included within the historic district is hereby provided in Exhibit "B," which is attached hereto and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
SECTION 7. - REQUIREMENT TO OBTAIN A CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS. 
A certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated historic property or any structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district; except as otherwise may be exempted by the City of Flowery Branch Historic Preservation Ordinance, Ordinance No. 375, as may be amended from time to time. 
SECTION 8. - NOTICE TO PROPERTY OWNERS FOLLOWING ORDINANCE ADOPTION. 
Within thirty (30) days immediately following the adoption of this ordinance designating a historic district, the known owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the known owners and occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within the designated historic district shall be given written notice of such designation which shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property within the historic district designated. 
SECTION 9. - INCORPORATION CLAUSE. 
This Ordinance is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq., which Act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this Ordinance. Where any provision of this Ordinance is in conflict with any provision of the Act, the Act shall control. Or where this Ordinance is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the Act, such provision of the Act, so as to meet the mandate of the Act, shall be fully complied with. 
SECTION 10. - SEVERABILITY. 
Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
SECTION 11. - REPEALER. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, specifically including but not limited to City of Flowery Branch Ordinance No. 225, "Historic District Ordinance," are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
SECTION 12. - EFFECTIVE DATE. 
The effective date of this Ordinance shall be upon approval by the City Council of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, the public welfare demanding it. 
Approved this 20th day of August, 2008. 
EXHIBIT "A" 
The boundary of the Flowery Branch Historic District encompasses an area described as follows: Commencing from the intersection of Snelling Street and Railroad Avenue (including 5803 Church Street) extending northeasterly along Railroad Avenue to the intersection of Railroad Avenue and Main Street (with the inclusion of those properties fronting Railroad Avenue); thence northwesterly along Main Street (with the inclusion of those properties fronting Main Street, 5501 Main Street and 5606/07 Church Street) to its intersection with Gainesville Street; thence northeasterly along Gainesville Street (including 5808, 5804, 5710, 5708, 5604/08, 5514 and 5504 Gainesville Street and the front 200'-0";pm; area of 5608 Gainesville Street) to the intersection of Gainesville Street and the northern property line of 5509 Gainesville Street; thence southeasterly along Chestnut Street to its intersection with Church Street (to include 5509 Gainesville Street and 5514, 5502, 5506, 5510, and 5410 Chestnut Street); thence northeasterly along Church Street (including 5314, 5304, 5246, and 5238 Church Street) to its intersection with Chattahoochee Street (excluding properties on the northwest side of Church Street located north of 5238 Church Street and excluding 5215 and 5227 Church Street); thence southeasterly along Chattahoochee Street to its intersection with the Norfolfk Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence northeasterly for a distance of 450'-0";pm; along the western portion of the Norfolk Southern Railroad right-of-way; thence southerly at an angle of 280° across Atlanta Highway to the northwest corner of 4805 Atlanta Highway (including 4805 Atlanta Highway); thence southwesterly along the Atlanta Highway right-of-way to the northwest corner of Spring Street (including 4933 Atlanta Highway, the front 150'-0" ;pm; area of 5007 Spring Street and 5103 Spring Street); thence continuing southwesterly along Atlanta Highway (to include all those properties fronting Atlanta Highway located between Atlanta Highway, Spring Street, Mulberry Street and E. Main Street, respectively) to the southwestern property line of 5305 Atlanta Highway (including 5305 Atlanta Highway); thence continuing southwesterly along the Atlanta Highway right-of-way to its intersection with Phil Neikro Boulevard; thence southwesterly across Atlanta Highway to an intersecting point with the Norfolk Southern Railroad right-of-way (including that portion of the railroad right-of-way) to the southern property line of 5803 Church Street as included above. In addition, the properties located on the following streets are located within the district: 
Chestnut Street and Pine Street (between Gainesville Street and Railroad Avenue); and Spring Street (between Church Street and Railroad Avenue); and Railroad Avenue (between Snelling Street and Chattahoochee Street). All rights of way identified within the shaded area are also included in the district. The above description is intended to identify the exterior boundary of the district. The entire district is shown on the attached map. When in conflict, the attached map should be considered the determining document. 

EXHIBIT "B" 

 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISIONS ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the city, as adopted by the City Council on December 13, 2006. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - BASIC ORDINANCE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 101. - Short Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of Flowery Branch, Georgia." 
Sec. 102. - Purpose and Intent. 
This Ordinance and its rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
(a)  To protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the City; 
(b)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(c)  To assure the provision of required roads, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement standards of the City; 
(d)  To assure adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments, especially for the purposes of assuring that all building lots will be accessible to fire fighting equipment and other emergency and service vehicles; 
(e)  To assure the provision of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; 
(f)  To assure the adequate provision of water supply, storm water drainage, sanitation, lighting, and other necessary improvements; 
(g)  To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing uniform procedures and standards for the subdivider, land developer, and staff to follow; 
(h)  To assure, in general, the wise development of new land areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the community; 
(i)  To assure the accurate description of property and adequate and proper identification of property in public records; 
(j)  To help conserve and protect the natural, economic and scenic resources of the City; 
(k)  To help eliminate the costly maintenance problems which develop when roads and lots are laid out without proper consideration given to various public purposes; 
(l)  To protect lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
Sec. 103. - Authority. 
This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to powers vested in counties by Georgia law, including the State of Georgia Constitution, home rule powers, and state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of Comprehensive Plans and the protection of vital areas of the State. 
ARTICLE 2. - REFERENCE TO OTHER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 201. - Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control. 
No land shall be platted or developed except in compliance with the Flowery Branch Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance (Ordinance No. 249), as amended. 
Sec. 202. - Reference to Zoning Ordinance. 
All subdivisions and land developments shall comply as required with the zoning ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch, as may be amended from time to time. 
No person shall subdivide or develop land, and the Zoning Administrator shall not approve any subdivision or development of land, unless the lots created pursuant to said subdivision or the land use or development activity meet or exceed all applicable requirements of the zoning district in which it is located, and the zoning ordinance generally. 
Sec. 203. - Special Review of Subdivisions along State Routes. 
No subdivision plat containing land that abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat has been submitted for review and comment by the Georgia Department of Transportation, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-151. 
When the City receives such a plat, it shall submit two copies of the proposed subdivision plat to the Georgia Department of Transportation if such proposed subdivision includes or abuts on any part of the state highway system. The Georgia Department of Transportation, within 30 days of receipt of the plat, shall recommend approval and note its recommendation on the copy to be returned to the Flowery Branch Zoning Administrator or recommend rejection. Failure of the Georgia Department of Transportation to act within this 30 day period shall constitute approval. If the plat is recommended for rejection, the reasons for rejection and requirements for approval shall be given the Flowery Branch Zoning Administrator in writing. A recommendation for rejection shall be binding on the City unless the City, by official action recorded in its minutes, overrules the recommendation for rejection. 
Sec. 204. - Reference To State and Federal Land Subdivision Laws. 
The subdivision of land shall comply, as applicable, with the federal and state full disclosure requirements for land sales. All subdivision plats shall also comply with applicable state law regarding accuracy and content of all such subdivision plats. 
ARTICLE 3. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 301. - Generally. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this Ordinance have their customary dictionary definition. Words used in the present or past tense include the future. Words in the singular include the plural, and vice versa. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter, and vice versa; when the sense so indicates, words of the neuter gender may refer to any gender. The word "building" includes any structure. The word "shall" is mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
Sec. 302. - Definitions. 
Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Access easement: An easement devoted to vehicular access which affords a principal means of access to abutting property or properties, but which is not necessarily open to the general public and which is not necessarily improved to standards of the County. 
Administrative appeal: A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance, or an action taken by the Zoning Administrator in the application or enforcement of this Ordinance. 
Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the City for approval of an application under the terms of this Ordinance. 
Alley: A public or private thoroughfare that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs): A collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. 
Block: A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by roads. 
Buildable area: The portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area or buffer; that portion of a lot wherein a principal building may be located. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Center line: That line connecting the succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of any easement. 
City: The City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
City Attorney: The Attorney of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
City Engineer: The professional engineer of the City of Flowery Branch, whether on staff or a consulting engineering firm in the employ of the City of Flowery Branch. 
Common area: Land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated to the public, and designed for the common usage of the development. These areas include green open spaces and yards and may include pedestrian walkways and complimentary structures and improvements for the enjoyment of residents of the development. Maintenance of such areas is the responsibility of a private association, not the public. 
Common contiguous parcels: Parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common point and having a common owner, regardless of whether portions of the parcels have separate tax lot numbers, were purchased in different land lots, or were purchased at different times. 
Comprehensive plan: Any plan by a county or municipality covering such county or municipality or any plan by a regional development center covering the centers region proposed or prepared pursuant to the minimum standards and procedures for preparation of comprehensive plans and for implementation of comprehensive plans, established by the Department of Community Affairs. (Georgia Code Section 50-8-2); Those coordinated plans or portions thereof which have been prepared by or for the City of Flowery Branch for the physical development of the jurisdiction; or any plans that designate plans or programs to encourage the most appropriate use of the land in the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
Conservation: The management of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction, or degradation. 
Conservation easement: A nonpossessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open-space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open-space use; protecting natural resources; maintaining or enhancing air or water quality; or preserving the historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural aspects of real property. (Georgia Code Section 44-10-2) 
Conservation subdivision: A subdivision, where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design, that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision, and that clusters housing together on smaller lots than in conventional subdivisions. 
Cross-section: A profile of the ground surface perpendicular to the centerline of a road, stream, or other feature. 
Cul-de-sac: A road having one end open to traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn-around. 
Cul-de-sac, temporary: A non-permanent vehicular turn around located at the termination of a street or alley, created for construction and not accepted as a public improvement. 
Curb: A boundary, usually constructed of concrete, usually marking the edge of a roadway or paved area, which is designed to channel storm water to drainage inlets and/or prevent or deter access. 
Curb radius: The curved edge of a road at road intersections. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane of a specified distance that permits vehicles to leave the main vehicle stream and slow down. 
Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. 
Dedication plat: A plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. 
Deflection angle: The angle between a deviation in the direction of the center line of a street and the extension of the center line along a straight course from the point from which the center line changed direction. 

Detention: The temporary retraining of storm water on-site. 
Detention pond: A pond or pool used for the temporary storage of storm water runoff and which provides for the controlled release of such storm water. 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; any land-disturbing activity which alters the elevation of the land, removes significant vegetation, or causes structures of any kind to be erected or removed. 
Development permit: Approval by the Zoning Administrator to proceed with development. For purposes of this Ordinance, the development permit required by this Ordinance shall be coordinated with the permit required for compliance with Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch, as amended, and the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. 
Development plan: Any plan containing substantial information required to be filed by this Ordinance, which shows how the property to be affected by the development will be changed and improved in a specific manner, including the installation of roads and utilities and the erection of buildings and structures, among other specific requirements. 
Development site: Any and all areas within which "development" takes place. 
Drainage easement: An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. Both streams and storm drainage channels are required to have easements for maintenance purposes as specified in this Ordinance. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Driveway: A constructed vehicular access serving one (1) or more properties and connecting to a public or private street, as distinguished from a platted, public or private street. 
Easement: A non-possessory interest in land; a grant by a property owner for the use by the public, a corporation or persons, of a portion of land for a specified purpose or purposes. 
Environmental Health Department: The Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
Escrow account: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value specified by the Zoning Administrator to cover the costs of required improvements. 
Excavation: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "cut." 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Fire flow: The flow of water required to extinguish the largest probable fire served by a water facility. 
Gated community: Residential areas that restrict access to normally public roads and spaces. These are subdivisions of usually high-end houses. Gates can include guard houses, electronic arms operated by card, codes, or remote control devices. Visitors must stop to be verified for entry. 
Grade, natural: The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating. 
Grading: Altering the shape or topography of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. (see also land-disturbing activity) 
Gradient: The rate of vertical change between two distance points, determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance (i.e., rise over run). 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Governing Body: The Flowery Branch, Georgia, Mayor and City Council. 
Greenway: A linear park or open space conservation area that provides recreational opportunities, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, and/or conservation of open spaces or natural areas. 
Group Development Project: A shopping center or other development with multiple buildings arranged as a group, no less than twenty acres in size, which is subdivided into lots but not in the customary manner so as to meet zoning requirements for lot size, lot width, lot frontage, building setbacks, lot coverage, and other dimensional requirements customarily related to buildings and lot line configurations. A primary purpose of a group development project is to permit the subdivision of a shopping center or other development so that each building may be located on its own fee-simple lot that does not necessarily meet all zoning requirements, but where the shopping center or other development meets applicable zoning requirements as a whole (i.e., all land area included in the development). 
Half street: A portion of the ultimate width of a road or street where the remaining portion of the road or street shall be provided at a future date. 
Highway: A term applied to streets and roads that are under the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Transportation or federal highway agency. Highways are major arteries of the city and county circulation network, carry significant volumes of traffic for both long and short trips, and are designed with access to abutting properties with some degree of control and safe standards of design. 
Home owners association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is available to a person who has purchased of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, and which may have the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which may have authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. 
Impact: The effect of any direct man-make actions or indirect repercussions of man-made actions on existing physical, social, or economic conditions. 
Improvements: The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
Land development: Any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land-disturbance activity: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices exempt from the City's Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
Letter of credit: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the City. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
Lot: A portion or parcel of land intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development or both, intended to be devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, and having principal frontage on a public road or an approved private road. In determining the area and dimension of a lot, no part of the right-of-way may be included. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court of Hall County prior to the enactment of a zoning ordinance on September 30, 1972; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been lawfully recorded in the same office as of the effective date of this zoning ordinance; or any lot lawfully established by plat after the effective date of this ordinance. 
Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public road rights-of-way or private road or access easements, where they exist. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more roads at their intersection. 
Lot depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, double frontage: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two or more roads that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 
_____ 
_____
Lot, flag: A tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a public road or where existing, a private road, is less than the required minimum width for construction of a building or structure on that lot. Such lots have elongated access from the road and a conventionally proportioned building site at the rear of the lot. 
Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public road, or where it exists, a private road. 
Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required building line. 
Metes and bounds: A system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting roads. 
Open space: Land and water areas retained for use as passive recreation areas or for resource protection or conservation in an essentially undeveloped state. 
Original tract: A unit of land which the owner holds under single or unified ownership, or which the owner holds controlling interest on the effective date of this Ordinance, where all land abutting said tract is separately owned by others, not related to or associated by business partnership with the owner. 
Pavement width: The width of a given lane, road, or other road pavement width, measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb or to the edge of pavement where no curbs are required or exist. 
Performance bond: A type of subdivision improvement performance guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the Zoning Administrator to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the City. The City may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
Performance guarantee: Any financial deposit or other security that may be accepted by the City as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an application for subdivision or land development are satisfactorily completed in conformance with approved plans. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
Plat, final: A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information, certification, and all other elements and requirements set forth in this Ordinance and O.C.G.A. § 15-6-7, prepared for filing for record with the Clerk of the Hall County Superior Court. 
Plat, preliminary: A drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail to convey to the City the concept and workability of a subdivision, but not complete in form or detail required for recording. 
Potable water: Water that is suitable for human consumption, human contact, or in the preparation of foods for human consumption. 
Preserve: An area in which beneficial uses or natural landforms in their present condition are protected; for example, a nature preserve or wildlife habitat management area. 
Professional engineer: An engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
Protective covenants: Contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Public improvement: The construction, enlargement, extension or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to the City, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
Publicly dedicated: Land or improvements that have been transferred by plat or deeded to and accepted by the City for public use and maintenance. 
Regional Development Center: The Georgia Mountains Regional Development Center. 
Registered land surveyor: A surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of land surveying. 
Reservation: The designation by plat or deed of a certain area reserved for possible future public purposes. A reservation does not transfer title of the reserved area to the public unless the Governing Body of Flowery Branch, Georgia accepts the area for public purposes. 
Reserve strip: A strip or tract of land reserved for the purpose of controlling or limiting access from properties to abutting streets. 
Resubdivision: The act of changing an existing lot created by a plat and recorded in the Office of the County Superior Court Clerk of Hall County, Georgia. 
Retaining wall: A wall or similar structure used at a grade change to hold soil on the up-hillside from slumping, sliding, or falling. 
Retention: The permanent maintenance of storm water on-site. 
Retention pond: A pond or pool used for the permanent storage of storm water runoff. 
Right-of-way, public: That area, distinguished from an easement or private road right-of-way, which is owned in fee-simple title by the City of Flowery Branch or other government, for the present or future use of roads, roads and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
Right-of-way, private: That area, distinguished from an access easement or public right-of-way, dedicated to property owners of the subdivision involved or to other individuals, and which affords permanent access to abutting property or properties. A private right-of-way is distinguishable from a public road right-of-way in that maintenance and ownership of the road and accessory improvements is by private individuals or a private association rather than the City of Flowery Branch or another governmental entity. 
Riprap: Rocks, rubble, or stones, irregularly shaped and at least six inches in diameter, used for erosion control and soil stabilization. 
Road: A state highway, a county road, a street owned and/or maintained by the City, or where permitted, a private road. Roads afford the principal means of access to abutting property or properties and are required to meet specifications contained in this Ordinance. The term includes "street" but does not include "access easement." 
Road, private: An improved road, distinguished from a public road in that the right-of-way which affords a principal means of access to abutting property or properties is privately owned and maintained. Private roads are required to meet specifications contained in this Ordinance. 
Road, public: A state highway, county road, or a street owned and/or maintained by a municipality. New public roads are required to meet specifications contained in this Ordinance. 
Roadbed: That portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, including the curbs and shoulders. 
Roadway: The paved portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, measured from back of curb to back of curb. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Runoff coefficient: Ratio of the amount of rain which runs off a surface to that which falls on it; a factor from which runoff can be calculated. 
Septic tank: An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewerage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
Sewer: An artificial and usually subterranean conduit designed to carry off sewage and/or water. The term includes any pipe, manhole, connection, or other appurtenances thereto, located in a public right-of-way or easement that is designed to transport sewage and/or water. 
Sewer, sanitary: A sewer that carries sewage and residential, commercial or industrial waste. 
Sewer, storm: A sewer that carries storm, surface, and ground water drainage but excludes sewage and residential, commercial, and industrial wastes. 
Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a public road or private road. 
State waters: Includes any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. (Georgia Code Section 12-7-3) 
Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way, or a private street approved by the city, which affords the principal means of access for motor vehicles to abutting properties. 
Street, dead end: A street connected to another street at only one end. 
Street, major: An existing or proposed street or highway designated in the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. 
Street jog: The incidence where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. (See illustration) 

Structure: Anything built, constructed or erected, or established or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. For purposes of this ordinance, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, dog houses, and outdoor fenced animal runs are considered structures. Tents, vehicles, trailers, and play equipment attached to the ground in some permanent or temporary way shall be considered structures. A structure may or may not be easily moved from a given location on the ground. Walls and fences are considered structures but are subject to setback regulations for walls and fences rather than principal or accessory building setback regulations. Driveways and parking lots are not considered structures. 
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, lease lots, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, legacy, or building development. The term shall include the opening of a new road, a change in existing roads, or divisions of land involving the extension of water, sewer, or gas lines. The term includes re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdivision or to the land or area subdivided. 
Tangent: The straight-line distance between the ending of one curve of a line (center line of a street) and the beginning of another curve of the same line (center line). 

Trail: A way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians, and/or cyclists using non-motorized bicycles. 
Utilities: All lines and facilities related to the provision, distribution, collection, transmission, or disposal of water, storm and sanitary sewage, oil, gas, power, information, telecommunication and telephone cable, and including facilities for the generation of electricity. 
Vacation: The termination of, or termination of interest in, an easement, right-of-way, or public dedication of land. 
Variance: A minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of this Ordinance as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in a particular undue hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. 
Vicinity map: A map, not necessarily to scale, showing the general location of the proposed subdivision or land development in relation to major roads and/or natural features. 
Well: A hole or shaft excavated, bored, drilled, dug, or driven to tap an underground supply of water. 
Zoning Administrator: The Manager of Planning and Community Development of the City of Flowery Branch (or any similar position as it may be retitled), or authorized designee. 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 401. - Delegation of Authority to Zoning Administrator. 
The Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch hereby delegates to the Zoning Administrator the following powers and duties, which shall not be considered limiting: 
(a)  Preliminary plats. To review and make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding preliminary plats. 
(b)  Final plats. To approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove final plats, lot combination plats, and boundary line adjustments, provided, however, such delegation does not authorize the Zoning Administrator to accept public improvements for the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. 
(c)  Development plans. The Zoning Administrator is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove development plans and to issue development permits. 
(d)  Inspection. To inspect land developments and subdivisions. No person shall refuse entry or access to the Zoning Administrator upon request to enter onto property for purposes of inspection, upon the presentation of appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Zoning Administrator while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(e)  Administration. To adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary for the processing of applications established by this ordinance, and to prepare administrative procedures, guidelines, application forms, to tend to other administrative details not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance, and to implement the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Interpretation. To interpret the provisions of this ordinance. 
(g)  Enforcement. To enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 402. - Delegation of Authority to City Engineer. 
The Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch hereby delegates to the City Engineer the following powers and duties: 
(a)  Preliminary plats. To review and make recommendations to the Governing Body regarding preliminary plats. 
(b)  Final plats. To approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the improvements shown on final plats, provided, however, such delegation does not authorize the City Engineer to accept public improvements for the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. 
(c)  Development plans. To approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the improvements shown on development plans. 
(d)  Inspection. To inspect land developments and subdivisions. No person shall refuse entry or access to the City Engineer upon request to enter onto property for purposes of inspection, upon the presentation of appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with the City Engineer while in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(e)  Technical standards for improvements. The City Engineer is authorized to promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for land development improvements not already specified by this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to streets, storm drainage systems, driveways, curb cuts, and parking lots. 
(f)  Technical standards for utilities. The City Engineer is authorized to promulgate additional technical standards and construction specifications for utility improvements not already specified by this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to stormwater, water and sanitary sewer systems and utilities. 
Sec. 403. - Jurisdiction. 
This Ordinance shall apply to all unincorporated lands within the city limits of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
Sec. 404. - Land is One Tract Until Subdivided. 
Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, except land may be considered as multiple tracts if legally recorded as such before the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 405. - Subdivision of Land. 
No person shall subdivide land except in conformance with this Ordinance. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to sell, transfer, agree to sell, offer at public auction, negotiate to sell or subdivide any land until a preliminary plat, if required, and the final plat have been approved and the final plat recorded in accordance with this Ordinance. Said restriction applies to lands subdivided for non-residential as well as residential uses. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from this Ordinance or from the penalties established herein. The County, through its attorney or other official designated by the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch, may enjoin such transfer of, sale, or agreement by appropriate action. 
Sec. 406. - Development of Land. 
No person shall disturb or develop land or engage in development except in accordance with this Ordinance. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to disturb or develop any land until a development permit has been secured, if required by this ordinance or the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, and a development plan, if required, has been approved by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with this Ordinance. No person shall begin construction of any improvement on any lot prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, if required by this Ordinance, nor prior to approval of a development permit and/or development plan for said improvement as required by this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance 
The Zoning Administrator shall not authorize or permit the clearance of trees and vegetative materials, except for grubbing, outside approved construction limits, unless a development permit has been applied for and has been approved in accordance with this Ordinance, unless specifically exempted by this Ordinance. 
Sec. 407. - Building and Other Permits. 
No person shall construct or participate in the construction of any building or other structure or engage in any excavation, grading, or land disturbing activity on any parcel of land regulated by this Ordinance unless a development permit authorizing such activity has been issued in accordance with the provisions and procedures of this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. 
Sec. 408. - Public Roads and Lands. 
No land dedicated as a public road or other public purpose shall be opened, extended or accepted as a public road or for any other purpose unless such dedication is constructed in accordance with the specifications and procedures of this Ordinance and accepted by the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 409. - Preliminary Plat, Development Plans and Development Permit Required. 
No person shall begin development, land-disturbing activity, or construction of any improvement on any lot or land except in compliance with this Ordinance. No development permit shall be issued for land disturbing activity or the installation of improvements prior to the approval of a preliminary plat of such land, if required, and the approval of a development permit, nor prior to approval by the Zoning Administrator of plans for land disturbance and installation of improvements. 
Sec. 410. - Recording of Subdivision Plats and Transfer of Land. 
No subdivision plat, nor any part thereof, shall be recorded with the Clerk of Superior Court of Hall County unless the Zoning Administrator has approved such plat for recording. The Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County shall not record a plat of a subdivision, whether evidenced as a plat or as an attachment to a deed, unless such plat is a final plat approved by the Zoning Administrator and contains the Zoning Administrator's signature thereon. 
Any deed or other instrument of conveyance, including a security deed, bond for title, or any other document purporting to convey, then or in the future, title to real estate, filed for record with the Clerk of the Superior Court, wherein the property to be conveyed is described in some manner other than by reference to a recorded plat, shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by the party filing such deed or other instrument, which certificate shall be in the following form: 

 
Sec. 411. - Exemption from Plat Approval. 
The following types of land subdivision, transfer, and sale are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this Ordinance; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of this Ordinance: 
(a)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
(b)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
(c)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
(d)  The creation of leaseholds for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
(e)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the City to approve development on such lots if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable City regulations regarding lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
Sec. 412. - Exemption from Development Permit. 
Any development or activity that is exempt from the City's Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance shall be similarly exempt from the development permit requirements of this Ordinance. 
Any development or activity that is exempt from the City's development permit requirements of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall be similarly exempt from the development permit requirements of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 413. - Burial of Materials. 
No person shall bury, or cause or permit any person to bury, any trash, garbage, refuse, glass, cans, tires, appliances or other similar man-made objects materials on any property under subdivision or development, except within the limits of approved landfills or other sites specifically approved for such purpose(s). 
No person shall bury, or cause or permit any person to bury, any tree stumps, limbs, and similar natural materials on any property under subdivision or development, except that the Zoning Administrator may permit the burial of such natural materials on property under subdivision or development, if the site for burial of natural materials is specifically designated on the preliminary and final plat for the subdivision, if applicable, and on plans for the development, and a deed restriction is placed on the lot or development prohibiting the construction or development of a building, structure, or parking area on said burial site. 
ARTICLE 5. - PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Sec. 501. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Article is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions through the submittal of a preliminary plat. 
Sec. 502. - Preliminary Plat Approval Required. 
Any subdivision involving the dedication of a public street or public land, and any subdivision involving a new private street, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat. 
The Governing Body of the City of Flowery Branch must first approve a preliminary plat for a subdivision prior to the issuance of a development permit or initiation of any land disturbing or construction activities within the proposed subdivision. 
Sec. 503. - Pre-Application Conference. 
Whenever a person proposes the subdivision of a tract of land, he is encouraged (but not required) to consult early and informally with the Zoning Administrator. The prospective subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, and the proposed layout of the subdivision. This pre-application conference is intended to permit an early evaluation of the subdivider's intentions, to ensure coordination with the Comprehensive Plan of the City, and to provide the subdivider with the necessary laws, rules, and regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed subdivision. No fee shall be charged for the pre-application review, and no formal application shall be required. 
Sec. 504. - Relationship of Preliminary Plat to Development Permit. 
An application for preliminary plat approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit. Applicants are cautioned, however, that the preliminary plat approval is discretionary with regard to consistency with the comprehensive plan and design requirements of this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, and therefore, proceeding simultaneously with preliminary plat and development permit applications may result in the revision of civil engineering drawings and construction plans if the layout of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision must be significantly modified. 
Sec. 505. - Preliminary Plat Application Requirements. 
Applications for preliminary plat approval shall include the following: 
(a)  Application form. A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Zoning Administrator, requesting review for project approval. 
(b)  Copies of plats. A set number, as fixed from time to time by the Zoning Administrator, of copies of the preliminary subdivision plat meeting preliminary plat specifications of this Article and showing the entire ownership. 
(c)  Fees. Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
Sec. 506. - Preliminary Plat Specifications. 
A preliminary plat shall be prepared by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner, or any other person professionally familiar with land subdivision and land development activities. The preliminary plat shall meet the following specifications: 
(a)  Proposed name of subdivision. The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the city or county. If shown to the contrary, the Zoning Administrator may refuse to accept such subdivision name. 
(b)  Plat scale and sheet size. The preliminary subdivision plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 100 feet or less to one (1) inch. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size is 30 inches by 42 inches and the minimum dimensions of 17 inches by 22 inches; however, the Zoning Administrator may approve other sheet sizes and scales as appropriate. For property of over 100 acres, a smaller scale may be used where, in the judgment of the Zoning Administrator, presentation of detailed data is not necessary to evaluate the entire project. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public and private improvements. 
(c)  Owner contact information. Name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(d)  Applicant contact information. Name, mailing address, telephone and fax numbers and E-mail address of the applicant. 
(e)  Miscellaneous. Tax parcel number(s), date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(f)  Use. Proposed use of the property. 
(g)  Location and tract boundaries. Location (Land District and Land Lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre), and the approximate boundaries of the tract to be subdivided or developed by bearings and distances, The preliminary plat must reference and be based on a boundary survey of the exterior boundaries of the proposed subdivision, prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor. 
(h)  Location or vicinity map. A location or vicinity map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location maps must be drawn at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide or as the required location map. 
(i)  Prior subdivision. Name of former approved subdivision, if any, for all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat that has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of same. 
(j)  Zoning. Zoning district designation of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(k)  Conditions of approval. A copy of zoning, special use and variance conditions, if applicable. 
(l)  Natural features and flood plains. Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(m)  Streets, easements, political boundaries and built features. Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features. 
(n)  Subdivision layout. The proposed subdivision layout including lot lines and street right-of-way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths, along with the front building setback line and the approximate dimensions of the length and width of each lot. 
(o)  Phasing. The proposed phasing of the development, if it is proposed to be platted in phases. 
(p)  Water and sewage disposal. A statement as to the source of the domestic water supply and provisions for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, location and results of soil and/or percolation tests as required and approved by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(q)  Stormwater management. The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. Compliance with the stormwater management requirements of this Ordinance shall not be required at the time of preliminary plat approval but will be required for the issuance of a development permit. 
(r)  Additional information. Additional information as may be required to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. 
(s)  Certificate of preliminary plat approval. Certificate of preliminary plat approval, as follows or as may be modified from time to time, shall be shown on the preliminary plat: 
CERTIFICATE OF PRELIMINARY PLAT APPROVAL 
The following preliminary plat was approved by the Flowery Branch Mayor and City Council: 
Name ____________ 
Date ____________ 
Tax Parcel ____________ 
Zoning ____________ 
Address ____________ 
Sec. 507. - Review and Approval Process. 
The Zoning Administrator is responsible for administering the review and approval process for preliminary subdivision plats, which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Section. The procedures of this Section may be supplemented by the Zoning Administrator where additional specification is required. 
(a)  Review for completeness and application acceptance. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant. 
(b)  Distribution and agency review of preliminary plat. The Zoning Administrator shall forward a copy of the preliminary plat application to other city departments as may be appropriate, the Georgia Department of Transportation if the proposed subdivision has frontage on or proposes access to a state or federal road, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. Agency review shall specifically include the approval from the Hall County Environmental Health Department if septic tanks are proposed and the Flowery Branch Utilities Department in cases where connection to City water and/or sewer is proposed or required. 
(c)  Time period for completion of review. Within two (2) to three (3) weeks following receipt of the application, during which agency review shall be completed, the Zoning Administrator shall review the preliminary plat application for completion and compliance with this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, who shall work with each Department as necessary to resolve all issues. 
(d)  Action by Governing Body. When the Zoning Administrator has determined that the preliminary subdivision plat is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this Article and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, it shall be scheduled for consideration by the Governing Body. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. The Governing Body may approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the application for preliminary plat. 
Sec. 508. - Duration of Preliminary Plat Approval. 
Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of two (2) years, during which time a complete application for development permit and plan approval must be submitted. If a completed application for development permit and plan approval is not submitted within two (2) years after preliminary plat approval, said approval shall expire and be null and void. 
Sec. 509. - Amendments to Preliminary Plat Approval. 
The Zoning Administrator, in consultation with the City Engineer when engineering or utility considerations are involved, is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats (i.e., those that do not affect the public or private street configuration or that reconfigure lots and which do not increase the number of lots), without the need to reapply for preliminary plat approval. The application requirements and procedures for amending preliminary plats, unless minor in nature, shall be the same as for preliminary plat applications. 
ARTICLE 6. - DEVELOPMENT PERMIT AND PLAN APPROVAL 

Sec. 601. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Article is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of development through the submittal of an application for development permit and development plan review and approval. 
Sec. 602. - Development Permit and Development Plan Approval Required. 
Any development or land-disturbing activity shall require the submission of an application for development permit and development plans for review and approval, unless specifically exempted by this Ordinance. These requirements shall specifically include but not be limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. Any person seeking development activity on land within the City shall first submit to the Zoning Administrator an application for a development permit, including all civil design and construction drawings required by this Ordinance. 
The Zoning Administrator must first approve a development permit prior to the initiation of any development or land disturbing or construction activities, unless specifically exempted by this Ordinance. 
Sec. 603. - Pre-Application Conference. 
Whenever a person proposes the development of land, he is encouraged (but not required) to consult early and informally with the Zoning Administrator. The prospective developer may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and its vicinity, and the proposed layout of the development. This pre-application conference is intended to permit an early evaluation of the developer's intentions, to ensure coordination with the Comprehensive Plan of the City, and to provide the developer with the necessary laws, rules, and regulations in order to properly accomplish the proposed development. No fee shall be charged for the pre-application review, and no formal application shall be required. 
Sec. 604. - Development Permit Application. 
Applications for a development permit shall include the following: 
(a)  Application form. A properly completed application form, as furnished by the Zoning Administrator, requesting review for project approval. 
(b)  Site plan providing information on the property to be developed, based on a boundary survey prepared by a registered land surveyor. 
(c)  Copies of plans. A set number, as fixed from time to time by the Zoning Administrator, of copies of the development plans required by this Article and meeting specifications of this Article. 
(d)  Fees. Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
(e)  Plat or plan prior approvals or applications. A copy of the approved preliminary plat, if subdivision is required and preliminary plat approval has been obtained, or an application for preliminary plat approval. 
(f)  Standard drawings and construction specifications. When the subdivision or development involves an improvement for which a standard has not been established in this ordinance, or adopted by reference to another set of standards or specifications, the Zoning Administrator may require the application for development include standard drawings and construction specifications. 
The application shall be checked for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will not be processed and will be returned to the applicant. 
Sec. 605. - Relationship to Design Review and Approval. 
An application for development permit may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for design review and approval as specified in Article 40 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. Applicants are cautioned, however, that the design review and approval process is discretionary with regard to consistency with the comprehensive plan and design requirements of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, and therefore, proceeding simultaneously with design plan and development permit applications may result in the revision of civil engineering drawings and construction plans if the layout of the development considered during design review must be significantly modified. 
If type 2 (public) design review and approval is required, the design review process will be coordinated with the procedures for development permit approval as considered appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 606. - Types of Plans Required. 
The civil design and construction drawings for a project shall conform in all respects with the approved preliminary plat, if applicable, and all other requirements of this Ordinance. Applications for approval of civil design and construction drawings shall include each of the plans described in this Section, if required, which shall not be considered limiting: 
(a)  Erosion and sediment control plan. Plans must show proposed grading and land disturbance and be prepared to meet the erosion and sedimentation control requirements using best management practices under the City of Flowery Branch's Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
(b)  Tree protection and landscaping. Development plans shall demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Article 19 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, including but not limited to the protection of trees during development, the designation and protection of buffers, and submission of a landscaping plan. This includes plans for structural buffers, when proposed. 
(c)  Stormwater Management Report. The location and size of all proposed drainage improvements shall be designed in accordance with and meet all standards relating to Stormwater Management as specified in Article 12 of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Street Improvement Plan. When new streets, public or private, are provided, or when an existing public or private street is modified, a street improvement plan shall be provided including road profiles and cross-sections as required by the Zoning Administrator, type of sub-base, type of paving base, type of road paving and type of improvements within the road right-of-way outside of the paved area, and any additional information specified by this Ordinance or reasonably required to ensure compliance with this Ordinance. Such plan must demonstrate compliance with the specifications for roads provided in this Ordinance. 
(e)  Flood Plain Permit. When a flood plain permit is required by Article 32 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, a flood plain permit application shall be submitted as a part of the development permit application. 
(f)  Sewage Disposal Plan. Sanitary sewerage plans shall include profiles of all mains and outfalls, lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, and other information as may be required by the City Engineer. For projects to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, such plans shall show the location of septic tank, extent of drain field and attendant structures, location and results of percolation and/or soil tests, and other information shall be shown as required by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(g)  Domestic Water Supply Plan. The domestic water supply plan shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances, and other information as may be required by the City Engineer. 
(h)  Lighting plan. When a lighting plan is required by Article 23 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, the lighting plan shall be submitted as a part of the development permit application. 
(i)  Design plans. Copies of plans and elevation drawings required for design review and approval, if applicable, and if the applicant desires to proceed simultaneously with development permit and design plan approval. 
(j)  Other plans. Where the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance requires the submission of a plan, such plans shall unless otherwise directed by the Zoning Administrator be included in the application for development permit. 
Sec. 607. - Preparation by Professional. 
All civil design and construction plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a registered professional engineer and stamped by said registered professional engineer. All other maps, drawings and supportive computations required to be submitted by this Article shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sediment control, as applicable to the type of plan submitted. 
Sec. 608. - Separate Applications for Phased Projects. 
If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate development permit shall be required for each phase. 
Sec. 609. - Review of Development Permit Applications. 
The Zoning Administrator may forward a copy of the development permit application, including the civil design and constructions drawings for the project, to other City departments and government agencies or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The applicant may be required by the Zoning Administrator to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by (or have jurisdiction over) the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
(a)  The Flowery Branch Utilities Department. 
(b)  The Hall County Public Works Department. 
(c)  The Hall County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(d)  Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(e)  Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(f)  Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(g)  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(h)  U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Upon receipt of comments from other City departments and external agencies as appropriate, the Zoning Administrator shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution and as appropriate shall indicate on a copy of the civil design and construction drawings or in writing all comments related to compliance with this Article or the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, conditions of zoning or prior plat approval, and other city regulations, as appropriate. 
Upon receipt of the completed development plan by the Zoning Administrator, he shall review them for compliance with this Ordinance and any other applicable local laws and regulations. The Zoning Administrator shall have thirty (30) calendar days to accomplish the interagency review, if appropriate, and to certify compliance of the development plans with subdivision and land development requirements and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance; provided, however, that when development plan approval is required by a state or federal agency or another Department of the City of Flowery Branch, or in other cases with consent of the applicant, review may be extended. Although review may have been achieved, if another city department or external agency requires approval or permit, the applicant shall also be responsible for obtaining approval from all other agencies affected by the project prior to issuance of the development permit by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 610. - Issuance of Development Permit. 
(a)  Issuance. Upon approval or conditional approval of development plans, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a development permit. Issuance of a development permit shall constitute authorization for the applicant to begin land-disturbing activities and the construction of improvements in accordance with approved plan. 
(b)  Approval. If approved or conditionally approved, the Zoning Administrator shall provide his signature on said approved plans indicating said approval, retain two copies of said plans for records, and return one copy to the applicant. 
(c)  Denial. The only basis upon which the Zoning Administrator may deny a development plan is the failure of the application to meet the requirements of this Ordinance, the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, or other applicable laws, or the failure of the development plan to be consistent with preliminary plat approval, if required. If disapproved, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for said disapproval. 
(d)  Changes. If the Zoning Administrator requires changes, the applicant shall resubmit such plans to the Zoning Administrator for review. 
(e)  Duration. A development permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year after its issuance, after which time it shall become null and void unless the proposed development activity has begun. 
Sec. 611. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Approval of development plans by the City of Flowery Branch or its authorized agents, or the completion of inspections for work, shall not imply nor transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, surveying, landscape architecture, planning, or any other profession, from the professional corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared and sealed. 
(b)  The issuance of a development permit or the approval by the City of Flowery Branch (or any of its officers, agents, or employees) of any plat or development plan shall not be interpreted to relieve the applicant, his agent, or any other person of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all laws, statutes, codes, ordinances, and other regulations of this state and the City of Flowery Branch. Except for any variance specifically approved pursuant to this Ordinance, any development permit or approval issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
(c)  The approval of an erosion and sediment control plan or other plans under the provisions of this Article, the issuance of a development permit, or the compliance with the provisions of this Article shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City or the Soil and Water Conservation Commission District for damage to any person or property. 
(d)  The fact that any activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this Article and this Ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
Sec. 612. - Responsibilities after Issuance of Development Permit. 
(a)  Inspections. Upon issuing a development permit, all activity on the development site shall be subject to inspections as specified or authorized under the terms of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Posting of Permit. Evidence of the City of Flowery Branch's approval of development activity, if required pursuant to this Ordinance, shall be posted on the development site by the owner or agent of the development in a conspicuous place at the front of the site where the permitted work is to be done, and in the form of a colored card no less than 11 inches by 17 inches or as otherwise issued by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Maintenance Responsibilities. The owner of the development site is responsible for maintaining the development permit card and must replace any damaged, lost, or stolen permit cards before further inspections may be made. The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified by land development inspections prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation, or modification. The development permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the City, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved Erosion and Sediment Control Plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this Ordinance or the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. A holder of a development permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the development permit. 
Sec. 613. - Request for Inspection. 
Requests for land development inspections shall be made by the owner or contractor to the Zoning Administrator at least 24 hours prior to when the inspection is needed. Inspections shall be made and passed prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding into new phases. 
Sec. 614. - Inspections Required. 
Inspections are required of each of the following phases of the land development process, as applicable to the actual work to be performed under the development permit: 
(a)  Land disturbance/soil erosion inspection. Prior to clearing, grubbing and/or land disturbance of the property or any activity undertaken pursuant to an approved land development permit, erosion and sedimentation control measures and devices for protection of trees and undisturbed areas shall be inspected and approved. 
(b)  Street grade and sub-grade preparation. After completing street grading but prior to trenching or continuation with sub-grade preparation, inspection and approval shall be required. 
(c)  Storm drainage. Installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other stormwater facilities shall be inspected and approved. 
(d)  Sub-grade of streets. After compaction and receipt of test reports, the sub-grade may be roll-tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the City Building Inspector and/or City Engineer. 
(e)  Street curbing and gutter. Inspection shall be requested after the forms or string lines have been set. Street width and vertical and horizontal alignment may be spot checked. 
(f)  Street base. After receipt of test reports, the base may be string-lined for depth and crown. The street base may be roll-tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the City Building Inspector and/or City Engineer. 
(g)  Paving. An Inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be monitored and the street will be cored after completion to check thickness and density. Satisfactory test results of the cores shall be delivered to the City Engineer prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or certificate of occupancy. 
(h)  Final. A final inspection of land development activity and improvements installed shall be required and approved by the City Engineer, following submission and review of the as-built surveys required by this Article. 
Sec. 615. - As-Built Surveys Required. 
Upon completion of land development activity or the installation of improvements as authorized by the development permit and prior to final development inspection of public and private improvements, the owner shall submit record survey drawings showing "as-built" conditions of all public infrastructure improvements. The as-built survey drawings shall be certified and sealed by a registered land surveyor, subject to the tolerances of accuracy indicated in the survey certification. 
Sec. 616. - Specifications for As-Built Surveys. 
The as-built survey drawings shall show the location, vertical and horizontal alignment, and finished elevations of the following: 
(a)  Drainage system pipes and channels. 
(b)  Stormwater detention facilities. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer system. 
(d)  Public water system. 
(e)  Public streets, including street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
Sec. 617. - Process for Approving As-Built Surveys. 
As-built survey drawings required by this Article shall be submitted to the City Engineer in a number of sets as the City Engineer may require. 
Sec. 618. - Final Land Development Inspection. 
Following submission and review of the as-built surveys, the City Inspector and/or Zoning Administrator shall conduct a final development inspection of the project. The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified in the final development inspection prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
Sec. 619. - Maintenance Bond Required. 
Prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a maintenance bond in a form acceptable to the City Attorney is required for all public improvements shown on the as-built surveys required by this Article. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance of all such public improvements for 15 months from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final subdivision plat approval, as applicable. 
Sec. 620. - Amount of Maintenance Bond. 
The value of the maintenance bond shall be equal to 20 percent of the actual cost of construction of the public improvements shown on the as-built surveys or final plat if they were 100 percent complete. For those developers who choose to delay the wearing course of pavement and/or the sidewalk improvements, the value of the maintenance bond shall be equal to 20 percent of the completed work plus 100 percent of the value of the wearing course and/or the sidewalks. The cost of construction shall be evidenced by copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer. 
ARTICLE 7. - IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY 

Sec. 701. - Applicability. 
The improvements specified in this Article shall be provided by the subdivider or developer or at the subdivider's or developer's expense in every subdivision or land development in accordance with the standards contained in this Ordinance. 
Sec. 702. - Survey Monumentation. 
Survey monumentation of the public streets and lot lines in a subdivision shall be provided, where applicable, and when required by Georgia Board of Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors Board Rules, Chapter 180-7 Technical Standards for Property Surveys. 
Sec. 703. - Streets. 
Streets, whether public or private, shall provide access to a development and to all lots in a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties. 
(a)  Streets contained wholly within a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in this Ordinance. Streets that adjoin a development shall be improved to the minimum standards of a local street (unless the character area in which the subdivision or land development is located calls for a different standard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator) from the center line of the street along the development's frontage. 
(b)  Streets in nonresidential areas or serving a multi-family development shall be improved to "collector" street standards unless the character area in which the subdivision or land development is located calls for a different standard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator). In residential subdivisions, streets that serve 100 dwelling units or more shall be improved to "collector" street standards, while those serving fewer than 100 dwelling units shall be improved to "local" street standards, unless the character area in which the subdivision or land development is located calls for a different standard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  The City may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that improvements are needed to bring an existing public street to a higher level of classification than required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
(d)  Curb and gutter shall be required along all streets and internal roadways, unless the character area in which the subdivision or land development is located or the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance calls for a different standard, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 704. - Stormwater Facilities. 
Stormwater drainage and detention facilities shall be provided as required by the City Engineer and in accordance with this Ordinance. 
Sec. 705. - Sidewalks. 
Minimum five foot (5') wide sidewalks shall be provided along each side of any street within or adjacent to the development, in accordance with this Ordinance. Wider sidewalks shall be required when called for pursuant to design criteria specified for the character area in which the land development is located. A two foot wide landscape between the curb and sidewalks shall be installed, where possible. 
Sec. 706. - Traffic Control Devices. 
Street name signs, stop bars and traffic control signs shall be installed by the City at the developer's expense. 
Sec. 707. - Public Water. 
Public water service shall be provided to every lot in a subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection, as more specifically provided in Article 13 "Utilities," of this Ordinance. 
Water mains shall be connected to the existing City water system and extended past each lot. A contractor approved by the City shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves and hydrants at the developer's expense. The Governing Body may elect to participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that pipe sizes are needed in excess of that size required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
Sec. 708. - Fire Hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be located along the streets in every subdivision and within every development project, as approved by the City Engineer. 
Sec. 709. - Reclaimed Water. 
Reuse water service shall be provided to every lot in a subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection, as more specifically provided in Article 13 "Utilities," of this Ordinance. 
Reclaimed water mains shall be connected to the existing City water reuse system, where available and required, and extended past each lot. A contractor approved by the City shall install all elements of the reuse water system, including mains, valves and meters at the developer's expense. The Governing Body may elect to participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that pipe sizes are needed in excess of that size required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
Sec. 710. - Sanitary Sewerage. 
Every lot in a subdivision and every development shall be connected to the City's public sanitary sewerage system unless on-site disposal is approved by the City Engineer and the Hall County Environmental Health Department. Sewer lines shall be connected to the existing sanitary sewerage system and extended past each lot, as more specifically provided in Article 13 "Utilities," of this Ordinance. 
Every element of the sanitary sewer system, including mains, lift stations, outfalls, and laterals, shall be installed at the developer's expense by a contractor approved by the City. The Governing Body may elect to participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that sewer mains or related improvements are needed in excess of the facilities required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
ARTICLE 8. - FINAL PLAT 

Sec. 801. - Final Plat Approval Required. 
The purpose of this Article is to ensure compliance with the legal recording requirements of subdivisions and the proper installation of all required public or private improvements through the submittal of a final plat. 
Sec. 802. - Conformance with Preliminary Plat. 
The final subdivision plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary subdivision plat and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat that the owner proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 803. - Responsibilities. 
The property owner is responsible for compliance with all requirements of this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. Approval of a final subdivision plat and acceptance of the public improvements and dedications therein shall not relieve the owner of those responsibilities. 
Sec. 804. - Installation of Improvements. 
Prior to submission of an application for final subdivision plat approval, all public and private improvements shall have been properly installed and completed in accordance with all requirements and standards of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 805. - Final Plat Specifications. 
A final plat shall be prepared by a Registered Land Surveyor. In addition, if the subdivision involves public dedications of improvements, the final plat shall be approved and stamped by a Professional Engineer. 
The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on an appropriate material and sheet size, and using minimum line weights and letter heights as required by Georgia law for the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended), and as acceptable to the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
The final plat shall meet the following specifications: 
(a)  All data required by Georgia law pertaining to the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67, as amended). 
(b)  Name of the subdivision and street names. 
(c)  Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
(d)  Location or vicinity map. 
(e)  Reference to north point (magnetic, true north, or grid north). 
(f)  Graphic scale. 
(g)  Total acreage of the property being subdivided. 
(h)  Names of owners of record of all abutting land and deed/plat book references. 
(i)  Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/10 foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corner. 
(j)  Building setback lines (front, side, rear, and build-to lines) with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
(k)  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(l)  Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
1.  Utility easements. Whenever it is necessary or desirable to locate a public utility line outside of the street right-of-way, the line shall be located in an easement dedicated to the City for such purpose. The easement shall be no less than 20 feet wide for water and 20 feet wide for sewer, or as otherwise acceptable to the City Engineer. 
2.  Water course and drainage easements. A publicly dedicated stormwater easement or drainage easement is to be provided along any drainage channel, stream or water impoundment within a development. The easement is to be substantially centered on the water course or surround the high water line of the impoundment. All easements shall be no less than 20 feet wide or as otherwise acceptable to the City Engineer. 
(m)  The location and size of all utility lines. 
(n)  A listing of the private covenants recorded with each lot or a statement of the location of such covenants, if applicable. 
(o)  The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, and any wetlands and required stream buffers shall be delineated and labeled. 
(p)  Conditions of zoning, special use, or other approval by the city, if deemed appropriate for inclusion on the final plat by the Zoning Administrator. 
(q)  Acreage to be dedicated to the public, or as privately maintained (common area, roads, etc.). 
(r)  A surveyor's certificate and owner's certificate, as provided in this paragraph. In addition, the original final subdivision plat drawing shall bear the original signature, in black ink, of the registered land surveyor placed across the surveyor's seal in order to be valid and recordable. 
Surveyor's Certificate 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown thereon actually exist. 
The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in ____________ feet, and an angular error of ____________ per angle point, and was adjusted using ____________ rule. 
This plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in ____________ feet. 
By (name): ____________ 
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. ____________ 
Address: ____________ 
Telephone Number: ____________ 
Date: ____________ 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
State of Georgia 
County of Hall 
The undersigned certifies that he or she is the owner of the land shown on this plat and that the plat and the public and private improvements contained therein or associated therewith meet all applicable requirements and standards of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. The owner further acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed, and dedicates to the City of Flowery Branch forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as public streets, easements or other public use areas, and all water system, sewerage and other public improvements. 
Owner's name: ____________ 
Owner's address: ____________ 
____________ Date ____________ 
(Owner's signature) 
(s)  Plat recording and signature block for the Clerk of Superior Court. 
Sec. 806. - Final Plat Application Requirements. 
Applications for final plat approval shall include the following: 
(a)  Application form. A properly completed application form, as provided by the Zoning Administrator, requesting review for project approval. 
(b)  Copies of plats. A set number, as fixed from time to time by the Zoning Administrator, of copies of the final subdivision plat meeting final plat specifications of this Article. 
(c)  Fees. Payment of all applicable application and review fees, as established by the Governing Body from time to time. 
(d)  Financial guarantee of improvements. A maintenance bond, providing for the maintenance of all public improvements required by this Ordinance in the subdivision, shall be submitted which shall be valid for a period of fifteen (15) months following the date of approval of the final plat. If approved by the City Engineer, an alternative financial guarantee of improvements may be accepted, such as one of the following: 
1.  An escrow of funds with the City. 
2.  An escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the City can draw. 
3.  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the City can draw. 
4.  A performance bond for the benefit of the city upon which the City can collect. 
5.  A certificate of deposit with assignment letter. 
Sec. 807. - Review and Approval Process. 
The Zoning Administrator is responsible for administering the review and approval process for final subdivision plats, which shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this Article. The procedures of this Section may be supplemented by the Zoning Administrator where additional specification is required. 
(a)  Review for completeness and application acceptance. The Zoning Administrator shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
(b)  Distribution and agency review of final plat. The Zoning Administrator may forward a copy of the final plat application to other city departments as may be appropriate, the Georgia Department of Transportation if the proposed subdivision has frontage on or access to a state or federal road, or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. Agency review shall specifically include the approval from the Hall County Environmental Health Department if septic tanks are proposed and the Flowery Branch Utilities Department in cases where connection to city utilities is proposed or required. 
(c)  Time period for completion of review. Within two (2) to three (3) weeks following receipt of the application, during which agency review shall be completed, the Zoning Administrator shall collect all written comments or comments marked on plats related to compliance with this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, and shall submit them to the applicant (not necessarily in consolidated form). The Zoning Administrator shall have sole authority to determine the applicability of any provisions of this Ordinance to the final plat. 
(d)  Action. When the Zoning Administrator has determined that the final subdivision plat is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this Ordinance and the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, it shall be approved. The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations, and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. If revisions to a final plat are required, the applicant shall resubmit all revised drawings to the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 808. - Certificate of Final Plat Approval. 
When all of the requirements of this Ordinance, and any conditions of zoning have been met, the Zoning Administrator shall sign and date the CERTIFICATE OF FINAL PLAT APPROVAL stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the final subdivision plat. The executed original of the approved drawing shall be transmitted to the applicant and the Zoning Administrator shall retain the reproducible copy. 
Sec. 809. - Recording of Final Plat. 
Once the final subdivision plat has received approval as evidenced by the Certificate of Final Plat Approval, it shall be recorded by the applicant with the Clerk of the Superior Court. The applicant shall provide the Zoning Administrator with one reproducible of said recorded final subdivision plat. Recordation of a final plat constitutes approval to begin the sale or transfer of subdivision lots. After recording, the reproducible copy may omit the stamp and seal of the Registered Land Surveyor or the Professional Engineer, or both, upon request. 
Sec. 810. - Distribution of Recorded Final Plat. 
The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for ensuring that each applicable agency listed in this Section receives a copy of the final recorded plat with addresses assigned by the Addressing Department, unless that function is done by another City Department: 
1.  The Hall County Tax Commissioner. 
2.  The Hall County Tax Assessor. 
3.  The Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
4.  The City Police Department. 
5.  The City Building Inspector. 
6.  The City Engineer. 
7.  The City Utilities Director. 
8.  The Unites States Postal Service (local postmaster). 
At the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, additional agencies or persons may be added to the above list. 
Sec. 811. - Amendments to Final Plat Approval. 
The application requirements and procedures for amending final plats shall be the same as for final plat applications. 
Sec. 812. - Dedication of Public Streets and Acceptance of Public Improvements. 
(a)  Petition for public acceptance. At any date after twelve months has passed since the date of final plat approval, the subdivider may petition in writing to the Zoning Administrator for the Governing Body to accept public streets and other dedications, in whole or in part, within the subdivision. Said improvements shall not be accepted for maintenance until approved by the Governing Body. 
(b)  Completion of improvements. If construction of any required public improvements was authorized by the City Engineer to be deferred at the time of final plat approval, said work shall have been completed during the one-year maintenance period for the subdivision. 
(c)  Final inspection. Prior to expiration of the maintenance bond, the City Engineer shall conduct a final acceptance inspection of the public improvements. 
(d)  Correction of deficiencies. The owner shall correct all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship and make such repairs as necessary to approximate the as-built condition of the improvements. 
(e)  Release of bond and public acceptance. Upon certification by the City Engineer that the public improvements depicted on the as-built surveys are in conformance with the specifications of this Ordinance and are in good repair, the Governing Body shall release the maintenance bond and accept the public improvements into perpetual maintenance by the City. 
(f)  Warranty deed. Subdivision streets and rights-of-way and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted by the City only upon the delivery to the Governing Body of a general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such rights-of-way and lands. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by a certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the Governing Body, certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. 
Sec. 813. - Lot Combinations and Boundary Line Adjustments. 
An existing lot line forming the boundary between two conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the final plat requirements of this Ordinance. Where separate lots of land are proposed to be combined, they shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as a final plat for review, approval and recording. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the Zoning Administrator and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the re-plat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. 
One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots, may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the Zoning Administrator and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the Zoning Administrator and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall specify thereon that the re-plat is done for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. 
_____ 
ARTICLE 9. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Sec. 901. - Block Lengths and Widths. 
Intersecting roads shall be provided at such intervals so as to provide adequate cross traffic and connectivity. Blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1800) feet nor be less than six hundred (600) feet in length, except where topography or other conditions (including character area designation) justify a departure from these standards. In blocks longer than eight hundred (800) feet, pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block may be required near the center of blocks. 
_____
The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-road parking and deliveries. 
Sec. 902. - Lot Size, Width, and Depth. 
Lots shall meet any minimum area requirements established by the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. Where individual septic tanks are permitted, lots shall meet minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards of the state of Georgia as approved by the Hall County Environmental Health Department, or the minimum lot size of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, whichever is greater. 
Residential lots should have a depth not greater than three (3) times the width of the lot at the building line, unless unusual circumstances make these limitations not practicable. Residential corner lots should have widths to meet adequate or required building setbacks from both abutting roads. 
Commercial and industrial or other non-residential lots should be adequate to provide service areas and off-road parking suitable to use intended. 

Each lot shall contain an adequate building site not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or any required yards/building setback lines. 
Sec. 903. - Lot Lines. 
All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to road lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. 
Sec. 904. - Double Frontage Lots. 
Double frontage lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. 
A no-access, planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
Sec. 905. - Flag Lots. 
(a)  Intent. Flag lots, as defined in this Ordinance, are strongly discouraged. However, subdivisions designed with one or more flag lots may be approved where conditions of hardship make standard design or frontage impossible or impractical due to the configuration of the lot to be subdivided. 
(b)  Denial if reasonable alternative exists. The City shall have due cause to deny any preliminary or final plat that proposes any flag lot, when a reasonable alternative to such lot pattern is available. 
(c)  Panhandle (flag pole) length restriction. If permitted, no flag lot shall be allowed to be platted that has a "panhandle" portion (i.e., portion that does not meet the required lot width) that is more than 400 feet in length. 
(d)  Prohibition of abutting flag lots. If permitted, no flag lot shall abut another flag lot in any subdivision. 
Sec. 906. - Lot Remnants Not Permitted. 
All remnants of lots below any minimum lot size that may be required, left over after subdividing of a larger tract, must be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. The Zoning Administrator may permit a lot remnant for a specific purpose, such as a detention pond, provided that access and design are appropriate and the lot remnant is restricted to a specific non-building use, with said restrictions recorded on the final plat. 
Sec. 907. - Monuments. 
For all subdivisions, a Georgia registered land surveyor shall install permanent survey monuments at all property corners and land lot lines, prior to final plat approval. Lot corners shall be marked with metal rods not less than ½" in diameter and 18" in length and driven so as to be stabilized in the ground. Permanent survey monuments shall also be installed in accordance with the most recent edition of Sec. 180-7-.05, "Monuments" of the Rules of State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers & Land Surveyors and the Georgia Plat Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67). 
ARTICLE 10. - ACCESS AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS FOR ROADS 

Sec. 1001. - Access. 
(a)  Every development and every lot within a subdivision shall be served by a public street meeting the requirements of this Article or an approved private street meeting the requirements of Article 11 of this Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
(b)  Every development and every subdivision shall have access to the public street system via a paved roadway. 
(c)  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
(d)  No subdivision or development shall be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
Sec. 1002. - Conformance With Comprehensive Plan. 
All roads and other features of the adopted comprehensive plan shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and, if any, to the dimensions indicated in the transportation element of the comprehensive plan adopted by the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 1003. - Continuation of Existing Streets. 
Streets existing at the property line of a subdivision or land development, or which terminate within the boundaries of a subdivision or land development, shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. The Zoning Administrator may waive this requirement in instances where in his or her opinion such continuation or extension would be undesirable or incompatible with surroundings. 
Where, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property through the subdivision or land development. 
Sec. 1004. - Tract Plan for Future Roads and Phases. 
Where the land proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract owned or intended for subdivision or development by the subdivider or land developer, a tentative plan of a future road system for the portion not slated for immediate subdivision or land development consideration shall be required by the Zoning Administrator. When such tentative plan is required, it shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider or land developer at the time of submission of an application for preliminary plat or development plan approval, whichever occurs first. 
Sec. 1005. - Road Names. 
Road names shall be reviewed for correct usage and reasonable meanings consistent with the language used and are subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council after recommendation from the Zoning Administrator and 911 Coordinator. For instance, the term "parkway" shall not be appropriate for an undivided, two-lane road. Roads that are a continuation of or in alignment with existing named roads shall be given the name of the existing road. Names of new roads shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing roads in the City or County, regardless of the use of any suffix such as "road," "avenue," "boulevard," "drive," "place," "way," "court," or other designation. 
Sec. 1006. - Improvements along Existing Roads and Highways. 
Any subdivision or development with property fronting on an existing city street, county public road or state highway may be required to provide road improvements in order to bring the street, road, or highway into conformance with the applicable standards specified in this Ordinance. 
In such cases, in lieu of design and construction by the subdivider or developer, at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch, the subdivider or developer shall escrow the dollar equivalency of required improvements (including curbing, utility relocation, and drainage structures) as estimated by the developer and verified by the City Engineer. These funds shall be deposited in the appropriate road construction account prior to the approval of a final plat for a subdivision or prior to issuance of a development permit for a land development, or within 30 days of city, county, or state award of construction contract, whichever occurs first. 
For subdivisions or land developments accessing state routes, the Georgia Department of Transportation may require a driveway permit and the installation of deceleration lanes per its Regulations for Driveways and Encroachment Control. 
Sec. 1007. - Development Along Arterial Street or Limited Access Highway. 
Where a subdivision or land development abuts or contains an arterial street or a limited access highway, the Mayor and City Council may require a street to be constructed approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, from which the lots or land development shall be accessed instead of the arterial street or limited access highway. In such cases, the subdivision or land development shall require a ten-foot-wide no-access easement planted to prohibit travel across it. 
Sec. 1008. - Separation of New Streets along Arterial Street. 
Subdivision streets that intersect an arterial street shall do so at intervals of not less than 800 feet, or as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation, whichever is greater. 
Sec. 1009. - Road Alignment, Intersections, and Jogs. 
Roads shall be aligned to join with planned or existing roads. Under normal conditions, roads shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (90 degrees), but in no case shall such a road intersection be less than 75 degrees. Where offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset "T" intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of 150 feet. 

Sec. 1010. - Bridges. 
Bridges on public rights-of-way shall meet current American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) standards or other standard adopted by the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 1011. - Road and Traffic Control Signs. 
Road and traffic control signs shall be provided and installed by the subdivider along new public roads. The Zoning Administrator may require the installation of such signs by the City after the payment of fees to the City for the installation thereof. 
All land developments shall be provided with traffic control signs (e.g., speed limits, direction of travel, etc.) if necessary, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 1012. - Reference to Other Improvement Specifications. 
Minimum rights-of-way, paving widths, and other requirements for improvement shall be in accordance with minimum standards specified in this Ordinance, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance. In the absence of specific standards for roads and/or improvements within public rights-of-way, however, such unspecified materials and methods of construction shall be in accordance with one or more of the following standards incorporated by reference: 
Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this ordinance, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction shall conform to one or more of the following as appropriate and applicable: 
(a)  The latest standard specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation; 
(b)  The latest edition of AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets ; and/or 
(c)  The Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways published by the Federal Highway Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
Sec. 1013. - Alleys. 
Alleys shall be required at the rear of all lots in traditional neighborhood developments and may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-family, commercial or industrial developments. Alleys may be provided in one or two-family residential developments. Standards for the construction of alleys shall be consistent with those specified in Table 10.1. 
Sec. 1014. - Road Right-of-Way Widths and Miters. 
Standards for the new road rights-of-way shall be consistent with those specified in Table 10.1. The minimum required right-of-way width for a City Street or private road shall be fifty (50) feet, unless otherwise specifically provided in this Article. Wider rights-of-way (i.e., minimum 60 feet) shall be required by the Mayor and City Council for new City Streets serving commercial and industrial subdivisions, or in cases where the Transportation Element of the City of Flowery Branch Comprehensive Plan calls for a larger right-of-way for a road of the same functional classification proposed by the subdivider. 
In addition to the specified right-of-way widths, the City may require right-of-way miters at all intersections to provide area for adequate utility location and maintenance. Twenty (20) foot miters shall be provided at the right-of-way intersection of any state highway. Ten (10) foot miters shall be provided at the right-of-way intersection of a county public road if less than an eighty (80) foot right-of-way exists. 
Where existing County public roads or city streets abut a subdivision or land development, unless otherwise specifically provided by this Article, the right-of-way width shall be no less than fifty (50) feet, and the subdivider or developer shall dedicate to the owner of the public road or city street one-half of the required right-of-way, as measured from the centerline of the road, along the entire property frontage. 
_____
Table 10.1 
Street Improvement Requirements 

 
Sec. 1015. - Road Pavement Width. 
Standards for the new road pavement widths shall be consistent with those specified in Table 10.1, unless otherwise specifically provided by this Ordinance. Where curb and gutter is provided, the minimum pavement width shall be twenty-eight (28) feet from back-of-curb to back-of curb. 
In the case existing of public road s abutting a subdivision or land development, the pavement width shall be no less than the adopted standard for the city or county road, and the subdivider or developer shall if insufficient to meet that standard improve one-half of the required road pavement to City of Flowery Branch as measured from the centerline of the road, along the entire property frontage. 
_____
Sec. 1016. - Perpetual Easement. 
A five-foot wide perpetual easement shall be provided outside of the right-of-way line along both sides of all collector and local streets. See Figure 10.1, Typical Street Section A. 
Sec. 1017. - Alternative Street Standards. 
The Zoning Administrator may recommend and the Mayor and City Council may approve alternative street standards in accordance with this Section. The intent of this Section is primarily to provide for the extension of the grid street pattern in the Old Town and traditional neighborhood development character areas of Flowery Branch, which includes skinny streets. This Section, however, may be applied in other developments when consistent with Character Area designations as may be interpreted by the Zoning Administrator. 
In cases where alternative street standards are approved, only those modifications specified in this Section, or as may be specifically authorized by the Mayor and City Council, shall apply, and all other road improvement specifications of this Article shall be considered applicable to said modified streets. 
Alternative specifications for alleys, lanes, local streets, avenues and main streets, and parkways and boulevards are as shown in Tables 10.2, 10.3, 10.4, 10.5 and 10.6, respectively. One-way streets may be permitted as provided in these alternative standards and as illustrated in Figure 10.2. 
_____
Table 10.2 
Alternative Specifications for Alleys 

 
Table 10.3 
Alternative Specifications for Lanes 

 
Table 10.4 
Alternative Specifications for Local Streets 

 
Table 10.5 
Alternative Standards for Avenues and Main Streets 

 
Table 10.6 
Alternative Standards for Parkways and Boulevards 

 

Sec. 1018. - Road Grade and Vertical Curves. 
Road grades shall and vertical curves shall meet the specifications of Table 10.1. 
Sec. 1019. - Road Base and Paving Specifications. 
Road base and paving specifications shall meet the requirements of Table 10.1. 
Sec. 1020. - Grading. 
(a)  Grading of full width. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavement extensions or sidewalks, where required or if installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. 
(b)  Clearing. Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the developer shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved. 
(c)  Slopes and shoulder improvements. The maximum slope for all fill or cut slopes shall be 2 feet of run for each 1 foot of rise or fall. The minimum width for all shoulders on local or collector streets from back edge of the curb shall be 11 feet. All shoulders shall slope one-fourth (¼) inch to the foot toward the roadway. When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. 
(d)  Protection of banks. Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded (or in steep areas sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable vegetative cover to prevent erosion. 
(e)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved, the curb lines shall be staked by the developer's Registered Land Surveyor. Before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities that are to be located under the roadway are to be installed completely or otherwise provided in accordance with City requirements. Utilities shall be properly located in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Authorization. No private improvements, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall be installed within a public right-of-way except by authorization of the City Engineer. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's and the City's facilities should they become damaged. 
(g)  Preparation of subgrade. Prior to placement of the street base, the subgrade shall be compacted to 95% standard proctor. 
(h)  Curbing. Curbing shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the requirements and standards of this Article. All streets shall be provided with a combination curb and gutter of 3,000 psi Portland cement concrete, or with a header curb of the same material at median or cul-de-sac islands. Curbing along streets shall be 6 by 24-inch combination (full face) curb unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. (see Figure 10.3) 

Sec. 1021. - Other Road Specifications. 
Sight distance, horizontal alignment, vertical alignment, design speed, and another provisions of Table 10.1 not already specified in the text of these regulations shall be followed. 
Sec. 1022. - Cul-de-sacs Turnarounds. 
Roads that dead-end shall terminate in a cul-de-sac or other approved turn-around. Roads that are planned to continue at some future date shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac. Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, cul-de-sac or dead-end streets shall not be greater in length than 1,000 feet unless approved by the Mayor and City Council at preliminary plat approval. 
The right-of-way radius of a cul-de-sac shall meet requirements specified in Table 10.1. 
Sec. 1023. - Curb Radii. 
The curb-line radius at street intersections shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet. Where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, a longer radius may be required. For commercial and industrial subdivision streets, a minimum forty (40) foot curb-line radius shall be provided. 
Sec. 1024. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of five (5) feet (see Figure 10.4) and shall be provided under the following conditions: 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be installed in subdivisions with lots averaging less than one acre in area. 
(b)  The Mayor and City Council may require a subdivider to install, along the entire property frontage, sidewalks on roads leading to or going through commercial areas, school sites, places of public assembly, and other congested areas, or as may be otherwise recommended in the City's comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Sidewalks shall not be less than two (2) feet from street curbs or the edge of required pavement. The sidewalk location may be varied at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(d)  All driveway aprons over sidewalk areas shall be paved with concrete by the developer or builder. 
(e)  Sidewalks shall be four (4) inches thick (depth of paving) concrete (3,000 psi at 28 days). 
(f)  When sidewalks are required, the subdivider shall furnish and install all required sidewalk materials without cost to the City, in accordance with City Specifications. 
_____ 
_____
As an alternative to sidewalks, developments in conservation subdivisions may, with the approval of the Mayor and City Council, include common pedestrian paths constructed of pervious surfacing materials such as gravel, brick dust, mulch, or other similar surface. Such paths should follow routes that are desirable and appropriate for the individual landscape. An easement should be established, where feasible, in order to ensure the long-term accessibility of the path. 
Sec. 1025. - Location of Utilities in Streets. 
(a)  Above-Ground Utilities. Telephone poles, street light poles, telephone junction boxes and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a street right-of-way must be at least 8 feet back from the back of the street curb and 1 foot back from the edge of the sidewalk, whichever is farthermost from the roadway. 
(b)  Underground Utilities. Utilities placed underground shall be placed within the right-of-way. 
(c)  Sanitary Sewer. Sanitary sewer when placed within a street right-of-way, shall have a minimum of 4 feet of cover and provide a minimum slope of laterals to abutting properties of 1 percent. 
(d)  Location of utilities. Other utilities, when placed underground along the roadway, shall be located in the shoulder of the road and shall be placed at the following distances measured from the back of curb or edge of pavement, and placed at or below the depths indicated as follows (Table 10.7): 
Table 10.7 

 
Water and gas mains must be placed on opposite sides of the street. All utilities that will cross under pavement shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate. 
Sec. 1026. - Street Lights. 
Street lights may be provided in accordance with City specifications by the developers of a subdivision prior to the approval of a final plat. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the City and by the utility company that will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. The fixtures shall be mounted no more than thirty (30) feet above the ground and shall have appropriate arm length or power to place light over the street. Post top luminaries may be permitted when approved by the Zoning Administrator. Fixtures shall be located no more than five hundred (500) feet apart, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator, and, when provided, at least one light shall be located at each public or private street intersection within the subdivision or land development. 
The developer shall pay all costs for poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation of street lights, as well as arrange an agreement with the utility company for complete maintenance of all installations. The City of Flowery Branch may assume the responsibility for publicly dedicated city streets and make the monthly payments to the power company for electrical energy for each street light only after these requirements have been accomplished and improvements accepted by the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. Maintenance and operation costs of street lights will be assumed by the City no earlier than two years after lights have been installed. 
Sec. 1027. - Street Trees. 
(a)  When required. Street tree planting is strongly encouraged if not required for the character area in which the subdivision or land development is located. Street trees may be permitted within the rights-of-way of new public streets and private streets within commercial, industrial, or residential subdivisions, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Plan submittal and approval. When street trees are to be provided, the subdivider, owner of land to be dedicated as a public street, or the developer of a private street shall at the time of preliminary plat approval submit a plan for the provision of street trees along all said roads which shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Installation . It is the intent of this Section that where street trees are provided the subdivider or developer should carefully position street trees on the plan while taking into account sidewalk locations, utility locations, and, if not constructed simultaneously with the construction of the public or private street, future driveways. When street trees are provided, the subdivider or developer shall install said street trees, according to a plan approved by the Zoning Administrator as a part of preliminary plat approval or land development permit approval, and prior to dedication or opening of said street. The Zoning Administrator may accept an agreement by the subdivider where the responsibility for street tree planting is shifted to the owners or individual builders of the lots to be subdivided, upon their development. Any such responsibility shall be legally transferred in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. 
(d)  Location . Street trees must be planted within the public or private right-of-way or, if right-of-way width is insufficient to accommodate said street trees, then on private property within a street tree easement dedicated to the city. 
(e)  Requirements and guidelines. 
(1)  Size . When planted, street trees should be provided the greatest amount of growing area possible. The city encourages selection and planting of medium and large canopy trees (at maturity) so long as there is adequate room for planting to allow tree and root growth, without conflict with utilities and paved surfaces, including sidewalks. 
(2)  Species selection. Selected trees are classified by size of canopy in Table 10.8. The applicant for street tree plan approval may propose other species than those listed in Table 10.8. The city encourages the selection of both urban-tolerant and native trees, as specified in Table 10.8. 
(3)  Minimum tree lawn and minimum open soil surface area. No street tree shall be planted unless it has a minimum of five feet in width by five feet in length of open, unobstructed soil surface area. To ensure adequate growing area for street trees, each street tree planted shall be provided a minimum open soil surface area of 25 square feet for very small canopy, 75 square feet for small canopy, 225 square feet for medium canopy, and 400 square feet for large canopy trees. Street tree plans shall demonstrate compliance with these requirements. To meet the minimum soil surface area, private property adjacent to the right-of-way may be included if unobstructed. Tree grates above open soil surface areas may be proposed and permitted. 
(4)  Planting locations restricted. Street trees shall not be planted within: thirty (30) feet of the intersection of public or private streets; twenty (20) feet of street light and utility poles; ten (10) feet of existing walls, fences, signs, driveways, or fire hydrants; or five (5) feet of existing underground utility corridors and sidewalks. 
(5)  Spacing . Street trees shall be spaced at intervals appropriate considering the canopy size and height of the tree at maturity. Generally, this means that there should be a minimum spacing of 15 feet for very small canopy, 20 feet for small canopy, 40 feet for medium canopy, and 60 feet or more for large canopy trees at maturity. 
(6)  Overhead power or utility lines. When street trees are proposed to be planted underneath or within five (5) feet of overhead power lines or utilities, only those trees classified as "very small" or "small" in Table 10.8 may be planted. Additionally, underneath or near overhead power lines or utilities, only those species indicated with an "X" or "XX" (i.e., good or especially good) with regard to utility corridors in Table 10.8 should be planted. 
(7)  Root barriers. The street tree plan shall propose, and the Zoning Administrator shall require, the installation of root barriers, in accordance with manufacturer's specifications, when trees are planted within five feet of a sidewalk, curb, paved surface, or underground utility corridor. Street trees installed between a sidewalk and curb and gutter shall require root barriers along both the sidewalk and the curb. Street trees installed between an underground utility corridor and a sidewalk, shall require root barriers along both the utility corridor and the sidewalk. The street tree plan shall identify all street trees that require installation of root barriers. The linear distance of the root barrier shall be determined based on the critical root zone of the tree at maturity but in most instances shall be no less than 5 feet in length (2.5' feet from the trunk of the tree in each direction) adjacent to the improvement to be protected. 
(8)  Material and depth specifications for root barriers. Street tree root barriers can be made of durable high-density polyethylene or thick plastic, metal, or herbicide-impregnated cloth, buried vertically in the soil. Effective depths depend upon soil texture. At least 12 inches in vertical depth is required for protection. Install root barriers by trenching along the area to be protected. Installers shall make all necessary effort to use best management practices in addressing the potential damage to a sidewalk, curb, paved surface or underground utility by root invasion. 

Root Barrier Example 
Table 10.8  Characteristics of Trees Identified as Potentially Appropriate for Use as Street Trees 

 
X, XX = Good. 
P = Plant new trees and conserve existing trees. 
0 = Do not plant. 
( Ord. No. 509, § 1, 5-7-2015 ) 
Sec. 1028. - Construction Entrance/Exit. 
Construction entrances/exits onto hard surface public roads shall be improved with a minimum of six (6) inches of coarse aggregate (crushed stone) for a minimum width of twenty (20) feet and a minimum length of fifty (50) feet as approved by the Zoning Administrator. It shall be a violation of this Ordinance to track mud and dirt onto city or other public or private roads. 
ARTICLE 11. - PRIVATE ROADS 

Sec. 1101. - Generally. 
(a)  Private roads may, upon application, be permitted subject to the requirements of this Article. Proposed private streets shall not be permitted if they do not include access to amenities or features that, by design or agreement, are intended for use by the general public. 
(b)  Applications for approval of private roads shall be approved or disapproved by the Mayor and City Council. Following a recommendation by the Zoning Administrator, the Mayor and City Council shall consider the application and the may impose conditions on the approval of private roads to ensure various public purposes and to mitigate potential problems with private roads. 
(c)  No final plat involving a private road shall be approved unless said final plat conforms to the requirements of this Article. 
(d)  This section shall not be construed to prevent the installation of roads and driveways within private developments not involving the subdivision of land that remain under private ownership but which are unrestricted in terms of public access. 
Sec. 1102. - Special Improvement Requirements. 
Whenever a subdivision or development is proposed to have roads or streets closed to through-traffic (i.e., private with access control), the Mayor and City Council shall require that the following improvements and provisions be reviewed, approved, and installed or erected in accordance with approved development plans: 
(a)  A gate or guardhouse at the entrance to the private road or street; 
(b)  A sign of appropriate size to identify the street or development is private. 
(c)  Provisions are made to ensure that access at the entrance to the private road or street is not restricted to law enforcement officials and vehicles, emergency response officials and vehicles, postal delivery vehicles, and City personnel and vehicles while conducting City business. 
Sec. 1103. - Engineering Plans Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a new private road or alter an existing private road or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of development plans and securing a development permit from the Zoning Administrator in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 1104. - Standards for Private Roads. 
All private roads shall be constructed to standards for City Streets as specified in this Ordinance. 
Sec. 1105. - Road Names and Signs. 
Private roads shall be named, subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council after recommendation by the Zoning Administrator and 911 Coordinator. The subdivider of land involving a private road shall install road signs with content containing the road name as approved by the Zoning Administrator. The sign signifying the private road may be required by the Zoning Administrator to be a different color than that of road signs provided for public roads, or designated "private" in order to distinguish maintenance responsibilities in the field. 
Sec. 1106. - Rights-of-way. 
Rights-of-way for private roads shall be designated on final plats as general purpose public access and utility rights-of-way, along with the name of said private road. Said private rights-of-way shall, at minimum, be of the same width as that required for the right-of-way of a City road. Rights-of-way for private roads shall not be included in any calculation of minimum lot size established by the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. In the cases of private roads, the right-of-way for the private road shall be drawn as its own discrete parcel to be dedicated to a private homeowners association (i.e., not shown to be a part of any lot). 
Sec. 1107. - Maintenance. 
The City shall not maintain, repair, resurface, rebuild, or otherwise improve roads, signs, drainage improvements or any other appurtenances within rights-of-way established for private roads. A private maintenance agreement recorded with the Hall County Clerk of the Superior Court shall be required for any private road and other improvements within rights-of-way established for private roads. The maintenance agreement shall set out the distribution of expenses, remedies for non-compliance with the terms of the agreement, rights to the use of rights-of-way, and other pertinent considerations. The maintenance agreement shall specifically include the following terms: 
(a)  The maintenance agreement shall establish minimum annual assessments in an amount adequate to defray costs of ordinary maintenance and procedures for approval of additional needed assessments. The maintenance agreement shall also specify that the funds from such assessments will be held by a homeowners or property owners association in cases of a subdivision of five (5) or more lots fronting on a private road. 
(b)  The maintenance agreement shall include a periodic maintenance schedule. 
(c)  The maintenance agreement shall be enforceable by any property owner served by the private road. 
(d)  The maintenance agreement shall establish a formula for assessing maintenance and repair costs equitably to property owners served by the private road. 
(e)  The maintenance agreement shall run with the land. 
(f)  The Mayor and City Council may, at its discretion, as a condition of approving private roads, require a performance bond and/or maintenance bond be submitted by the subdivider and held by a homeowners or property owners association, to be drawn from by the homeowners or property owners association as maintenance and repair needs may arise. Alternatively, where such association does not exist, the Mayor and City Council may require that the subdivider pay an amount of money as recommended by the Zoning Administrator into an escrow account or other suitable account for the maintenance and repair of private roads and stormwater management improvements. 
Sec. 1108. - Specifications for Final Plats Involving Private Roads. 
No final plat involving a private road shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator for recording unless and until it shall contain the following on the face of the plat: 
(a)  Deed book and page reference to the recorded covenant required by this Article. 
(b)  "WARNING, the City of Flowery Branch has no responsibility to build, improve, maintain, or otherwise service the private roads, drainage improvements, and other appurtenances contained within the rights-of-way for private roads shown on this plat." 
(c)  "Grant of Right-of-way. The right-of-way shown on this plat for private road(s) is hereby granted and said grant of rights shall be liberally construed to provide all necessary authority to the City of Flowery Branch, and to public or private utility companies serving the subdivision, for the installation and maintenance of utilities, including, but not limited to, electric lines, gas lines, telephone lines, water lines, sewer lines, cable television lines, and fiber optic cables, drainage improvements, together with the right to trim interfering trees and brush, together with a perpetual right of ingress and egress for installation, maintenance, and replacement of such lines. 
____________ 
Signature of Property Owner" 
Sec. 1109. - Purchaser's Acknowledgement. 
Prior to the sale and as a condition of the closing of a real estate transaction involving any lot served by a private road in the City, the subdivider or seller of said lot shall execute a notarized purchaser's acknowledgement of private road construction and drainage maintenance responsibilities as set forth below. A copy of the purchaser's acknowledgement shall be retained by the purchaser and shall be required to be submitted as a condition of a building permit for a principal building on said lot: 
"Purchaser's Acknowledgement of Private Road and Drainage Maintenance Responsibility. 
(I) (We) have read the Declaration of Covenant that pertains to the lot that is the subject of this real estate transaction ____________ (insert address or attach legal description). (I) (We) understand that the Declaration of Covenant applies to the lot that (I am) (we are) purchasing and requires (me) (us) to provide a specified percentage or amount of the financing for the construction and maintenance of any private road and drainage facilities serving the lot which (I am) (we are) purchasing, and that owners of other lots in this plat may sue for and recover those costs which this covenant requires (me) (us) to pay, plus their damages resulting from (my) (our) refusal to contribute, plus reasonable attorneys fees. (I) (we) further understand that the City has no obligation to assist with the maintenance and improvement of the private road, drainage facilities, and other appurtenances within the right-of-way for the private road serving the lot in question. I (we) understand that a copy of this purchaser's acknowledgement shall be required as a condition of the issuance of a building permit for a principal building on the lot (I am) (we are) purchasing. 
____________ 
Purchaser" 
ARTICLE 12. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 1201. - Title. 
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Flowery Branch Post Development Stormwater Management Ordinance." 
Sec. 1202. - Findings and Purposes. 
The purpose of this Article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This Article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(a)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(b)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(c)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(d)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(e)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(f)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(g)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
Sec. 1203. - Applicability. 
This Article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless specifically exempted by this Article. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(a)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of 1 acre or more; 
(b)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
(c)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the Zoning Administrator to be a hotspot land use; or, 
(d)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in this Section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules (unless previously conceptually approved by the City Engineer). 
Sec. 1204. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from this Article: 
(a)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(b)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(c)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
(d)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 1205. - Administration. 
The Zoning Administrator or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Article. 
Sec. 1206. - Compatibility with Other Regulations. 
This Article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this Article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
Sec. 1207. - Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
The City of Flowery Branch will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this Article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
Sec. 1208. - Definitions. 
Applicant: A person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Channel: A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement: An agreement between a land owner and the City of Flowery Branch or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
Detention: The temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility: A detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer: A person who undertakes land development activities. 
Development: A land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement: An easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
Extended detention: The detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection: Measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
Flooding: A volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space: Permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot: An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic Soil Group (HSG): A Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover: A surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
Industrial Stormwater Permit: A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration: The process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Jurisdictional wetland: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development: Any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activities: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land development project: A discrete land development undertaking. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement: A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
New development: A land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution: A form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice: Any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility: A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
On-site facility: A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Overbank flood protection: Measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the 2-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit: The permit issued by the City of Flowery Branch to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person: Except to the extent exempted from this Article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development: The time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development: The time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Project: A land development project. 
Redevelopment: A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff: Stormwater runoff. 
Site: The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Stormwater better site design: Nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management: The collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility: Any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure: Any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan: A document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this Article. 
Stormwater management system: The entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
Stormwater retrofit: A stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff: The flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
Structural stormwater control: A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Sec. 1209. - Compliance. 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this Article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
Sec. 1210. - Permit Required. 
Unless specifically exempted by this Article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the City of Flowery Branch a permit application on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator for that purpose. 
Sec. 1211. - Permit Application Requirements. 
Unless otherwise exempted by this Article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(a)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with this Article; 
(b)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with the requirements of this Article; 
(c)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with this Article, if applicable; 
(d)  Performance bond in accordance with this Article, if applicable; and, 
(e)  Permit application and plan review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the City of Flowery Branch for construction document review by the City Engineer. All review fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
Sec. 1212. - Stormwater Concept Plan and Consultation Meeting. 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, it is recommended that the land owner or developer shall meet with the City of Flowery Branch for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting should take place at the time of the preliminary plat of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(a)  Existing conditions /proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(b)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(c)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans, if applicable, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
Sec. 1213. - Stormwater Management Plan Requirements. 
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this ordinance, including the performance criteria set forth in this Article. 
This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a Professional Engineer (PE) licensed in the state of Georgia, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. 
The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this Article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system, as determined by the City Engineer. The plan shall include all of the information required in the Stormwater Management Site Plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(a)  Common address and legal description of site. 
(b)  Vicinity map. 
(c)  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(d)  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in this Article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in this Article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(e)  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 4; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(f)  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is 10 percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(g)  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Flowery Branch Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance or NPDES Permit for Construction Activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(h)  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(i)  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(j)  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(k)  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Flowery Branch as provided in this Article, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with this Article. 
(l)  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City of Flowery Branch that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
Sec. 1214. - Stormwater Management Inspection and Maintenance Agreements. 
(a)  Agreement required. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City of Flowery Branch requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City of Flowery Branch, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
(b)  Approval by city. The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City of Flowery Branch prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. All maintenance agreements must be consistent with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch. 
(c)  Owner responsibilities. The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  Schedule. As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. 
(e)  Annual inspections. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(f)  Enforcement. In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Flowery Branch may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in this Article. 
(g)  Dedication in lieu of inspection and maintenance agreement. The City of Flowery Branch, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this ordinance and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
Sec. 1215. - Performance and Maintenance Bonds. 
(a)  Required duration and amount. All performance and maintenance bonds, cash deposits, escrow accounts or other guarantee/instruments of financial security as approved by the City Attorney to ensure maintenance of stormwater facilities, shall be for a period of two years (unless otherwise determined by the City Council), and be made payable to the City in the amount of ten (10) percent of the actual construction cost. 
(b)  Notice of need for maintenance. In the event that the stormwater facilities have not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Flowery Branch shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. 
(c)  Correction of violations. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the City of Flowery Branch, may correct the violation as provided in this Ordinance and be entitled to the amount identified under the bond (or other instrument of financial security). Other penalties may apply. 
Sec. 1216. - Permit Processing and Issuance. 
(a)  Application requirements. Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Administrator. Permit applications shall include the items set forth in this ordinance. Two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included. 
(b)  Notice of decision. The Zoning Administrator shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(c)  Disapproval. If either the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the City of Flowery Branch shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event all application requirements shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(d)  Issuance. Upon a finding by the City of Flowery Branch that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this Article, the City may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
Sec. 1217. - General Requirements After Permit is Issued. 
Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Compliance and certification. The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this ordinance and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(b)  Development limited to approved areas. The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(c)  Periodic inspections. The City of Flowery Branch shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(d)  Changes to plans. No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the City of Flowery branch; and, 
(e)  Report, certificate and plans upon completion. Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by this Article. 
Sec. 1218. - Modifications for Off-Site Facilities. 
The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City of Flowery Branch which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City of Flowery Branch that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(a)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(b)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(c)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(d)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(e)  Water quality impairment in violation of State water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
Sec. 1219. - Performance Criteria for Water Quality. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(a)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(b)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(c)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City of Flowery Branch are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
Sec. 1220. - Performance Criteria for Stream Channel Protection. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(a)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(b)  24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; *This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City of Flowery Branch for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
(c)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
Sec. 1221. - Performance Criteria for Overbank Flooding Protection. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the 1-year, 24-hour storm under this Article is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the 2-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. *This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City of Flowery Branch for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
Sec. 1222. - Performance Criteria for Extreme Flooding Protection. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24 hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated.*This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the City of Flowery Branch for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
Sec. 1223. - Performance Criteria for Structural Stormwater Controls. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from City of Flowery Branch before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the City of Flowery Branch may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
Sec. 1224. - Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. 
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under this Article. The applicant may, if approved by the City of Flowery Branch, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Sec. 1225. - Drainage System Guidelines. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. 
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(b)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(c)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
Sec. 1226. - Dam Design Guidelines. 
The following post-development stormwater management performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this Article. 
Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
Sec. 1227. - Inspections to Ensure Plan Compliance During Construction. 
Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the City of Flowery Branch or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the City of Flowery Branch. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(a)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(b)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(c)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and, 
(d)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
Sec. 1228. - Final Inspection and As Built Plans. 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a Professional Engineer. A final inspection by the City of Flowery Branch is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
Sec. 1229. - Long-Term Maintenance Inspection of Stormwater Facilities and Practices. 
Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this ordinance. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the City of Flowery Branch shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Flowery Branch, may correct the violation as provided in this Article. 
Inspection programs by the City of Flowery Branch may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
Sec. 1230. - Right-of-Entry for Inspection. 
The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the City of Flowery Branch to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this ordinance is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this Article. 
Sec. 1231. - Records of Maintenance Activities. 
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the City of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 1232. - Failure to Maintain. 
If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the City of Flowery Branch, after thirty (30) days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The City of Flowery Branch assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorum tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
ARTICLE 13. - UTILITIES 

Sec. 1301. - Easements. 
Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water or drainage easement of at least of twenty (20) feet in width. Easements for storm pipes shall be at least fifteen (15) feet wide, and all easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Where easements are needed for utility locations, they shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer to the appropriate utility provider. Easements having a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided where required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Where easements are needed for public water and/or sewer lines, they shall be provided as determined appropriate by the Zoning Administrator but shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide. All easements required pursuant to this Section shall be shown on any required preliminary plat, final plat and development plan. 
Sec. 1302. - Storm Drainage System. 
No land shall be platted or developed except in accordance with storm water management standards provided in this Ordinance. At a minimum, storm drainage in subdivisions and land developments shall meet the following requirements. The storm drains along with catch basins and manholes shall be installed in compliance with the plans and specifications, and as indicated herein. 
(a)  Every subdivision or land development shall be served by storm drainage facilities, including drains, sewers, catch basins, culverts and other facilities as required by standards and specifications of the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  All drainage facilities shall be so designed to serve the entire drainage area in which these facilities are located. All road drains serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. A formula may be developed by the Zoning Administrator to provide for a sharing of the cost of other drainage facilities needed to serve the subdivision when certain of the required drainage facilities are necessary to serve other subdivisions or land developments in the same drainage basin. 
(c)  Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods proposed by a professional engineer accepted by the Zoning Administrator as a substitute for the Rational Method, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with required plans. Capacity for a 25-year storm or rain shall be provided for all road drainage structures such as catch basins, inlets cross drains, etc, except that along state rights-of-way the design shall meet standards of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(d)  All surface water drainage shall be transported to existing storm sewers or to drainage facilities approved by the Zoning Administrator. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot or land development site to adjacent lots, land development sites, or vacant properties. Storm water shall not be discharged directly to perennial streams. It shall be directed toward natural drainages. If water must be discharged to a stream, the water quality flowing into the stream must meet or exceed the water quality in the receiving waters. The water quantity flowing into the stream must not disrupt or degrade the ecology of the water body. 
(e)  Whenever drainage ditches are used, such ditches shall retain natural design characteristics and be so designed that they do not present a hazard to life and safety or create erosion problems. 
(f)  All drainage features shall be in accordance with standards and specifications of the Board of Commissioners, and no extension shall be made from the road drainage through the abutting property without approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(g)  When the construction of a proposed public road makes it necessary to cross a storm drain, the developer shall provide and install the required size and length of an acceptable grade of pipe. 
1.  In cases where the developer or subdivider chooses not to develop the land through which the drain runs, then the trench may be left open; provided, however, in such cases the plat must be so marked and an easement shown thereon, indicating that no building or driveway shall be built over or within forty (40) feet of the open drain. 
2.  Where the developer chooses to leave the drain open and same is crossed by a driveway, the size of pipe shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator and no building will be approved unless the installation meets the requirements of the Zoning Administrator. 
3.  Notwithstanding the above controls, the Zoning Administrator may refuse to issue building approval on any lot or lots where the land is subject to floods or where, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator, the elevations of the property are such that a building could not be properly maintained on the lot. 
Sec. 1303. - Water System. 
All water mains, where provided, shall be designed by a professional engineer and installed along with a service connection for each lot or land development and be in operating condition prior to final plat approval, if required, and paving installation. All pipes, valves, and other components shall conform to the Development Guidelines for Water Mains and Sanitary Sewer Systems" of the City of Gainesville Public Utilities Department, January 2004, as may be amended from time to time. 
Where water systems are provided, it is recommended that they be looped. Where a public water supply does not exist, the Health Department may authorize the installation of individual wells for each lot or land development. In such instances, the well shall be installed prior to approval of a final plat, if required. 
Sec. 1304. - Fire Hydrants. 
Fire hydrants shall be located and set in accordance with City specifications. Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential land developments and all subdivisions where a municipal, county, or community water supply exists. In such cases where a municipal, county, or community water supply exists, fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at appropriate intervals throughout the subdivision or land development shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer as required by the County Fire Department. To eliminate repavement of roads, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a road within the right-of-way shared by such underground utilities. 
Sec. 1305. - Reclaimed Water System. 
(a)  Overview. Reclaimed water involves taking wastewater from the City's treatment plants, giving it a high degree of treatment and using the resulting high quality water for a new beneficial use. Reclaimed water is delivered to homes and businesses through an underground distribution system entirely separate from the drinking water system. Reclaimed water can serve in many capacities where it is unnecessary to use high-quality, potable (or drinkable) water. Uses of reclaimed water include: irrigating lawns and landscaping designs; irrigation of edible crops that will be peeled, cooked or thermally processed before consumption is allowed; and use in fountains or decorative pools, and fire-fighting. Using reclaimed water is known as "water reuse." When there are insufficient uses of reclaimed water, the water is sprayed on a field in an approved manner which essentially is an inefficient or non-productive use of reclaimed water resources. 
(b)  Purposes of water reuse. The City's reclaimed water system can save extensive amounts of drinking water each day, and its use is less expensive for the vast majority of customers. Promoting greater use of reclaimed water among private developments helps to delay the need for developing costly new water sources and building or expanding very expensive treatment plants. Promotion of water reuse also helps the City to comply with permits relating to its water supply and wastewater treatment. 
(c)  When required. When the following types of developments, or portions thereof, are located within a reasonable distance (as determined by the City Engineer) of where there are City's reclaimed water distribution mains are installed, the development shall be connected to the City of Flowery Branch's reclaimed water system. 
1.  Golf courses. 
2.  Areas of more than one-quarter acre of landscaping; 
3.  Uses requiring on-site fire-fighting water supply. 
4.  Subdivisions or other residential developments of ten (10) units or more. 
5.  Other direct reuse sites (areas permitted for the application or impoundment of reclaimed water) identified by the Zoning Administrator or City Engineer that reasonably preclude human contact with reclaimed water. 
(d)  Conveyances. Pipeline conveyance means any system of pipelines that transports reclaimed water from a sewage treatment facility to the point of land application or end use. When required by the City Engineer to connect to the existing reclaimed water system, the developer shall construct a pipeline conveyance so that: reclaimed water does not find its way into, or otherwise contaminate, a potable water system; system structural integrity is maintained; and the capability for inspection, maintenance, and testing is maintained. 
(e)  Conveyance design standard. The reclaimed water conveyance and all appurtenances conducting reclaimed water shall be designed to withstand a static pressure of at least 50 pounds per square inch greater than the design working pressure without leakage. 
(f)  Location and application methods. Reclaimed water conveyances shall be located no closer than 50 feet from a drinking water well, nor closer than two feet vertically or six feet horizontally from a potable water pipeline. A permittee irrigating with reclaimed water shall: use application methods that reasonably preclude human contact with reclaimed water; prevent reclaimed water from standing on open access areas during normal periods of use; prevent reclaimed water from coming into contact with drinking fountains, water coolers, or eating areas; and secure hose bibbs discharging reclaimed water to prevent use by the public. 
(g)  Markings. For a pipeline conveyance, eight inches in diameter or less, pipes shall be marked in English: "CAUTION: RECLAIMED WATER, DO NOT DRINK" in intervals of three feet or less and colored purple or wrapped with durable purple tape. All external uses of reclaimed water shall be clearly marked as containing reclaimed water or reuse water by displaying the international "do not drink" symbol. 
(h)  Metering and use. No person or end user shall directly reuse reclaimed water unless permitted by the City of Flowery Branch and according to approved and correctly installed meters. 
(i)  Amount of water reuse and agreement. The amount of reuse water to be used by an individual development, in terms of gallons per day for anticipated uses, shall be determined by the City Engineer. An agreement shall be required memorializing the amount of reuse water to be used, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and approved by the City Engineer. 
Sec. 1306. - Sanitary Sewerage System. 
When in the written opinion of the City Engineer, public sanitary sewers are within reasonable access of the subdivision or land development, the subdivider or land developer shall provide sanitary sewer services designed by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision, or to the land development. All road sewers, where required, serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. A formula may be developed by the Zoning Administrator to provide for a sharing of the costs of other sewer facilities needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain of the required sewer facilities are necessary to serve other subdivisions or land developments in the same drainage basin. 
When in the written opinion of the City Engineer, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot or the land development may be used when in compliance with the standards of the Hall County Health Department. If public sewerage is not available, but is expected to be available within a reasonable time period after completion of the subdivision or land development, an alternate method for sewage disposal for individual lots or the land development will be required on an interim basis. In such instances, if permitted, the developer will be required to construct a complete sanitary sewer system for the subdivision or land development, including outfall lines, road sewers, and service stubs to individual lots. 
All sewers will be plugged and otherwise protected to insure serviceability at the time of connection to the public system, and will conform to the specifications of the owner of the water system if applicable and the Zoning Administrator. 
All pipes, valves, and other components shall conform to the Development Guidelines for Water Mains and Sanitary Sewer Systems" of the City of Gainesville Public Utilities Department, January 2004, as may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 1307. - Utilities. 
All utility improvements within subdivisions and developments shall be located within the right-of-way of a public street or, if permitted, a private street, or within an easement designated for such use meeting specifications of this Ordinance. 
The electric system and any other underground utility system, when it is provided in a subdivision or land development, shall be installed along with service connections before any paving of roads. All utility facilities, including but not limited to electric power, telephone, and cable television, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision or land development. 
ARTICLE 14. - ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, REMEDIES, AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 1401. - Generally. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this Ordinance or the requirements of an approved plat, development plan or permit is subject to any or all of the enforcement actions and remedies described in this Section. 
Sec. 1402. - Notice of Violation. 
If the Zoning Administrator or his designee determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with any provision of this Ordinance or any term or conditions of a permit, approved plat or development plan, he shall issue a written Notice of Violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Said Notice of Violation may be issued prior to or concurrent with the issuance of a stop work order. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this Ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or agent of the owner of the property where the activity is taking place. 
Sec. 1403. - Content of Notice of Violation. 
Each notice of violation shall contain the following: 
(a)  The name and address of the owner, applicant, or other person responsible for the site where the violation occurred or is occurring; 
(b)  The address or other description of the site where the violation occurred or is occurring; 
(c)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(d)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to correct the violation; 
(e)  The date for the completion of such remedial measures, after which further enforcement action will be taken; and 
(f)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the Notice of Violation is directed. 
Sec. 1404. - Stop Work Order. 
Upon learning or discovering a violation of this Ordinance or any approved site plan or permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator may immediately issue a Stop Work Order which forbids all further work at the job site until the Stop Work Order is withdrawn or otherwise removed. The Stop Work Order shall be posted on the job site and mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the permit or approved site plan. The Stop Work Order shall remain in effect until the remedial measures set forth in the Notice of Violation have been taken or any violation has otherwise been corrected to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator; provided, however, the Zoning Administrator may withdraw or modify any Stop Work Order to enable the applicant to take necessary remedial measures to cure any such violation. 
Sec. 1405. - Failure of Remedial Measures. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the Notice of Violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the Notice of Violation, any one or more actions or penalties described in this Section as appropriate may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the Notice of Violation was directed and/or the property where the violation occurred or is occurring. 
Sec. 1406. - Withholding, Modification, Revocation, or Suspension of Approvals or Pending Approvals. 
The Zoning Administrator may at any time refuse to issue, revoke, modify, or suspend a plat, plan, or permit for the building or other development activity or improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in violation of this Ordinance until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the Notice of Violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the enforcement officer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
Sec. 1407. - Withholding of Utility Service. 
The Zoning Administrator may request or direct any utility service provider to withhold utility service to any property on which a violation is alleged to have occurred. 
Sec. 1408. - Citation. 
The Zoning Administrator shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this Ordinance and to prosecute such violations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Sec. 1409. - Penalty for Violating Ordinance. 
Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this Ordinance, or any plat, development plan or permit issued pursuant to this Ordinance, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both, for each such violation or failure to comply hereunder. Each day any violation of this Ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. Any violation or failure to comply that continues for more than one day shall constitute a public nuisance. 
ARTICLE 15. - ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1501. - Administration and Interpretation. 
The Zoning Administrator shall administer and interpret the provisions of this Ordinance. 
Sec. 1502. - Fees. 
The fees for various applications required by this Ordinance shall be as set by Resolution of the Governing Body from time to time. 
Sec. 1503. - Additional Specifications. 
The City Engineer is hereby authorized to prepare and recommend standard drawings and constructions specifications for private and public improvements not specified in this Ordinance. Upon their adoption by the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch, they shall become mandatory. 
Sec. 1504. - Variances Permitted; Criteria. 
Upon application by the subdivider or land developer the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch shall be authorized to grant a variance or variances upon a showing that each of the following criteria has been met: 
(a)  There are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner's or occupant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
(b)  As a result of such unusual circumstance or conditions, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties that render it difficult to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(c)  The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which the property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(d)  The variance approved is the minimum variance that will reasonably make possible the legal use of the lots, land, building or structure 
Sec. 1505. - Procedures for Variances. 
(a)  Application. Application for a variance shall be filed with the Administrator on a form prescribed by the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Hearing before Mayor and City Council. The Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch shall consider and act upon (i.e., approve, conditionally approve, or deny) the variance application after conducting a public hearing and, if provided, those findings and recommendations of the Zoning Administrator. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the date, time, and place of the hearing held by the, by written mail, personal service, or facsimile, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing before the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. The public shall be given notice of the date, time, place, and nature of the hearing by publication in the City's legal organ at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. At the public hearing, the applicant shall have an opportunity, personally or through counsel, to present evidence and argument in support of his or her application for a variance. 
(c)  Posted Notice of Hearing. In addition to any notice of hearing already specified in this Section, at least fifteen (15) days prior to any public hearing referenced in this Section, the City shall post at least one (1) sign in a conspicuous location on the property where a variance is sought, stating the date, time, and place of the hearing and specifying the name and address of the current owner of the property, the location of the property, the present land use district of the property, and the nature of the proposed variance. The sign shall remain on the property until the public hearing is held and must be at least four (4) square feet in size. The City is authorized to charge the applicant a fee for any such sign to cover any costs incurred for its preparation, installation, and removal. 
(d)  Compliance with Conditions of Variance and Approved Plans. Compliance with any conditions imposed in the Mayor and City Council's approval of a variance, and adherence to the submitted plans, as approved, is required. Any departure from such conditions of approval and approved plans constitutes a violation of this Ordinance and invalidates any variance issued subject to such conditions. 
Sec. 1506. - Group Development Projects. 
The standards and requirements of this ordinance may be modified in the case of a plan and program for group development projects or neighborhood unit or planned unit development which are not divided into customary lots, blocks and streets. This Section specifically contemplates and accommodates the desire of a shopping center developer to subdivide the center into tracts which do not meet zoning requirements for lot size, lot width, lot frontage, building setbacks, lot coverage, and other dimensional requirements customarily related to buildings and lot line configurations, so that each tenant shall own their own building and/or lot. 
Notwithstanding zoning ordinance requirements to the contrary, the Zoning Administrator may approve a development proposal and approve a final plat for a subdivision or leasing plan that does not meet the requirements for lot size, lot width, lot frontage, building setbacks, lot coverage, and other dimensional requirements customarily related to buildings and lot line configurations, subject to the following: 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed group development project provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation and utility needs of the tract when fully developed or populated. 
(b)  When considered as a whole, the group development project does not exceed the density (unit per acre) or intensity specifications (floor-area ratio or lot coverage) permitted by the zoning ordinance for the entire tract to be subdivided or divided into leaseholds; provided, further, the group development project must observe external building setbacks that would apply in the absence of approval of the group development project. 
(c)  A set of covenants, conditions, and restrictions, or other legal mechanism, has been submitted by the applicant, and reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator and City Attorney, so as to insure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(d)  In cases where a lot is proposed that does not meet minimum access and/or lot frontage requirements of the zoning ordinance, access easements must be shown on the plat to be recorded and the access easement agreement shall be recorded in the deed records of Hall County, or other arrangement acceptable to the Zoning Administrator and City Attorney. 
(e)  In cases where buildings do not observe side yard requirements (i.e., zero lot line attached buildings), the Building Inspector shall certify that applicable fire and/or building code requirements for fire walls have been met. 
(f)  Plans for such developments shall be submitted to and approved by the Zoning Administrator whether or not such plat is to be recorded, and no building permits shall be issued until such approval of plans and/or final plat has been given. 
(g)  The Zoning Administrator may place conditions on the final plat, plan, and/or conditions, covenants and restrictions in order to ensure the purposes of this ordinance are met. 
Sec. 1507. - Administrative Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the Zoning Administrator in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance may file an appeal to the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch. 
If any person desires to appeal a decision or action of the Zoning Administrator in the administration or enforcement of this Ordinance, he or she shall file an appeal application with the Zoning Administrator within 15 days of the date of the action or decision of the Zoning Administrator being appealed. Upon receipt of said application, the Zoning Administrator shall arrange a date and time before the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch on which the appeal shall be heard and shall notify the applicant in writing by first class mail. The application for an appeal shall include specific information regarding the nature of the appeal, the basis for the appeal, statute or code references, and supporting documentation submitted with the appeal application. 
Sec. 1508. - Inspections. 
The Zoning Administrator or his designee and any other officer of the City charged with responsibility for administration or enforcement of this Ordinance shall be authorized to inspect premises proposed for subdivision or land development, including any improvements within such subdivision or land development, to determine compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance and other laws and regulations of the City. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to any person authorized to conduct inspections who presents appropriate credentials for same, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such person while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
Sec. 1509. - Amendment. 
The Mayor and City Council may amend this Ordinance. Before enacting such amendment to this Ordinance, the Mayor and City Council of Flowery Branch shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing in the City's legal organ or a newspaper of general circulation in the City. 
Sec. 1510. - Severability. 
Should a court of competent jurisdiction find any provision of this Ordinance to be invalid or unenforceable, such invalid or unenforceable provision shall be severed from this Ordinance and shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of this Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect. 
Sec. 1511. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plat or development plan under the provisions of this Ordinance nor the compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law; provided, however, nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to impose any liability upon the City for damage to any person or property. 
Sec. 1512. - Repeal and Amendment of Previous Ordinances. 
All Ordinances or parts thereof having the same purpose or subject matter are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 1513. - Adoption and Effective Date. 
The Council of the City of Flowery Branch hereby ordains that the above articles and sections, which collectively constitute the City of Flowery Branch Subdivision & Land Development Ordinance, are hereby adopted. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the adoption and enactment of this Ordinance, the public health and welfare demanding it. 
Appendix C - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city, as adopted by the City Council on December 13, 2006. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. Additions made for clarity, such as consistent state statute citations and catchline modifications, are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
Sec. 1.2. - Authority. 
The Flowery Branch Mayor and City Council is authorized by state constitutional grant of authority and various statutes and administrative rules of the state of Georgia to enact and enforce the provisions of this zoning ordinance. Those grants of authority include but are not limited to those described in this Section. 
(a)  Article 9, Section 2, Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia; 
(b)  The Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.); 
(c)  Pursuant to Georgia Code Section 36-70-3, the governing bodies of municipalities and counties are authorized to develop, establish, and implement land use regulations which are consistent with the comprehensive plan of the municipality or county; 
(d)  The local government's ability to exercise the power of zoning is specifically recognized in Georgia Code Section 36-70-5 and is not otherwise limited or compromised except as provided by law; 
(e)  Pursuant to Georgia Code Section 50-8-2, in order to maintain its status as a "qualified local government," a local government must establish regulations consistent with its comprehensive plan; 
(f)  Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning (Chapter 110-3-2 of Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs) have been adopted to implement the Georgia Planning Act of 1989. Said standards and procedures were ratified by the Georgia General Assembly, and have since been amended. Said rules require local governments that adopt a comprehensive plan pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 to describe regulatory measures and land development regulations needed to implement local comprehensive plans. As provided in Georgia Code Section 50-8-12, the powers given to the Georgia Department of Community Affairs do not limit or compromise the right of the governing authority of any county or municipality to exercise the power of zoning; 
(g)  The local government has adopted a Comprehensive Plan in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and the comprehensive plan has been revised from time to time; 
(h)  The Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District is authorized to develop and has developed regional and watershed-specific plans for storm-water management, waste-water treatment, water supply, water conservation, and the general protection of water quality, and such plans are required pursuant to Georgia Code Section 12-5-572 to be implemented by local governments in the district. Local governments are required to implement said plans by Georgia Code Sections 12-5-582 and 12-5-583, and failure to do so means that the local government shall be ineligible for state grants or loans for water supply and conservation projects determined by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division to be inconsistent with such plans. Said district pursuant to state law has prepared model ordinances for local governments to follow; 
(i)  As provided in Georgia Code Section 36-34-1, the General Assembly has vested certain general powers in the governing body of each of the municipal corporations of the state of Georgia, such powers being in addition to or cumulative of those which any municipal corporation may now have under its charter or any other special or general law. Such powers include authority to exercise certain common functions of local government and to provide for local self-government to the extent of the powers granted; 
(j)  The municipality is permitted pursuant to Georgia Code Section 36-35-6.1 the right to enact restrictions on signs which are not otherwise limited by said Code Section or other law; 
(k)  Pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965 (Georgia Code Section 36-35-3) the governing authority of each municipal corporation shall have legislative power to adopt clearly reasonable ordinances, resolutions, or regulations relating to its property, affairs, and local government for which no provision has been made by general law and which are not inconsistent with the Constitution or any charter provision applicable thereto; 
(l)  Pursuant to Georgia Code Section 36-65-1, it is declared by the General Assembly of Georgia that in the exercise of powers specifically granted to them by law, local governing authorities of cities and counties are acting pursuant to state policy. 
Sec. 1.3. - Purposes. 
The purposes of this Ordinance include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Implement the comprehensive plan including goals and policies not currently implemented by land use regulations of the City; 
(b)  Promote the health, safety, welfare, morals, convenience, order, and prosperity of the citizens in the City; 
(c)  Promote responsible growth, lessen congestion in the public streets, secure safety from fire and health dangers, and promote desirable living conditions; 
(d)  Provide adequate access to natural light and air; 
(e)  Regulate the height, bulk, and the size of buildings, structures and land activities; 
(f)  Classify land uses, set out zoning and overlay districts, establish procedures for the handling of certain land use matters, and regulate the distribution and density of uses on the land to avoid both the undue concentration of population and the inappropriate dispersion of population; 
(g)  Prevent the encroachment of incompatible land uses within residential areas, protect property against blight, preserve property values, and promote desirable living conditions and stable neighborhoods; 
(h)  Maintain the integrity and individual character of established communities and settlements, and promote desired character in new developments; 
(i)  Attain attractive and function business and employment areas, reserve suitable land for industry, and prevent land-inefficient and poorly functioning strip-type development; 
(j)  Insure a planned approach to community needs for infrastructure expansion and improvements, and provide for planned and orderly growth consistent with the provision of needed public and private facilities and services; 
(k)  Protect and preserve sensitive natural areas and vital natural resources and avoid environmental degradation and other undesirable consequences of irresponsible or shortsighted land management; 
(l)  Minimize or eliminate visual clutter and traffic hazards resulting from excess business advertising and other signs, while retain forms of protected speech; 
(m)  Provide for "smart" growth principles and practices; 
(n)  Those additional purposes and intentions as articulated in the various Articles and Sections of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 1.4. - Findings Regarding Aesthetics and Additional Purposes. 
Traditional regulations, such as height and bulk of buildings, setbacks, and yards are grounded in public health, safety, and welfare public purposes, but they are also adopted out of concern for the look of things. Promoting healthy, safe, spacious, and quiet residential neighborhoods by necessity also includes attention to the aesthetics of development. 
Nauseous smells have historically come under the ban of the law, but other ugly sights and discordant surroundings may be just as distressing to keener sensibilities. There are links between community appearance and property values, and aesthetic regulations have non-aesthetic purposes supporting such restrictions, such as the preservation of property values, the community's cultural setting, the economic interest in tourism, and intangible human values. It is in the public interest to direct and control the visual appearance of the community, to prevent patently offensive harm to the existing visual character of the community, because happiness, comfort, and general well-being of citizens result from an aesthetically pleasing environment. 
The Governing Body finds that its citizens have widely shared human values related to the visual environment. The desire to protect certain features of the visual environment reflects a widespread pattern of community preference rather than simply the desires of a narrow elite. That finding is supported by community visioning and character area delineation completed as a part of the local government's comprehensive planning process. These regulations are therefore based on the visual sensibilities of the average person in the community. The Governing Body finds further that visual harm to a widespread pattern of community preference can occur without the imposition of the provisions of this ordinance, which places limitations on or prohibits altogether certain uses, structures, and practices that would be out of harmony or incongruent with the distinctive character or visual features of the surrounding area. 
After careful study of specific existing features of the visual environment, the Governing Body finds that reasonable and intelligible standards can be established for implementation and administration to protect areas from associational dissonance - these include neutral and objective criteria such as (among others) height, bulk, scale, placement, topography and building materials. The regulations contained herein are reasonably related to legitimate public purposes and the minimum necessary to prevent substantial harm to existing features of the visual environment selected for protection. 
Sec. 1.5. - Adoption and Effective Date. 
Thee Council of the City of Flowery Branch hereby ordains that the following articles and sections, which collectively constitute the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, are hereby adopted. This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after the adoption and enactment of this Ordinance, the public health and welfare demanding it. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2018, repealed former Art. 2, §§ 2.1—2.7, and enacted a new Art. 2 as set out herein. Former Art. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 348-11, §§ 1—6, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 348-13, § 1, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 514, § 1, 6-24-2015; Ord. No. 545, § 1, 3-15-2018. 

Sec. 2.1. - Use Definitions. 
A 
Accessory dwelling unit, attached: A second dwelling unit that is added to the structure of an existing site-built, single-family dwelling, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single household, with provision within the attached accessory dwelling for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use to the principal dwelling but must meet the setback and lot coverage requirements of the primary structure. 
Accessory dwelling unit, detached: A second dwelling unit that is added to an existing accessory structure (e.g., residential space above a detached garage), or as a new freestanding accessory building, for use as a complete, independent living facility for a single household, with provision within the accessory apartment for cooking, eating, sanitation and sleeping. Such a dwelling is considered an accessory use to the principal dwelling but must meet the setback and lot coverage requirements of the primary structure. Includes the term garage apartment. 

Accessory Apartment, Detached  (Above Garage Shown) 
Active recreational facilities: Equipment and areas prepared for active use for recreational and leisure purposes, including, but not limited to: playground equipment (swing sets and climbing structures); courts for basketball, volleyball, and tennis; leveled, striped fields for football, soccer, or multiple purposes; community picnic pavilions (including covered facilities with grills and/or fire rings); community buildings for recreational events, and golf courses, excluding clubhouses, developed areas and accessory uses. Trails and bikeways through open spaces shall not be considered active recreational facilities. 
Adult business: See Adult Entertainment of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Flowery Branch (Ordinance No. 360, as amended). 
Agricultural facility: Includes, but is not limited to, any land, building, structure, pond, impoundment, appurtenance, machinery, or equipment which is used for the commercial production or processing of crops, livestock, animals, poultry, honeybees, honeybee products, livestock products, poultry products, timber, forest products, or products which are used in commercial aquaculture. Such term does not include any farm labor camp or facilities for migrant farm workers. (Georgia Code Section 41-1-7) 
Agricultural operation: Those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; the construction of farm buildings; the plowing, tilling, or preparation of soil at an agricultural facility; the planting, growing, fertilizing, harvesting, or otherwise maintaining of crops; the application of pesticides, herbicides, or other chemicals, compounds, or substances to crops, weeds, or soil in connection with the production of crops, timber, livestock, animals, or poultry; the breeding, hatching, raising, producing, feeding, keeping of livestock, hogs, equines, chickens, turkeys, poultry or other fowl normally raised for food, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, dogs, rabbits, or similar farm animals for commercial purposes, but not the regular slaughtering, or processing of such animals; The production and keeping of honeybees, the production of honeybee products; The production, of eggs or egg products; the manufacturing of feed for poultry or livestock; the rotation of crops, including without limitation timber production; Commercial aquaculture; and the application of existing, changed, or new technology, practices, processes, or procedures to any agricultural operation. (based on Georgia Code Sections 1-3-3 and 41-1-7). Agricultural operation does not include a roadside stand or agricultural processing. 
Agricultural processing: Activities distinguished from the raising, cultivating, harvesting of food and fiber products (i.e., agriculture) because they go beyond the basic production cycle and involve significant manufacturing or processing operations so that the naturally grown or raised product is changed for consumer use, or where some physical, chemical, or similar change of an agricultural product occurs. Such activities include but are not limited to: cotton ginning, grist mills, milling of flour, feed, or grain, packaging of fresh or dried foods and fibers for wholesale or retail sale, slaughterhouses, refineries, wineries, canneries, and milk processing plants. Agricultural processing is considered a manufacturing use. 
Aircraft landing area: Any landing area, runway, or other facility designed, used, or intended to be used for the taking off or landing of aircraft (airplanes, helicopters, gliders, ultralights, and any contrivance now known or hereafter invented for use in or designed for navigation of or flight in air) and which may include, aircraft storage, tie-down areas, hangars, and other necessary buildings and appurtenances. This term includes private use heliports. This use may be a principal or accessory use. 
Amusement park: A commercially operated park operating outdoors where there are various devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of items, and buildings for shows and entertainment. 
Animal hospital: An establishment designed or used for the care, observation, or treatment of domestic or farm animals. This definition includes veterinary clinics. 
Animal shelter: Any premises designed or operated for impounding and caring for stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals (usually primarily cats and dogs), or that are otherwise subject to impoundment. An animal shelter is usually intended to provide only temporary kenneling of such animals until a permanent home if found. 
Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephone, radio, or television communications or data transmission through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. See also wireless telecommunication facilities. 
Antique shop: A retail establishment primarily engaged in the offering of products with value derived because of their age or historic significance. 
Apartment building: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family for rent or lease. An apartment building is considered a multi-family residential use. 
Arcade, amusement: A place or facility where pinball or electronic games are played for amusement. Amusement arcades are indoor commercial recreation facilities. 
Art gallery: An establishment engaged in the sale, loan, or display of art books, paintings, sculpture, or other works of art. This use does not include libraries and museums. An art gallery is an enclosed retail trade establishment unless operated by a public entity in which case it is considered a public use. 
Assisted living facility: Residences for the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administered medication. They may provide other services incidental to the above. For purposes of this ordinance, assisted living facilities are considered institutionalized residential living and care facilities. 
Auction house or auction yard: Any building, structure, enclosure, or place where goods or livestock are sold by auction (i.e., through bid in competition with others). 
Automated teller machine: A mechanized consumer banking device offered by a bank, whether outside or in an access-controlled facility operated by walk-up customers only and not accessible to customers in vehicles. 
Automobile sales: A premises designed or used for storage and display for sale, rental, or lease of cars, trucks, tractors, trailers, campers, recreational vehicles, golf carts, motorcycles, and agricultural implements, all of which are complete and operable. 
Automobile service establishment: Top and body, paint, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops, and oil change and lubrication facilities. 
Automobile sales and service establishment: A premise that includes both automobile sales and automobile services, as defined in this ordinance. 
B 
Bank or financial establishment: A business that accepts money for deposit into accounts from the general public or other financial institutions, and which may include personal or business loans, wire transfers and safe deposit boxes. Such uses include but are not limited to banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions, and security and commodity exchanges. 
Barn: A building or structure accessory to agriculture or single-family residential use which is used for the storage of grain, hay, and other farm products, or the sheltering of livestock, or the storage of farm equipment produced, housed, or used on the premises. 
Batching plant: A plant for the manufacture or mixing of asphalt, concrete, cement, or concrete or cement products, including any apparatus incidental to such manufacturing and mixing. 
Bed and breakfast inn: A facility where overnight accommodations not exceeding six rooms are provided to transients for compensation, with or without a morning meal, and which may include afternoon and/or evening meal for guests, and where the operators of the facility live on the premises. A bed and breakfast inn does not include retail uses, public bar, conference center, or special event facilities. 
Big box commercial retail building: A retail business involving the sale of services or merchandise on an individual lot of record where an individual tenant occupies more than 60,000 square feet. 
Boarding house: See rooming house. 
Borrow site: A site used for the extraction of earthen materials such as sand, gravel, rock, dirt, etc., where the material is removed from the site. 
Botanical garden: A private facility, either nonprofit or operated for a fee, for the demonstration and observation of the cultivation of flowers, fruits, vegetables, or ornamental plants. 
Brewery: An industrial use that brews ales, beers, and/or similar beverages on site. 
Broadcasting studio: A building or structure operated as a radio or television broadcasting studio or station with local broadcast capability or intended for satellite distribution of programs, and usually including satellite dishes, microwave dishes, and/or other types of communications equipment. 
Building materials sales: An establishment offering lumber or other construction materials used in buildings for sale to contractors or the general public. When operated in whole or part outside the confines of a building, a building materials sales establishment is an open-air business. 
Building sales establishment: A lot on which the principal use is the sale of manufactured homes and/or modular buildings. This use is an open-air business. 
Bulk storage: The storage of chemicals, petroleum products, or similar materials in above ground or below-ground storage containers designed for wholesale distribution or mass consumption. This includes fuel oil distributors with storage of products. 
Business service establishment: A business activity engaged in support functions to establishments operating for a profit and individuals and institutions on a fee or contract basis, including but not limited to: advertising agencies, photocopying, blueprinting and duplication services, mailing agencies, commercial art and graphic design; personnel supply services and employment agencies, computer and data processing services, detective, protective, and security system services, accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services, publications and business consulting firms, food catering, interior decorating, and locksmiths. 
C 
Camp or campground: Any place established or maintained for two or more individual spaces or sites for temporary living quarters in cabins, structures, or tents for recreation or vacation purposes for a fee. 
Carport: A roofed, accessory building or structure, open on two or more sides, made of aluminum, wood, or any combination thereof, including such materials on movable frames, for the shade and shelter of private passenger vehicles or other motorized or non-motorized equipment such as tractors and boats. 
Car wash: The use of a site for washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, other vehicles, or other light duty equipment. 
Caretaker's residence: A dwelling unit within a principal building or any freestanding building or structure that is accessory to an institutional, commercial, or industrial use, and located on the same lot there with, which is used for occupancy as a dwelling by an owner, security agent, or caretaker. 
Carnival: Any use which constitutes a traveling or transportable group or aggregation of rides, shows, gaming booths, and concessions, and where the public either pays admission or participation fees. A carnival is a temporary use. 
Catering service: An establishment that serves and supplies food to be consumed off-premises. A catering service is a business service establishment. 
Cemetery: The use of property as a burial place. 
Church: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures that by design and construction are primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. Associated accessory uses include but are not limited to: residence for pastor, minister, priest, or rabbi, schools, meeting halls, indoor recreational facilities, day care, and kitchens. This term includes synagogues, temples, and other places of worship. 
Christmas tree sales facility: A facility conducted on a temporary basis during holiday season, generally conducted wholly outdoors but which may involve a tent or other temporary structure, that offers for sale Christmas trees and incidental holiday items such as wreaths and Christmas tree stands. Such facility is a temporary open-air business establishment. 
Clinic: An institution or professional office, other than a hospital or nursing home, where persons are counseled, examined, and/or treated by one or more health professionals providing any form of healing or medical health service. Persons providing these services may offer any combination of counseling, diagnostic, therapeutic or preventative treatment, instruction, or services, and which may include medical, physical, psychological, or mental services and facilities for primarily ambulatory persons. 
Club or lodge, nonprofit: A building or premises, used for the assembly of members of associations or organizations of an educational, fraternal, or social character, not operated or maintained for profit. The term shall not include casinos, nightclubs, bottle clubs, or other establishments operated or maintained for profit. 
Club, private: Buildings and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or persons, and used for assembly of members for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, to which membership is required and where use of premises is restricted to members and their guests. The definition "private club" shall also include a "bona fide private club" as that term is defined in Georgia Code Section 3-7-1. 
Co-generation facility: An installation that harnesses energy that normally would be wasted to generate electricity, usually through the burning of waste, and which may use, distribute through connection, or sell the energy converted from such process. 
College or university: An educational use that provides training beyond and in addition to that training received in the 12th grade (i.e., undergraduate and graduate), and which has students regularly attending classes, and which confers associate, bachelor, master, or doctoral degrees. 
Commercial recreational facility, indoor: A use that takes place within an enclosed building that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to the following: assembly halls, amusement arcades, auditoriums, billiard halls and pool rooms, bowling alleys, dance halls, ice and roller skating rinks, and fully-enclosed theaters. 
Commercial recreational facility, outdoor: A use of land and/or buildings that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to the following: amusement parks, stadiums, amphitheaters, fairgrounds, drive-in theaters, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, batting cages, race tracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, unenclosed firearms shooting ranges and turkey shoots, fishing ponds, equestrian centers and horse and pony riding rinks, botanical and zoological gardens, zoos for exotic animals or wildlife, recreational vehicle parks, and ultra-light flight parks. A golf course and private club that is built as part of a single-family residential subdivision and that operates in a quasi-public manner is not considered to be an outdoor commercial recreational facility. 
Community recreation: A private recreational facility for use solely by the residents and guests of a particular residential development, including indoor facilities such as community meeting rooms and outdoor facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and playgrounds. These facilities are usually proposed, planned, and provided in association with a development and are located within the boundaries of such development. 
Composting facility: A facility where compost or organic matter that is derived primarily from off-site is processed by composting and/or processed for commercial purposes. Activities of a composting facility may include management, collection, transportation, staging, composting, curing, storage, marketing, or use of compost. 
Condominium: A form of ownership as defined by state law in which common elements are jointly owned. 
Condominium building: A building containing one (1) or more individually owned units or building spaces and related, jointly-owned, common areas as defined by laws of the State of Georgia. When a building on property under condominium ownership contains only one dwelling unit, that building is considered a detached, single-family residential condominium building. When a building on property under condominium ownership contains two or more dwelling units, that building is considered an attached, multi-family residential condominium building. 
Conservation area: Any land set aside for conservation of the land in its natural state. 
Conservation areas, primary: Any property qualifying as conservation use property under Georgia Code Section 48-5-7.4; and any steep slopes, floodplains, wetlands, water bodies, upland buffers around wetlands and water bodies, critical wildlife habitat, and sites of historic, cultural, or archaeological significance, located outside of building envelopes and areas established for building purposes. 
Conservation areas, secondary: Prime farmland, natural meadows, mature woodlands, farm fields, localized aquifer recharge areas, and lands containing scenic views and sites, located outside of building envelopes and areas established for building purposes. 
Conservation subdivision: A subdivision where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision. 
Construction field office: A manufactured home, travel trailer, truck trailer, and/or other structure used temporarily as an office in conjunction with a construction project. A construction field office is a temporary use. 
Construction yard: An area on or immediately adjacent to a construction site used on a temporary basis for the parking and storage of equipment used in a construction project, and the storage and preparation of materials and other items used in the construction project. Such yards may include one or more construction field offices. 
Continuing care retirement community: An institutional residential living facility providing multiple, comprehensive services to older adults. Such facility normally contains a combination of independent living units, assisted living, and skilled nursing care units. 
Contractor's establishment: An establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities, including but not limited to, plumbing, electrical work, building, grading, paving, roofing, carpentry, and other such activities, including the storage of material and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. This use includes landscaping companies. 
Convenience store: A retail store that sells convenience goods, such as prepackaged food items and a limited line of groceries. Convenience stores may or may not sell gasoline, diesel, and kerosene but do not include automotive services. A convenience store is an enclosed retail trade establishment. 
Cooperative building: A building containing one or more dwelling units under cooperative ownership. Cooperative residential buildings are considered multi-family dwellings. 
Cottage industry: A use or activity which is accessory to a single-family residence or a commercial establishment that produces one or more goods on the premises through hand-made workmanship craft for retail sale. Such goods-producing activities include but are not limited to candle-making, glass blowing, pottery making, weaving, woodworking and the production by hand and small tools of furniture, sculpting, and other similar or associated activities. 
Crisis center: A facility or portion thereof and premises that are used for the purposes of emergency shelter, crisis intervention, including counseling, referral, hotline response, and similar human social service functions. Said facility may include meal preparation, distribution, or service for residents of the center as well as nonresidents, merchandise distribution, or shelter, including boarding, lodging, or residential care. This term includes domestic violence and centers, homeless shelters, and halfway houses. 
Custom order shop: A business establishment that offers merchandise, but which maintains no merchandise inventory on site other than display items (which are not visible from the exterior of the building). 
D 
Day care center: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, and licensed or registered by the State of Georgia as a group day care home or day care center, wherein are received for pay for group supervision and care, for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven (7) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Distribution center: A use where goods are received and/or stored for delivery to the ultimate customer at remote locations. 
Dormitory: A building intended or used principally for sleeping accommodations where such building is related (an accessory use) to an educational, civic, or religious institution, not operated for commercial purposes. 
Drive-through: An accessory use where a good is sold to customers in vehicles. 
Driving range: An area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for practicing golf drives, chipping, and putting, and which may include a snack bar and pro shop. A driving range is an outdoor commercial recreation facility. 
Dry cleaning plant: A building, portion of a building, or premises used or intended to be used for cleaning fabrics, textiles, wearing apparel, or articles of any sort by immersion or agitation, or by immersions only, in volatile solvents included, but not limited to, solvents of the petroleum distillate type, and/or the chlorinated hydrocarbon type, and the processes incidental thereto. 
Dwelling: A building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for permanent living, and/or sleeping quarters. 
Dwelling, single-family detached, condominium: A residential building designed for occupancy by one family only, where more than one dwelling is located on a single lot and the land is owned in common. 

Dwelling, Single-Family Detached  Condominium 
Dwelling, single-family detached, fee-simple: A building designed, arranged to be occupied or used by one (1) family only and where each dwelling is located on its own lot in fee-simple title. This definition specifically includes an "industrialized building, residential" as defined when occupied by one family on a lot in fee-simple title. 

Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two (2) families living independently of each other and where each dwelling is located on its own lot in fee-simple title, but where the two dwelling units are attached along a common property line, or where the two dwellings are located on the same lot. 

Dwelling, multi-family: A building other than a duplex, designed for or occupied exclusively by three (3) or more families or households with separate housekeeping facilities for each family or household. Apartment houses and residential condominium buildings containing two or more units are considered multi-family dwellings. 

Dwelling unit: A building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for living quarters for one (1) or more persons living as a single housekeeping unit with cooking facilities, but not including units in hotels or other structures designed for transient residence. 
E 
Exterminator: An establishment engaged in pest control for businesses, institutions, residences, or industries. 
Extraction: Removal or recovery by any means whatsoever of sand, gravel, soil, rock, minerals, mineral substances or organic substances other than vegetation, from water or land on or beneath the surface thereof, exposed or submerged. This term includes gravel pits, mines, quarries, and similar operations, but not "borrow site" as defined herein. 
F 
Fallout shelter: An accessory building or underground facility designed for the protection of life from radioactive fallout. A fallout shelter may be an accessory use to a dwelling or other principal use. 
Fairgrounds: An area of land including, but not limited to: agricultural-related office buildings, animal shows and judging, carnivals, circuses, community meeting or recreational buildings and uses, concerts, food booths and stands, games, rides, rodeos, sales and auctions. Fairgrounds are considered outdoor commercial recreation facilities unless publicly owned, in which case they are public uses. 
Family: An individual, or 2 or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than 4 unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit; provided, however, that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or families. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Family day care home: A private residence in which is operated by any person who receives therein (for pay) for supervision and care for fewer than twenty-four (24) hours per day, three (3) to not more than six (6) children under eighteen (18) years of age who are not residents in the same private residence. For purposes of this ordinance, a family day care home may be operated as a home occupation, subject to the requirements of this ordinance. 
Fee simple: A form of ownership where the owner is entitled to the entire property with unconditional power of disposition during his or her life and which descends to his or her heirs and legal representatives upon his or her death intestate. 
Fence: An enclosure or barrier, composed of wood, masonry, stone, wire, iron, or other approved materials or combination of materials used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening, or confinement, including brick or concrete walls but not including hedges, shrubs, trees, or other natural growth. 
Fence, barbed wire: One or more strands of wire or other material having intermittent sharp points of wire or metal that may puncture, cut, tear, or snag persons, clothing, or animals, including vertical supports. 
Fence, chain-link: An open mesh fence made entirely of wire woven in squares of approximately 1.5 inches with vertical supports, usually spaced at an interval of six (6) feet, usually at a height of three (3) or more feet. 
Fence, solid: A fence, including entrance and exit gates where access openings appear, through which no visual images can be seen. 
Flea market: The use of land, structures or buildings for the sale of produce or goods, usually second-hand or cut-rate. A flea market is an open-air business. 
Food processing plant: A manufacturing establishment producing or processing foods for human or animal consumption and certain related products or by-products, including but not limited to the following products: sugar, dairy, fruit and vegetable (including canning, preserving and processing), grain mill products and by-products, meat, poultry and seafood (including by-product processing but not including the slaughtering of animals), and miscellaneous foot preparation from raw products. This is a manufacturing use. 
Forestry: An operation on a tract or parcel of land involving the growing, conserving, and managing of forests and forest lands (includes the term "silviculture"). Forestry operations or practices include the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods and other forestry products for commercial purposes. Incidental uses to forestry include the erection of accessory structures and improvements normally associated with timber production, including but not limited to storage buildings, the construction of roads, insect and disease control, fire protection, and may include the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process the timber cut from the parcel or parcels. This term does not include the cutting of timber associated with approved land development. This definition does not include processing of timber into finished or semi-finished products or other than temporary storage of logs. 
Funeral home: A building used for human funeral services. Such building contains a chapel and may include space and facilities for embalming and the performance of other services used in the preparation of the dead for burial or cremation, the performance of autopsies and other surgical procedures, the indoor storage of caskets, funeral urns, and other related funeral supplies, and the indoor or outdoor storage of funeral vehicles. 
G 
Garage: A building, or part thereof, used or designed to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles. A garage in the customary sense is distinguished from a carport in that it is fully enclosed. It may be attached to a single-family dwelling or may be an accessory building. In such context a garage is an accessory use to a single-family dwelling. 
Gas tank sales: The retail sale of bulk storage tanks for flammable and combustible liquids, compressed gases or liquefied petroleum (LP) gas. Gas tank sales are considered open air business uses. 
Group Development Project: A shopping center or other development with multiple buildings arranged as a group, no less than twenty acres in size, which is subdivided into lots but not in the customary manner so as to meet zoning requirements for lot size, lot width, lot frontage, building setbacks, lot coverage, and other dimensional requirements customarily related to buildings and lot line configurations. A primary purpose of a group development project is to permit the subdivision of a shopping center or other development so that each building may be located on its own fee-simple lot that does not necessarily meet all zoning requirements, but where the shopping center or other development meets applicable zoning requirements as a whole (i.e., all land area included in the development). 
Group home: A single household of more than two unrelated persons, whether or not they are developmentally disabled, under the supervision of a resident manager. 
Growler: A retail establishment that sells beer in a bottle made of glass or other material customary to the industry that is sealed on the premises. 
Greenhouse: A building designed or used for growing or propagating plants, with walls or roof usually designed to transmit light. Greenhouses can be principal or accessory uses of a commercial nature or they can be private, such as one on a farm or as an accessory structure to residential use. 
Guest house: A lodging unit for temporary guests in a building accessory to a detached, single-family dwelling unit, and which is not rented or otherwise used or occupied as a separate dwelling. A guest house is an accessory use to a detached, single-family dwelling. 
H 
Hazardous waste materials: Any materials defined or customarily defined as hazardous waste by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources; generally, any refuse or discarded material or combination of refuse or discarded materials in solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous form which cannot be handled by routine waste management techniques because they pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or other living organisms because of their chemical, biological or physical properties. 
Health spa: An establishment which for profit or gain provides as one of its primary purposes, services or facilities which are purported to assist patrons improve their physical condition or appearance through change in weight, weight control, treatment, dieting, or exercise. The term includes establishments designated as "reducing salons," "exercise gyms," "health studios," "health clubs," and other terms of similar import. Not included within this definition are facilities operated by nonprofit organizations, facilities wholly owned and operated by a licensed physician at which such physician is engaged in the practice of medicine, or any establishment operated by a health care facility, hospital, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing care facility. 
Home occupation: Any use, occupation or activity conducted entirely within or on the same lot as a dwelling by a resident or residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residence purposes and does not change the character thereof. 
Hospital: An institution licensed by the state and providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily in-patients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity or other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including as an integral part of the institution, such related facilities as laboratories, outpatient facilities, or training facilities. 
Hotel: A commercial lodging service with one or more buildings devoted to the temporary shelter for the traveling public, and where entry to individual guest rooms is via a central lobby. A hotel may include as accessory uses the following: full dining, public bar, retail uses, and special event or conference center facilities. 
I 
Incinerator: A facility with equipment that uses a thermal combustion process to destroy or alter the character or composition of medical waste, sludge, soil, or municipal solid waste, not including animal or human remains. 
Industrial use: An activity or structure in which the primary purpose involves manufacturing, assembly, fabrication, and processing, bulk handling of products, warehousing, heavy trucking, power generation facilities, etc. Such use may also include such activities as research and technological processes. 
Industrialized building: Any structure or component thereof which is designed and constructed in compliance with the state minimum standards codes and is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation or assembly and installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. An industrialized building bears an insignia of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. All industrialized buildings bearing an insignia of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs pursuant to applicable state law shall be deemed to comply with state minimum standards codes and all ordinances and regulations enacted by any local government which are applicable to the manufacture or installation of such buildings. 
Industrialized building, residential: Any dwelling unit designed and constructed in compliance with the Georgia State Minimum Standard One and Two Family Dwelling Code which is wholly or in substantial part, made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in a manufacturing facility and cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Any such structure shall not contain a permanent metal chassis and shall be affixed to a permanent load-bearing foundation. The term shall not include manufactured homes as defined by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 32 5401, et seq. A residential industrialized building bears an insignia of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. For purposes of this ordinance, a detached residential industrialized building for one family shall be considered the same as a detached, single-family dwelling and permitted under the same zoning districts as a detached, single-family dwelling. All residential industrialized buildings bearing an insignia of approval issued by the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs pursuant to applicable state law shall be deemed to comply with state minimum standards codes and all ordinances and regulations enacted by any local government which are applicable to the manufacture or installation of such buildings. This ordinance shall not be construed to exclude detached, single-family residential industrialized buildings from being sited in a residential district solely because the building is a residential industrialized building. 
Institutional residential living and care facilities: An umbrella term that encompasses the following uses: assisted living facility, intermediate care home, nursing home, skilled nursing care facility, continuing care retirement facility, and personal care home. 
Intermediate care home: A facility which admits residents on medical referral; it maintains the services and facilities for institutional care and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will provide continuing supervision including emergencies; it complies with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. The term "intermediate care" means the provision of food, including special diets when required, shelter, laundry and personal care services, such as help with dressing, getting in and out of bed, bathing, feeding, medications and similar assistance, such services being under appropriate licensed supervision. Intermediate care does not normally include providing care for bed patients except on an emergency or temporary basis. 
J 
Junk: Scrap or waste material of any kind or nature collected for resale, disposal, or storage, or by accumulation. 
K 
Kennel: Any facility used for the purpose of commercial boarding or sale of domestic animals or pets such as but not limited to dogs and cats, and any other customarily incidental treatment of the animals such as grooming, cleaning, selling of pet supplies, or otherwise. 
Kitchen: Any room or part of a room designed, built, used, or intended to be used for cooking, the preparation of food, or dishwashing. The presence of a range, oven, or dishwasher, or utility connections suitable for serving a range or oven, shall normally be considered as establishing a kitchen. 
L 
Laboratory: A building or group of buildings in which are located facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing, or experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory. 
Landfill, construction and demolition: A disposal facility accepting waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material and other inert wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Landfill, inert waste: A disposal facility accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves, and specifically excluding industrial and demolition waste. 
Landfill, sanitary: The burial of non-hazardous waste where such waste is covered on a daily basis, as distinguished from a construction and demolition landfill. 
Landscaping company: A business engaged in the provision of landscaping services and/or the wholesale or retail sale of landscaping products including but not limited to sod, trees, landscaping timbers, and earth covering materials. The processing of wood into timbers, mulch, and/or chips is considered an incidental use of a landscaping company whose primary purpose is the wholesale or retail sale of landscaping products. 
Laundromat: A facility where patrons wash, dry, or dry clean clothing or other fabrics in machines operated by the patron. A laundromat is considered a personal service establishment. 
Live-work unit: Buildings or spaces within buildings that are used jointly for commercial and residential purposes where the two uses are physically connected in one unit and residential use of the space is accessory to the primary use as a place of work. This term is distinguished from a home occupation and from a mixed-use building. Live-work units may have larger work spaces than permitted by home occupation, and live/work units design the floor space for both living and working areas. Live-work units are distinguished between mixed-use buildings in that a mixed-use building has residential and nonresidential uses in the same building, but the residential and nonresidential spaces are not necessarily connected or used by the same person. 
Livestock: Cattle, horses, pigs, sheep, goats, llamas, emus, ostriches, donkeys, mules, goats, sheep, chickens, ducks, geese, and other fowl, rabbits, minks, foxes and other fur or hide-bearing animals, customarily bred or raised in captivity, whether kept for pleasure, utility, or sale. 
Lodging service: A facility that offers temporary (15 days or less in one room) shelter accommodations, or place for such shelter, open to the public for a fee, including "hotel" and "motel" as defined. "Bed and breakfast inn" is defined separately. 
Logging yard: Areas where logs of wood are stored on a regular basis before transfer by truck or railroad. 
Lumber yard: A facility where wood materials such as lumber, plywood, panels or other wood products are processed and sold for retail sale or wholesale. Such use may involve performing millwork, planing, cutting, and/or other customizing processes. 
M 
Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
Manufactured home, class "A": A dwelling unit meeting the definition of "manufactured home" and which meets the following development standards: 
(a)  Minimum width of at least twenty-eight (28) feet. 
(b)  The roof has a minimum 3:12 roof pitch which means having a pitch equal to at least three inches of vertical height for every twelve inches of horizontal run. The roof has a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass tiles, slate, built-up gravel materials, standing seam (non-corrugated) tin or steel or other materials approved by the Building Inspector. The roof overhang must be at least one (1) foot when measured from the vertical side. 
(c)  The exterior siding materials consist of wood, masonry, hardboard, stucco, masonite, vinyl lap, or other materials of like appearance comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built dwellings. 
(d)  The wheels and towing devices are removed and the home is attached to a permanent foundation that meets all applicable building code requirements. 
(e)  Skirting. The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure and the ground of the manufactured home is skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, finished concrete or siding of like or similar character to the manufactured home that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage except for proper ventilation and access openings. 
(f)  Includes a landing installed at each outside doorway. The minimum size of the landing is four feet by six feet (excluding steps) at each doorway. The structure includes steps which lead to ground level, and both landing and steps meet applicable building code requirements. 

_____
Manufactured home park: A parcel of land or any portion thereof under which has been designed, planned, or improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes for residential use, including land, buildings, and facilities used by the occupants of manufactured homes on such property. Also referred to as "land lease communities." 
Manufactured home space: A parcel of land within a manufactured home park which is reserved or leased for the placement of an individual manufactured home and accessory structures for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
_____
Manufacturing, processing, assembling: The mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products. The land uses engaged in these activities are usually described as plants, factories or mills and characteristically use power-driven machines and materials handling equipment. Establishments engaged in assembling component parts of manufactured products are also considered under this definition if the new product is neither a fixed structure nor other fixed improvement. Also included is the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastic resins, or liquors. 
Marina: A facility for the mooring, berthing, storing, or securing of watercraft, and which may include boat sales, boat fuel sales, boat construction, boat repair, marine equipment sales, boat and jet ski rental, and other uses clearly incidental to watercraft activities. 
Materials recovery facility: A solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable material, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. (Georgia Code 12-8-22) 
Micro-brewery: A facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages for distribution, retail or wholesale, on or off the premises, and which has a capacity of no more than 15,000 barrels per year. The development may include other uses such as a restaurant, bar or live entertainment. 
Mining: All or any part of the process involved in the mining of aggregates and/or minerals by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open pit mining or minerals naturally exposed, mining by auger methods, dredging, and quarrying, underground mining, and surface work incidental to such activities. See also the term, "extraction." 
Mixed-use development: A single building containing more than one type of land use; or a single development of more than one building and use, where the different types of land uses are in close proximity, planned as a unified, complementary whole. 
Mobile home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; and which has not been inspected and approved as meeting the requirements of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
Model home: A principal residential building, temporarily open to viewing by prospective homebuyers, on property containing or proposed to contain a residential subdivision, and which may also be used temporarily as real estate sales office for lots in the residential subdivision. 
Modular home: [Deleted, Ord. 348-11] 
Motel: A commercial lodging service with one or more buildings devoted to the temporary shelter for the traveling public, and where entry to individual guest rooms is via the exterior of the building rather than through a central lobby. 
Museum: A building having public significance by reason of its architecture or former use or occupancy, or a building serving as a repository for a collection of natural, scientific, literary curiosities or objects of interest, or works of art, and arranged, intended, and designed to be viewed by members of the public with or without an admission fee, and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public as gifts or for their own use. 
N 
Nonconforming building or structure: A building or structure that does not meet one or more height, setback, building coverage, or other dimensional requirements for the land use district in which said building or structure is located; or a building or structure occupied by a use subject to the specific use provisions of this Ordinance, and which does not meet one or more height, setback, building coverage, or other such dimensional requirements for said specific use. 

Nonconforming lot of record: A lot of record which legally existed prior to the adoption of this Ordinance but which, due to the adoption of this Ordinance, does not conform to the minimum access, frontage, lot size, lot width, or other lot requirements of the land use district in which the lot is located as established by this Ordinance; or a lot of record lawfully established after the effective date of this Ordinance which, due to an amendment to this Ordinance, does not conform to the minimum access, frontage, lot size, lot width, or other lot requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 

Nonconforming use: A use or activity that: was lawfully established prior to the adoption of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right in the zoning district in which said use or activity is located as established in this Ordinance; or a use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the amendment of this Ordinance, but which, by reason of such amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right in the zoning district in which said use or activity is located as established in this Ordinance or an amendment thereto. 

Nursery or kindergarten school: Any building used routinely for the daytime care or education of preschool age children and including all normal accessory and play areas. For purpose of this ordinance, a nursery or kindergarten school is considered to be a day care center. 
Nursing home: A facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home; it complies with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. A nursing home is an institutionalized residential living facility for purposes of this Ordinance. 
O 
Office: A building or portion thereof wherein services are performed involving predominantly administrative, professional or clerical operations and not involving retail sales or other sales of any kind on the premises. 
Office/warehouse: A building that combines office and warehouse or storage functions, where the majority of the area of the building is devoted to warehouse or storage functions, and which does not involve retail sales. 
Open air business: Any commercial establishment with the principal use of displaying products in an area exposed to open air on three or more sides, including but not limited to rock yards, nurseries and garden supply stores, lumber and building materials yards, flea markets, statuaries and monument sales establishments, liquid petroleum dealers and tank sales. A produce stand is not considered to be an open air business. 
Orchard: An establishment which cares for and harvests fruit- or nut-bearing trees, bushes, or vines. 
P 
Package store: A retail establishment that sells beer, wine, and/or liquor in sealed containers for off-site consumption. 
Parking lot, off-site: A parcel of land or portion thereof principally used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles whether or not a fee is paid for parking, not located on the same site as the destination of the motor vehicle operator. 
Parking structure: A structure or portion thereof composed of one or more levels or floors used exclusively for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. A parking structure may be totally below grade (as in an underground parking garage) or either partially or totally above grade with those levels being either open or enclosed. 
Passive recreation: Recreational activities and places that generally do not require a developed site. This generally includes such activities as hiking, horseback riding, and picnicking, provided that such activities occur in a manner that is consistent with existing natural conditions. 
Pawn shop: A type of used merchandise store in which merchandise is offered as collateral for obtaining loans and wherein such merchandise is offered for sale in recompense for default of loan repayment. A pawn shop is an enclosed retail trade establishment when operated wholly within a building. 
Personal care home: Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. Personal care tasks include assistance with bathing, toileting, grooming, shaving, dental care, dressing, and eating. This use is an institutionalized residential living facility for purposes of this Ordinance. 
Personal service establishment: A facility engaged in the provision of services for a fee to persons and their apparel, including but not limited to barber and beauty shops, coin-operated and full service laundries and dry cleaners, photographic studios, shoe repair and shoeshine shops, tanning studios, and travel agencies. 
Planned unit development: A form of development characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, and a mix of building types and land uses. 
_____ 
_____
Power plant, private: A facility, distinguished from a public use, that converts one or more energy sources, including but not limited to water power, fossil fuels, nuclear power, or solar power, into electrical energy or steam, the primary function of which is the provision of electricity to the use on the site the facility is located, or off-site. 
Public use: Any building, structure, or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, state of Georgia, a County, a municipality, or any authority, agency, board, or commission of the above governments, that is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: government administrative buildings, post offices, police and fire stations, libraries and museums, public health facilities, public works camps, parks and community centers, public roads and streets, airports, water and sanitary sewerage intake, collection, pumping, treatment, and storage facilities, emergency medical facilities, and jails and correctional facilities. 
R 
Rail yard: An area of land, a portion of which is covered by a system of railroad tracks, that provides for switching, storing, moving, repairing, and weighing of railroad cars, trains, engines, locomotives, and similar stock designed to roll on a track. 
Railroad freight terminal: A facility for freight pick-up or distribution by railroad. 
Recreational vehicle: A vehicular type unit primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, which either has its own motive power or is mounted or drawn by another vehicle. This term includes motorized homes, motorized campers, pick-up campers, travel trailers, camping trailers, and tent trailers, among others. 
Recreational vehicle park: Any lot of land upon which two or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or maintained for occupancy on a temporary basis by recreational vehicles as temporary living quarters by campers, vacationers or travelers. This definition also includes developed campgrounds, governed by a set of public or private management rules, that accommodate recreational vehicles on camping spaces for paying guests and which may include park-owned recreational vehicle(s) for rent. A recreational vehicle park is distinguished from a campground in that all or some of the camping sites provide recreational vehicle utility connection assemblies to enable the camping unit to connect with water, sewage disposal, electric power, and/or other utilities and services. 
Recovered materials: Those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential; can be feasibly used, reused, or recycled; and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse, or recycling, whether or not requiring subsequent separation and processing. (Georgia Code Section 12-8-22) 
Recovered materials processing facility: A facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials. Such term shall not include a solid waste handling facility; provided, however, any solid waste generated by such facility shall be subject to all applicable laws and regulations relating to such solid waste. (Georgia Code Section 12-8-22) 
Recycling center: Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting and processing materials to be recycled, including but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum materials. 
Relocated residential structure: A detached, site-built single-family dwelling (i.e., excluding a manufactured home, mobile home, modular home, or industrialized building) that is moved (or disassembled into more than one structure and moved) to another site, whether temporarily or permanently. 
Restaurant: Any establishment in which the principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state, and in which customers are served their food and/or beverages by a restaurant employee at the same table or counter at which the items are consumed, or customers are served their food and/or beverages by means of a cafeteria-type operation where the food or beverages are consumed within the restaurant building. This term includes bars, taverns, pubs, and sidewalk cafes. 
Restaurant, drive-through: Any establishment in which the principal business is the sale of foods and beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state and in which the principal or accessory method of operation of all or any portion of the business is to allow food or beverages to be served directly to the customer in a motor vehicle either in a parked state or in vehicle aisles, without the need for the customer to exit the motor vehicle. 
Retail trade establishment, enclosed: Any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which may include the incidental repair of such goods and products, that operates entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, except for outdoor display during business hours and accessory storage in enclosed, subordinate buildings. These include but are not limited to the following: convenience stores including the sale of gasoline, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores, grocery and miscellaneous food stores including retail bakeries, apparel, shoe, and accessory clothing stores, furniture, upholstery, floor covering, household appliance and home furnishing stores, musical instrument stores, radio, television, and computer stores, record, tape, compact disc and DVD stores, eating and drinking places not involving drive-in or drive-through facilities, drug stores, apothecaries and proprietary stores, liquor stores and bottle shops, used merchandise stores and pawn shops, sporting goods stores and bicycle shops, art and stationery stores, hobby, toy, and game shops, jewelry, gift, novelty, souvenir shops, camera and photographic supply stores, luggage and leather goods stores, sewing, needlework, and piece goods stores, catalogue and mail order stores, news stands, florists, tobacco shops, automotive parts stores not involving repair, video rental and sales stores (except adult businesses as defined), and watch and clock sales and repair shops. 
Retreat center: A facility used for professional, educational, or religious meetings, conferences, or seminars and which may provide meals in a single building, lodging, and recreation for participants during the period of the retreat or program only. Such center may not be utilized for the general public for meals or overnight accommodations. Housing is usually in lodges, dormitories, sleeping cabins or other such temporary quarters, which do not contain kitchens. 
Riding academy or equestrian center: An establishment where horses are kept for riding or are kept for competition or educational purposes incidental to a club, association, ranch, educational institution or similar establishment but which does not involve commercial sales and is not open to the general public for a fee. 
Riding stable: An establishment where horses or other animals that can be ridden by humans are kept for riding and which offers the general public rides for a fee. A riding stable is an outdoor commercial recreation facility. 
Roadside stand: A use offering either farm-grown, prepared food products such as fruits, vegetables, canned foods, or similar agricultural products for sale on the premises within a temporary structure on the premises with no space for customers within the structure itself, or without using such temporary structure. 
Rooming house: A residential building in which three or more rooms are rented but are not open to the public or overnight guests. Includes the term boarding house. 
S 
Salvage yard: A place of business primarily engaged in the storage, sale, dismantling or other processing of uses or waste materials which are not usually intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include paper and metal salvage yards, used tire storage yards, or retail and/or wholesale sales of used automobile parts and supplies. This term includes junk yards. 
Sawmill: A facility where logs or partially processed wood are sawn, split, shaved, stripped, chipped, or otherwise processed to produce wood products. This term does not apply to the temporary processing of timber for use on the same lot by the owner or occupant of that lot. 
School for the arts: An educational use not operated by the Hall County Board of Education that offers or provides instruction to more than two students at a time in dance, singing, music, painting, sculpting, fine arts, or martial arts. 
School, private, elementary, middle, or high: An educational use for students in grades one through twelve or for only certain ranges of grades one through twelve, not operated by the Hall County Board of Education, which has a curriculum at least equal to a public school with regard to the branches of learning and study required to be taught in the public schools of the state of Georgia. 
School, professional: An educational use not operated by the Hall County Board of Education and having a curriculum devoted primarily to business or professions, including but not limited to barbers and beauticians, dentists, and real estate agents and brokers. 
School, special: An educational use not operated by the Hall County Board of Education that provides special education to more than two students at a time, including but not limited to the training of gifted, learning disabled, and mentally or physically handicapped persons. 
School, trade: An educational use not operated by the Hall County Board of Education and having a curriculum devoted primarily to industry, trade, or other vocational-technical instruction. 
Self-service storage facility: A structure, building or group of buildings divided into separate compartments, spaces, or stalls, which may be of different sizes and which may or may not be climate controlled, and which are leased or rented on an individual basis to businesses and residents for temporary storage needs, but where no commercial transactions or activities take place other than the rental of the storage units. Also referred to as mini-warehouses. 
Semi-public use: Any building, structure, or use, owned and/or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or that is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as but not limited to the following: underground and overhead gas, electric, steam, or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, including incidental wires, cables, and poles but not towers. Includes utility company substations as defined herein. 
Service and fuel filling station: Any building, structure or land use for the retail sale of motor vehicle fuel, oil accessories and which may include the servicing of motor vehicles, except that major repairs, body repairs and painting of motor vehicles shall not be considered servicing of motor vehicles. Such uses are automobile service establishments. 
Shopping center: A group of commercial establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property and related in its location, size and type of shops to the trade area which the unit serves. For purposes of use regulations, shopping centers are considered enclosed retail trade establishments. 

Showroom: A principal or accessory use where wholesale or retail goods are displayed. 
Silviculture: The scientific management of forest trees; the ongoing growing, cultivation and reforestation of trees. Silviculture is included in the term "forestry." 
Skilled nursing care facility: A facility which admits residents on medical referral; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will provide continuing supervision including emergencies; it complies with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. For purposes of this Ordinance, this use is an institutionalized residential living facility. 
Slaughterhouse: A facility for the slaughtering and processing of animals and the refining of their byproducts. 
Solid waste handling: The storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. (Georgia Code Section 12-8-22) 
Solid waste handling facility: Any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste. (Georgia Code Section 12-8-22) 
Solid waste transfer facility: A fixed facility where solid waste from collection vehicles is consolidated and temporarily stored for subsequent transport to a permanent disposal site. 
Special event facility: A facility or assembly hall available for lease by private parties for special events including but not limited to weddings, birthdays, reunions, anniversaries, and the like. 
T 
Taxi-cab or limousine service: Any place used to dispatch motor vehicles with drivers for hire. 
Taxidermy: A business engaged in preparing, stuffing, and mounting of the skins of animals. 
Temporary use: A use or structure is in place for only a short period of time. 
Therapeutic camp: A child-caring institution which provides a variety of outdoor activities taking place in a wilderness or camp environment that are designed to improve the emotional and behavioral adjustment of the residents participating in the activities; it is regulated by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Tow service: An establishment that dispatches towing vehicles and which provides for the storage of vehicles for a period not exceeding 60 days but does not include disposal, disassembly, salvage, or accessory storage of inoperable vehicles. This term is distinguished from "wrecked motor vehicle compound" and "salvage yard" as defined herein. 
Tower, amateur radio: A freestanding or building-mounted structure, including any base, tower or pole, antenna, and appurtenances, intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Townhouse: One (1) of a group of three or more single-family, attached dwelling units under fee simple ownership. (see also figure next page) 

_____ 
_____
Truck stop: An establishment engaged primarily in the fueling, servicing, repair, or parking of tractor trucks or similar heavy commercial vehicles, and which may include the sale of accessories and equipment for such vehicles. A truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, showers, or restaurant facilities primarily for the use of truck drivers. 
Truck terminal: A facility or premise for the receipt, transfer, short-term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck. 
U 
Use, accessory: A use of land subordinate to the principal building or use on a lot for purposes incidental and related to the principal building or use and located on the same lot therewith. 
Use, conditional: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the particular zoning district and is not automatically permitted by right within a zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, may be found to be compatible and approved by the Governing Body within a particular zoning district as provided in certain instances by this Ordinance. An approved conditional use runs with the property. 
Use, permitted: A use by right which is specifically authorized in a particular zoning district, or permitted by right in a particular overlay district if established. 
Used: The word "used" as applied to any land, building or structure shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
Utility company: A private business providing electricity, natural gas, telephone or other services under the regulation of Georgia Public Services Commission. This use includes equipment and vehicle storage. 
Utility company substation: A facility used for the transmission or distribution of services provided by a utility company, such as an electrical transformer station, telephone junction box, cable box, television box, or natural gas regulator station. 
V 
Vehicle emission testing facility: A building or structure used for testing vehicles for compliance with air quality standards. 
W 
Warehouse: A use involving the storage of products, supplies, and equipment, and which typically involve truck or rail transportation to and from the site. 
Wastewater treatment plant: A facility or group of units used for the treatment of industrial or domestic wastewater for sewer systems and for the reduction and handling of solids and gasses removed from such waste, whether or not such facility is discharging into state waters (includes spray fields). 
Wholesale trade establishment: An establishment engaged in the selling or distribution of merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other wholesalers. 
Wireless telecommunication equipment: Any equipment used to provide wireless telecommunication service, but which is not affixed to or contained within a wireless telecommunication facility, but is instead affixed to or mounted on an existing building or structure that is used for some other purpose. Wireless telecommunication equipment also includes a ground mounted base station used as an accessory structure that is connected to an antenna mounted on or affixed to an existing building. 

Wireless telecommunication facility: Any freestanding facility, building, pole, tower, or structure used to provide wireless telecommunication services, and which consists of, without limitation, antennae, equipment and storage and other accessory structures used to provide wireless telecommunication services. 
Wrecked motor vehicle compound: An area used to store disabled or impounded motor vehicles until such time as their disposition (either by junk, salvage, repair, etc.) has been determined by an insurance company, the owner of the vehicle, or his or her legal representative. 
Y 
Yard sale: The temporary sale of home furniture, appliances, clothing and/or domestic items owned by an occupant of a residential dwelling and taking place on the premises on which such occupant resides, whether in the yard or in a carport or garage. Yard sales which do not take place on the premises where such occupant resides are considered open-air businesses, except that this shall not be construed to prevent the sale of such items by another family or household in connection with an event where such items are sold by the occupant of a residence on the premises where the yard sale occurs. This term includes garage sales. 
Z 
Zero lot line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no (zero) front, side or rear building setback (or yard requirements) and rests directly on a front, side, or rear lot line. A zero lot line development is one where houses in the development on a common street frontage are shifted to one side of their lot. 

( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 2.2. - Design-Related Definitions. 
Alternative tower structure: Clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, man-made trees (without accessory buildings/structures), and similar natural or man-made alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Arcade: A covered passage contiguous to a street or plaza with shops on one or both sides, accessible to the public. Generally, the facade overlaps the sidewalk while the shop front remains set back. The sidewalk is fully covered with an overhang. 
Architectural appearance, exterior: The architectural character and general composition of the exterior of a structure, including but not limited to the kind, color, and texture of the building material and the type, design, and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements. 
Architectural features: Ornamental or decorative features attached to or protruding from an exterior wall or roof, including cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments. 


Architectural recesses: Portions of a building wall at street level which are set back from the street line so as to create articulation of the building wall and/or to provide space for windows or doors. 
Attractive: Having qualities that arouse satisfaction and pleasure in numerous, but not necessarily all, observers. 
Awning: A roof-like cover, often made of fabric or metal, designed and intended for protection from the weather or as a decorative embellishment, and which projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk, or door. 
Awning, internally illuminated: A fixed awning covered with a translucent membrane that is, in whole or part, illuminated by light passing through the membrane from within the structure. 
Balustrade: A railing consisting of a handrail or balusters. 
Build-to line: An alignment establishing a certain distance from the property line (street right-of-way line) along which the building is required to be built. 

Building frontage: The length of any side of a building which fronts on a public street, measured in a straight line parallel with the abutting street. 

Canopy: A roof-like structure, supported by a building and/or columns, poles, or braces extending from the ground, including an awning, that projects from the wall of a building over a sidewalk, driveway, entry, window, or similar area, or which may be freestanding. 
Character: Special physical characteristics of an area or structure that set it apart from its surroundings and contribute to its individuality. 
Cornice: Any horizontal member, structural or non-structural, of any building, projecting outward from the exterior walls at the roof line. 
Court: An open, uncovered area partly or wholly enclosed by buildings or walls and used primarily for supplying access, light, air, and/or open space to abutting buildings. 
Design guideline: A standard of appropriate activity that will preserve or enhance the architectural character and site design and function of a building, structure, or development. 
Detail: A small feature or element that gives character to a building. 
Dormer: A window projecting from a roof. 
Eave: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Eave line: The extension of a roof line beyond the vertical wall of a building. 
Elevation drawing: An architectural drawing of a building or building facade, intended to illustrate its design, characteristics and major features (see example below). 
_____ 
_____
Facade: The face (exterior elevation) of a building, especially the face parallel to or most nearly parallel to a public street. 
Facade, front: Any facade with a main public entrance which faces one of the primary streets. 
Facade, rear: Any facade without a public entry that does not face a public road. 
Facade, side: Any facade without a public entry but facing a public street. 
Fenestration: The organization of windows on a building wall. 
Footprint: The horizontal area as seen in plan, measured from the outside of all exterior walls and supporting columns. It includes garages, covered carports, and accessory structures. 
Gable: The triangular upper portion of an end wall, underneath a peaked roof. 
Green: An open space available for unstructured recreation, its landscaping consisting of grassy areas and trees. 
Harmony: A quality that represents an attractive arrangement and agreement of parts of a composition, as in architectural elements. 
Lighting, neon outline: Outline lighting formed in whole or part with neon. 
Lighting, outline: An arrangement of lighting that outlines or calls attention to certain features of a building, such as its shape or the decoration of a window. 
Lighting, pedestrian-scale: Light standards or placements no greater than 15 feet in height located along walkways. 
Marquee: A roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
Massing: The overall visual impact of a structure's volume; a combination of height and width and the relationship of the heights and widths of the building's components. 
Modularity: Design composition comprised of a rhythmic organization of parts. 
Modulation: A measured setback or offset. 
Opaque: Impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
Parapet: That portion of a wall which extends above the roof line. 
Pedestrian-scale development: Development designed with an emphasis primarily on the street sidewalk and on pedestrian access to the site and building, rather than auto access and parking areas. The building is generally placed close to the street and the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. There are generally windows or display cases along building facades which face the street. 
_____ 
_____
Plaza: An open area adjacent to a civic or commercial building that functions as a gathering place and may incorporate a variety of non-permanent activities, such as vendors and display stands. 
Porch: A projection from a building wall which is covered but enclosed on no more than one side by a vertical wall. 
Portico: An exterior appendage to a building, normally at the entry, usually roofed. 
Proportion: Balanced relationship of parts of a building, signs and other structures, and landscape to each other and to the whole. 
Retail display window: A window or opening in the exterior wall of any portion of a building used for business purposes, through which merchandise, services, or businesses are displayed or advertised and visible from the ground or sidewalk level. 
Roof: The cover of a building, including the eaves and similar projections. 
Roof, flat: A roof having no pitch or a pitch of not more than 2:12. 
Roof, pitched: A shed, gabled, or hipped roof having a slope or pitch of at least one foot rise for each four feet of horizontal distance. 
Shop front: A business or retail use where the facade is aligned directly on the frontage line with the entrance at grade; typical of sidewalk retail. Shop fronts often have awnings. 
Square: An area for passive recreational use, usually bounded by streets. 
Stoop: An exterior floor, typically but not necessarily constructed of concrete and/or masonry, with a finished floor elevation at least six inches higher than the adjacent ground level, and utilized primarily as an access platform to a building. 
Street furniture: Those features associated with a street that are intended to enhance the street's physical character and use by pedestrians, such as benches, trash receptacles, planting containers, pedestrian lighting, kiosks, etc. 
Street hardware: Objects other than buildings or street furniture that are part of the streetscape. Examples are: non-pedestrian street light fixtures, utility poles, traffic lights and their fixtures, fire hydrants, etc. 
Streetscape: An area that may either abut or be contained within a public or private street right-of-way or access way that may contain sidewalks, street furniture, trees and landscaping, and similar features. Streetscape also includes the visual image of a street, including the combination of buildings, parking, signs, and hardscapes. 
_____ 
_____
Traditional neighborhood development: An approach to land-use planning, urban design, and development that promotes the building of neighborhoods with a mix of uses and housing types, architectural variety, one or more central public gathering places, interconnected streets (and sometimes alleys), and edges defined by greenbelts or boulevards. The basic goal is the integration of residences with work, shopping, recreation, and transit all within walking distance. 
Trash enclosure: An accessory use of a site where trash and/or recyclable material containers, or any other type of waste or refuse container is stored. 
Undergrounding: The placement of utility lines below ground, with the removal of above-ground poles, wires and structures as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 2.3. - Miscellaneous Definitions. 
Abandon: To stop the use of property or the occupancy of a building for twelve (12) months or more. 
Abandonment: A condition where the use of property has stopped or the building has been vacant for twelve (12) months or more. 
Abutting: Having property lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 

Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
Alley: A public or private thoroughfare, narrower than a street, which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property at the rear of buildings. 
Annexation: The process by which a parcel of land is transferred from the jurisdiction of unincorporated Hall County to the jurisdiction of the City of Flowery Branch. 
Appeal: A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance, or a request for a review of an action taken by an administrative official in the application or enforcement of this Ordinance. 
Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the City for approval of an application under the terms of this Ordinance. 
Basement: That portion of a building having its lowest floor subgrade (below ground level) on two or more sides. 
Berm: An earthen mound or embankment, usually less than three feet if designed to provide visual interest only, and usually six feet or more in height if intended to screen views or reduce noise. 

Buffer: A strip of land located between a side or rear property line and a building, structure, or use, intended to separate and obstruct the view of the site on which the buffer is located from an abutting property. A buffer is usually intended to provide screening, as defined and as may be required by this Ordinance. (see illustration) 

Buffer, natural undisturbed: A buffer that contains a natural area consisting of trees and/or other vegetation, undisturbed except for approved access and utility crossings, and replanted where sparsely vegetated. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
(1)  Building, accessory: A building subordinate to the main (principal) building on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 

(2)  Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the main or primary use of the lot on which said building is situated. In any residential land use district, any structure containing a dwelling unit shall be defined to be the principal building on the lot on which same is situated, except for detached accessory apartments. 
Building height: The vertical distance measured to the highest point of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 

Building Inspector: The city's official responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable building codes of the city. 
Building setback line: A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the front wall of a principal building (excluding roof overhangs of 36 inches or less) and the road right-of-way line or a side or rear building wall and a side or rear property line when measured perpendicularly thereto. For purposes of this Ordinance, a minimum required building setback line and minimum required yard shall be considered the same. 
(1)  Front building setback: The minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abutting road and any part of a principal building on a lot (excluding roof overhangs of 36 inches or less). The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it. 
(2)  Rear building setback: The minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot (excluding roof overhangs of 36 inches or less). The rear building setback extends along the full length of the rear lot line. 
(3)  Side building setback: The minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot (excluding roof overhangs of 36 inches or less). The side building setback extends along the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any). 
Caliper: The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point 6 inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including 4-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
Certificate of occupancy: A document issued by the Building Inspector indicating that the building and use or reuse of a particular building or land is in conformity with all applicable codes and regulations, and that such building or land may be occupied for the purpose stated therein. 
City Engineer: The city's official responsible for implementing and enforcing the applicable engineering requirements of the development regulations and those other engineering requirements of the city, which may be provided by a private firm on a contract basis. 
Common area: Land within a development, not individually owned or dedicated to the public, and designed for the common usage of the development. These areas include green open spaces and yards and may include pedestrian walkways and complimentary structures and improvements for the enjoyment of residents of the development. Maintenance of such areas is the responsibility of a private association, not the public. 
Comprehensive plan: Any plan by a county or municipality covering such county or municipality or any plan by a regional development center covering the center's region proposed or prepared pursuant to the minimum standards and procedures for preparation of comprehensive plans and for implementation of comprehensive plans, established by the Department of Community Affairs. (Georgia Code Section 50-8-2) 
Concept plan: A document submitted with an application for a rezoning or other type of application upon which the applicant has shown the intended development and its design. 
Condition of approval: A requirement adopted by the Governing Body at the time of approval of a change in zoning district or approval of a conditional use or variance; placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this Ordinance in order to reduce an adverse impact of the request and to further protect the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
Conditional use: A use which is not automatically permitted by right, but which may be permitted within a zoning district (approved through a public hearing process by the Governing Body, subject to meeting specific requirements of this Ordinance. 
Conservation easement: A nonpossessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open-space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open-space use; protecting natural resources; maintaining or enhancing air or water quality; or preserving the historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural aspects of real property. (Georgia Code Section 44-10-2) 
Critical root zone: The land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is determined by the farthest extent of the drip line from the trunk. 
_____ 
_____
Curb cut: The providing of vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting road; the physical improvement designed to provide such ingress/egress. 
Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and width and which may include a taper, as approved by the Zoning Administrator, that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
Deciduous: A plant with foliage that is shed annually (e.g., weeping willow; maple). 
Density: The quantity of building per unit of lot area; for example, the number of dwellings per lot area (gross square foot or per acre). 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials; any land-disturbing activity which alters the elevation of the land, removes significant vegetation, or causes structures of any kind to be erected or removed. 
Development permit: An official authorization issued by the Zoning Administrator in accordance with this ordinance to proceed with land disturbance and grading, as set forth in this ordinance. 
Diameter Breast Height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk (usually a mature tree) measured at a height of 4½ feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below 4½ feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 

Discontinuance: A lapse in the activity or operation of a nonconforming use for a period of six (6) months but less than twelve (12) months. Discontinuance for twelve (12) months or more shall be considered "abandonment." 
Drip line: A perimeter formed by the points farthest away from the trunk of a tree where precipitation falling from the branches of that tree lands on the ground. 
Dumpster: A container designed to hold refuse that has a hooking connection that permits it to be raised and dumped into a sanitation truck for disposal, or a container (excluding temporary placements) designed to hold refuse that is loaded onto a truck. 
Environmental Health Department: The Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
Evergreen: A plant or tree with foliage that persists and remains green year-round (e.g., pine; magnolia). 
Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of each floor of the principal building, and any accessory buildings, measured from the exterior walls or from the center line of party walls. The term does not include any area used exclusively for the surface parking of motor vehicles or for building or equipment access, such as stairs, elevator shafts, and maintenance crawl space. 
Floor-area ratio (FAR): The total floor area of the building or buildings on a lot or parcel divided by the gross area of the lot or parcel. 
_____ 
_____
Frontage or road frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where its front lot line abuts the right-of-way of any road from which access may be directly gained. 
Governing Body: The Flowery Branch, Georgia, Mayor and City Council. 
Grade, natural: The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating. 
Grading: Altering the shape or topography of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. (see also land-disturbing activity) 
Household pet: Any animal other than livestock or wild animals, which is kept for pleasure and not sale, which is an animal of a species customarily bred and raised to live in the habitat of residential dwellings or on the premises thereof and is dependent upon residents of the dwelling for food and shelter. Household pets include but are not limited to dogs, cats, rodents, common cage birds, aquarium-kept fish, and small amphibians and reptiles. 
Impervious surface: Any hard-surfaced, man-made area that does not readily absorb water, including but not limited to building roofs, parking and driveway areas, graveled areas, sidewalks, and paved recreation areas. 

Improvements: The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
Landscape strip: A area of landscaping of specified width. 
Landscaping: The modification of the landscape for an aesthetic or functional purpose. The area within the boundaries of an individual lot that includes the preservation of existing vegetation and the continued maintenance thereof, as well as, the installation of trees, shrubs, ground covers, grass, and flowers. Landscaping areas may also include decorative rock, bark, mulch and other similar approved materials in addition to vegetation and live plant material. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices. (Georgia Code Section 12-7-3) 
Land trust: A private, nonprofit conservation organization formed to protect natural resources, such as productive farm or forest land, natural areas, historic structures, and recreational areas. Land trusts purchase and accept donations of conservation easements. They educate the public about the need to conserve land and some provide land-use and estate planning services to local governments and individual citizens. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a use, building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 

Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
Lot, double frontage: Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two (2) streets. 
Lot, flag: A tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. Also called a panhandle lot. 
Lot, interior: A lot having frontage on only one street. 
Lot area, minimum: Minimum lot area means the smallest permitted total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of street right-of-ways but inclusive of easements. 
Lot coverage: The part or percent of a lot occupied by buildings and structures, including accessory buildings and structures, but not including unenclosed parking or loading areas. 
Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been recorded in the records of the Clerk of Superior Court of Hall County prior to the enactment of a zoning ordinance on September 30, 1972; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been lawfully recorded in the same office as of the effective date of this zoning ordinance; or any lot lawfully established by plat after the effective date of this ordinance. 
Metes and bounds: A system of describing and identifying land by a series of lines around the perimeter of an area; "metes" means bearings and distances and "bounds" refers to physical monuments. 
Nuisance: Anything that causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man. (Georgia Code Section 41-1-1) 
Nuisance, public: A nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. A private nuisance is one limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. (Georgia Code Section 41-1-1) 
Occupied: The word "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Open space, landscaped: That portion of a given lot, not covered by buildings, parking, access and service areas, that is designed to enhance privacy and the amenity of the development by providing landscaping features, screening and buffering for the benefit of the occupants or those in neighboring areas, or a general appearance of openness. Landscaped open space may include, but need not be limited to, grass lawns, decorative planting, berms, walls and fences, sidewalks/walkways, ornamental objects such as fountains, statues and other similar natural and man-made objects, wooded areas, and water courses, any or all of which are designed and arranged to produce an aesthetically pleasing effect within and exterior to the development. 
Outdoor storage: The keeping of any goods, junk, material, merchandise or commercial vehicles in the same outdoor place for more than twenty-four hours. 
Overlay zone: A defined geographic area that encompasses one or more underlying zoning districts and that imposes additional requirements above those required by the underlying zoning district. An overlay zone can be coterminous with existing zoning districts or contain only parts of one or more such districts. 
Parking space: A space identified and set aside for the temporary parking of an automobile or other motor vehicle. 
Recreation, passive: Recreational activities and places that generally do not require a developed site. This generally includes such activities as hiking, horseback riding, and picnicking, provided that such activities occur in a manner that is consistent with existing natural conditions. 
Retaining wall: A wall or similar structure used at a grade change to hold soil on the up-hillside from slumping, sliding, or falling. 
Rezoning: An amendment to the Official Zoning Map, or an amendment to an overlay zone boundary, that changes the zoning district or overlay zone of one or more properties specified in an application. 
Screening: A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby building, structure, or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or some combination thereof, according to specifications of this Ordinance. 
Shrub: A woody plant, smaller than a tree, consisting of several small stems from the ground or small branches near the ground, and generally obtaining a height less than eight (8) feet; a shrub may be deciduous or evergreen. 
Sight visibility triangle: The areas at the corners of an intersection of roads, or at the intersection of a road and driveway, which may vary based on type of road, that are to be kept free of shrubs, ground covers, berms, fences, structures, or other materials or items over two and one-half (two and ½) and twelve (12) feet in height as measured from the ground. 
_____ 
_____
Slope: An inclined earth surface, the inclination of which is expressed as the ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. In these regulations, slopes are generally expressed as a percentage; percentage of slope refers to a given rise in elevation over a given run in distance. A fifty (50) percent slope, for example, refers to a 100-foot rise in elevation over a distance of 200 feet. A fifty (50) percent slope is expressed in engineering terms as a 2:1 slope. 

State waters: Includes any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. (Georgia Code Section 12-7-3) 
Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way, or a private street approved by the city, which affords the principal means of access for motor vehicles to abutting properties. 
Street, major: An existing or proposed street or highway designated in the comprehensive plan as an arterial or collector street. 
Story: That portion of a building compromised between a floor and the floor or roof next above. The first floor of a two (2) or multi-story building shall be deemed the story that has no floor immediately below it and that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy. Those stories above the first floor shall be numbered consecutively. 
Structure: Anything built, constructed or erected, or established or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner, the use of which requires location on the ground or which is attached to something having permanent location on the ground. For purposes of this ordinance, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, dog houses, and outdoor fenced animal runs are considered structures. Tents, vehicles, trailers, and play equipment attached to the ground in some permanent or temporary way shall be considered structures. A structure may or may not be easily moved from a given location on the ground. Walls and fences are considered structures but are subject to setback regulations for walls and fences rather than principal or accessory building setback regulations. Driveways and parking lots are not considered structures. 
Substantial accordance: Strong, yet not precise, conformity such that an ordinary person would conclude that all essential elements are met. 
Tower, amateur radio: A freestanding or building-mounted structure, including any base, tower or pole, antenna, and appurtenances, intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission. 
Tree: Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk diameter of three (3) inches or more which normally attains a mature height of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 

Tree, flowering ornamental: A tree that produces seasonal flowers and blossoms and is used primarily for aesthetic or ornamental purposes (e.g., flowering dogwood; eastern redbud). 
Tree, hardwood: Any leaf-bearing (not needle-bearing) tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
Tree, shade: A broadleaf tree having an average height at maturity of at least 20 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical, or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this Ordinance which permits construction or use in a matter otherwise prohibited by this Ordinance, which may be approved in individual cases upon application and applied to specific property where compliance would result in a particular hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience or a desire to make a profit. A variance is a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of the regulations of this Ordinance which are dimensional in nature as applied to specific property. 
Variance, administrative: A variance which is authorized to be approved by the Zoning Administrator under the terms of this ordinance. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. 
Yard: A space on the same lot with a principal building, open unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings or structures are expressly permitted. See also terms under "building setback." 

(1)  Yard, front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. For corner and double frontage lots, front yard requirements apply to all road frontages. 
(2)  Yard, rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(3)  Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning Administrator: The Manager of Planning and Community Development of the City of Flowery Branch (or any similar position as it may be retitled), or authorized designee. 
Zoning map: The official zoning map or maps of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 2.4. - Responsibility for Interpretation. 
The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions, or any other provision of this zoning ordinance, unless that authority is provided to another administrative official within a specific Article. Interpretations of the Zoning Administrator or other administrative officer may be appealed under the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 2.5 - Interpretations. 
In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements. Where the literal interpretation is clear to the Zoning Administrator, it shall be construed literally. Where the Article, Section, or Subsection has a statement of purpose and intent, the Zoning Administrator shall consider said purpose and intent in making the interpretation. The Zoning Administrator shall make interpretations in a way that are liberally construed in favor of the City. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 2.6. - Use of Figures. 
Figures associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this Ordinance are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 2.7. - Use of Words and Phrases. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
(a)  If a term is not defined in this ordinance the Zoning Administrator shall use the common definition of said term as presented in the New Oxford American Dictionary, 3rd Edition or later. 
(b)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular tense include the plural tense, and words used in the plural tense include the singular tense. 
(c)  The masculine person "he" or "his" also means "her" or "hers." 
(d)  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, county, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
(e)  The words "shall" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
(f)  Where a term is defined in this Article, it shall be construed to have meaning and application throughout this Ordinance, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
(g)  Where a term is defined in any Article other than this Article, it is generally the intent that such definition applies only within the Article it appears, since it is positioned in the Article to which it most readily refers; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the Zoning Administrator from interpreting that defined term as applying outside the strict context of the Article in which it appears, and to that end, all definitions, regardless of location within this Ordinance, apply equally to the use of such terms throughout the Ordinance. 
(h)  For purposes of this Ordinance, the following features shall be considered an attachment: enclosed garages, screen porches, and enclosed breezeways. The following shall not be considered an attachment: carports, decks, trellises, and unenclosed breezeways. In all other instances, the Zoning Administrator shall make the determination of whether or not a proposed building, structure, or portion thereof is an attachment to a principal building or whether it is an accessory structure. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 3. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND OFFICIAL ZONING MAP 

Sec. 3.1. - Intent. 
In addition to the various purposes articulated in Article 1 of this Ordinance, the zoning districts established in this Article are intended to: promote the orderly future development of the municipality in accordance with its comprehensive plan; discourage sizes and types of development which would create excessive requirements and costs for public services; discourage uses which because of their size or type would generate an abnormal amount of traffic on streets in the City; establish relationships between and among land uses that will ensure compatibility and maintain quality of life; and protect and promote suitable environments for family and household residences, institutions, offices, commercial, industrial and other uses. 
Sec. 3.2. - Zoning Districts Established. 
The following zoning districts are hereby established: 
A, Agricultural District 
R-1, Residential Low-Density District 
R-2, Residential Moderate-Density District 
R-3, Residential Multi-Family District 
TND, Traditional Neighborhood Development District 
PUD, Planned Unit Development 
MHP, Manufactured Home Park 
O-P, Office-Professional District 
INST, Institutional District 
NS, Neighborhood Shopping District 
HB, Highway Business District 
CBD, Central Business District 
M-1, Light Manufacturing and Industrial District 
M-2, Heavy Manufacturing and Industrial District 
( Ord. No. 348-13, § 2, 8-18-2011 ) 
Sec. 3.3. - Official Zoning Map. 
The boundaries of zoning districts created by this ordinance are hereby established as shown on map entitled "Official Zoning Map" of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia. 
Said official zoning map and all explanatory matter thereon accompany and are hereby made a part of this zoning ordinance. The official zoning map shall indicate the date of adoption and most recent amendment. The original of the official zoning map shall be kept in the office of the city clerk. 
The official zoning map may be kept electronically in a geographic information system and such electronic data shall constitute an integral part of the official zoning map. The Zoning Administrator may make copies of the official zoning map available to the public for a reasonable fee. 
Sec. 3.4. - Revision of the Official Zoning Map. 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, the Governing Body approves changes in the zoning district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the official zoning Map, such changes shall be made promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Governing Body. The procedure for amending the official zoning map is specified in this zoning ordinance (see Article 34). 
The Zoning Administrator is authorized to correct errors in the official zoning map, which may include revisions to property lines which form a zoning boundary, without a requirement to seek approval of the Governing Body or initiate procedures for amending the official zoning map. 
( Ord. No. 348-13, § 3, 8-18-2011 ) 
Sec. 3.5. - Character and Future Land Use Districts Established. 
The character areas and future land use districts presented in map and text form in the adopted comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, are hereby adopted as if fully set forth in this ordinance. The recommendations for appropriate development specified in the comprehensive plan for character areas and future land uses shall be applicable to development in the form of guidelines. Furthermore, to the extent this zoning ordinance provides regulations for character area districts, they are mandatory and shall be followed. 
The boundaries of character and future land use districts as established in the adopted comprehensive plan shall not be amended through the zoning map amendment process established in this zoning ordinance, and such character area and future land use district boundaries shall only be changed by amending the adopted comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 3.6. - Overlay Districts. 
The city may adopt overlay districts, including overlay districts for purposes of historic preservation. If adopted, overlay districts shall be shown on the official zoning map or on a separate overlay district map which is referenced in this zoning ordinance. This provision shall not be construed as repealing or preventing the city's separate adoption by ordinance of historic district regulations. The procedure for adopting or amending an overlay district boundary shall be the same as for amending the official zoning map, as specified in this zoning ordinance (see Article 34). 
Sec. 3.7. - Rules Governing Boundaries. 
Where the boundaries of the various zoning districts, overlay districts, or character districts adopted in this zoning ordinance are unclear or in dispute, the Zoning Administrator shall interpret the boundary and make a final determination which may be appealed pursuant to Article 39 of this zoning ordinance. In interpreting the boundaries, the Zoning Administrator shall be bound by the following rules governing mapped boundaries. 
(a)  Streets. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of streets or highways, street right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerline, street right-of-way lines or such lines extended shall be construed to be such boundaries. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately paralleling the centerline of streets or highways, the location of said boundaries shall be determined by using an engineering scale on the map showing such boundaries. 
(b)  City Limits. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the corporate limit line of the city, such corporate limit line shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(c)  Property Lines. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following property lines or such lines extended, such property lines or such lines extended, as indicated by boundary survey, deed or legal description maintained in the official file of said zoning adoption or amendment, if available, shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(d)  Streams and Rivers. Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerline of stream beds or river beds, or the edge of such stream or river, such centerline or edges shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(e)  Abandonment or Vacation of Right-of-Way. Where a public street or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, and said street or right-of-way is also a zoning district boundary, the regulations applicable to the property to which it reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned public street or right-of-way. 
ARTICLE 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 4.1. - Use, Occupancy and Erection. 
No building, structure, land, or water shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part hereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations of this zoning ordinance or amendments thereto. All non-residential uses must be conducted inside an enclosed building or structure unless specifically permitted within Articles 6, 7 and 9 of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-11, § 7, 11-18-2010 ) 
Sec. 4.2. - Use Prohibited When Not Specified. 
If not otherwise stated, any use not specifically permitted as a use by right or specifically indicated as a conditional use in any given zoning district as provided under Articles 6, 7, and 9 of this zoning ordinance shall be prohibited in that zoning district. 
( Ord. No. 348-11, § 8, 11-18-2010 ) 
Sec. 4.3. - Minimum Requirements. 
Within each zoning district, the regulations set forth shall be minimum requirements and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of building, structure or land, except as may be altered through conditions of zoning applied to specific properties. 
Sec. 4.4. - Relationship to Private Restrictions. 
This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any valid easement, covenant, or deed restriction duly recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Hall County, Georgia. 
Sec. 4.5. - Validity of Existing Conditions of Zoning. 
Notwithstanding the repeal of prior zoning ordinances, if a property was zoned subject to conditions prior to the adoption of this zoning ordinance, the existing zoning conditions shall continue to apply to said property, until or unless amended by the Governing Body. 
Sec. 4.6. - Group Development Projects. 
The standards and requirements of this ordinance may be modified in the case of a plan and program for group development projects or neighborhood unit or planned unit development which are not divided into customary lots, blocks and streets. This Section specifically contemplates and accommodates the desire of a shopping center developer to subdivide the center into tracts which do not meet zoning requirements for lot size, lot width, lot frontage, building setbacks, lot coverage, and other dimensional requirements customarily related to buildings and lot line configurations, so that each tenant shall own their own building and/or lot. 
Notwithstanding zoning ordinance requirements to the contrary, the Zoning Administrator may approve a development proposal and approve a final plat for a subdivision or leasing plan that does not meet the requirements for lot size, lot width, lot frontage, building setbacks, lot coverage, and other dimensional requirements customarily related to buildings and lot line configurations, subject to the following: 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator finds that the proposed group development project provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation and utility needs of the tract when fully developed or populated. 
(b)  When considered as a whole, the group development project does not exceed the density (unit per acre) or intensity specifications (floor-area ratio or lot coverage) permitted by the zoning ordinance for the entire tract to be subdivided or divided into leaseholds; provided, further, the group development project must observe external building setbacks that would apply in the absence of approval of the group development project. 
(c)  A set of covenants, conditions, and restrictions, or other legal mechanism, has been submitted by the applicant, and reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator and City Attorney, so as to insure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(d)  In cases where a lot is proposed that does not meet minimum access and/or lot frontage requirements of the zoning ordinance, access easements must be shown on the plat to be recorded and the access easement agreement shall be recorded in the deed records of Hall County, or other arrangement acceptable to the Zoning Administrator and City Attorney. 
(e)  In cases where buildings do not observe side yard requirements (i.e., zero lot line attached buildings), the Building Inspector shall certify that applicable fire and/or building code requirements for fire walls have been met. 
(f)  Plans for such developments shall be submitted to and approved by the Zoning Administrator whether or not such plat is to be recorded, and no building permits shall be issued until such approval of plans and/or final plat has been given. 
The Zoning Administrator may place conditions on the final plat, plan, and/or conditions, covenants and restrictions in order to ensure the purposes of this ordinance are met. 
ARTICLE 5. - GENERAL DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2018, repealed former Art. 5, §§ 5.1—5.13, and enacted a new Art. 5 as set out herein. Former Art. 5 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 5.1. - Every Use Must Be Upon a Lot of Record. 
No building or structure shall be erected, or any use established unless it is upon a lot of record as defined by this zoning ordinance unless it is specifically provided otherwise in this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.2. - One Dwelling on a Lot. 
Only one single-family dwelling and its accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot intended for such use, unless otherwise specifically provided. This provision shall not be construed to prevent the construction of more than one detached single-family condominium, multiple-family dwelling, office, institutional, commercial or industrial building upon a single lot, in zoning districts where permitted, subject to setbacks and separation as provided in this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.3. - Height Limitations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this section, no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, or altered, to exceed the maximum height of buildings and structures or the number of stories specified in this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  The height limitations established herein shall not apply to chimneys, smokestacks, church spires and steeples, domes, flag poles, public monuments, observation towers, water towers, non-commercial radio and television towers, electricity transmission towers, utility poles, and similar structures. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.4. - Maximum Density, Minimum Lot Size, and Minimum Lot Width. 
(a)  No lot shall hereafter be developed with a number of housing units that exceeds the residential density per unit of land (e.g., acres) for the zoning district in which the lot is located as established by this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  No lot shall hereafter be platted, established, or developed that fails to meet the minimum lot size and minimum lot width for the zoning district in which the lot is located as established by this zoning ordinance, except as otherwise specifically provided including the case of nonconforming lots as defined and regulated herein. 
(c)  No lot shall be reduced in size, and no principal building shall hereafter be constructed, so that the maximum density, minimum lot size, or minimum lot width of the zoning district, as the case may be, in which said lot and building are located are not maintained, except as otherwise specifically provided in this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.5. - Minimum Required Yards and Building Lines. 
(a)  Yards Observed. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected in a manner to have narrower or smaller front yards, side yards, or rear yards than specified for the zoning district in which the property is located, or for the specific use if yards and setback regulations pertain to a specific use as provided in this zoning ordinance. The buffer requirements established by this zoning ordinance may supersede these minimum required yards. 
(b)  Reductions Prohibited. No lot shall be reduced in size, and no principal building shall hereafter be constructed, so that the front, side, or rear yards of the zoning district in which said lot and building are located are not maintained. This section shall not apply to portions of lots affected by public acquisition of part of the lot. No part of a yard shall be included as a part of the yard required for another building. 
(c)  Build-to Lines. In the case where a build-to line is established by or pursuant to this zoning ordinance, no building shall be erected in a manner to have a different building setback or yard that fails to observe said build-to line regulation. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.6. - Principal Building Separation. 
(a)  On lots where more than one principal residential building is permitted, the building separation between principal residential buildings shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. 
(b)  Individual dwelling units within attached single-family fee simple dwellings (townhouses, which are zero lot line on one or both sides) shall be exempt from this requirement, although this provision shall apply to townhouse buildings. 
(c)  All non-residential principal buildings shall provide for adequate building separation to allow for sufficient fire access and traffic flow and that meet applicable building code requirements. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.7. - Maximum Building Coverage. 
No lot shall hereafter be developed to exceed the maximum building coverage specified for the zoning district in which it is located. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.8. - Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage. 
Maximum impervious surface shall not exceed the percentage mandated by the zoning classification. Impervious surface calculation shall not include the primary or accessory structures located on the property. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.9. - Minimum Landscaping or Open Space. 
(a)  No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner to have less than the minimum percentage of landscaping or open space than specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, or for the specific use if a minimum percentage of landscaping or open space for the specific use is required by this Ordinance, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance. 
(b)  No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered in a manner that reduces the minimum required landscaping or open space specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, or for the specific use if a minimum landscaping or open space for the specific use is required by this Ordinance, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.10. - Minimum Required Landscape Strips and Buffers. 
(a)  No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected or use established unless it meets the minimum landscape strips and buffers required by this zoning ordinance for the zoning district in which said building, structure, or use is located, or for the specific use if buffer and landscape strip requirements are established for said use in this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  No lot shall hereafter be developed, and no building, structure, or improvement shall hereafter be erected, installed or altered in a manner that reduces the minimum required width of a landscape strip or buffer specified for the zoning district (or if applicable and controlling, by the overlay zone) in which the property is located, or for the specific use if a landscape strip or buffer for the specific use is required by this Ordinance, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance. 
(c)  No part of a required landscape strip or buffer shall be included as a part of the buffer required for another lot, building, or use. 
(d)  Buffer and landscape strip requirements, if larger than minimum required yards, supersede minimum required yards established by this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.11. - Street Frontage Requirement. 
(a)  No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot, and no lot shall hereafter be created or subdivided, that does not abut for at least thirty (30) feet on a public street, or an approved private street, unless specifically provided otherwise by this zoning ordinance, and in the case of fee-simple lots for attached residential dwelling units (i.e. townhouses), which may be platted to lot widths and with street frontages specified for such uses in this Ordinance. 
(b)  The street frontage requirements of this Ordinance shall not prevent a building, structure, or activity from being accessed through an access easement, so long as the lot on which it is located meets the minimum required street frontage and provided further that the access easement is located in a zoning district that permits the use accessing the easement. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 5.12. - Acquisition for Public Purpose. 
When a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose and such acquisition renders the lot with less than the required lot area, lot width, or not in compliance with other dimensional requirements of this zoning ordinance, or where such remaining lot has an existing building or structure that does not meet required building setbacks or other dimensional requirements of this zoning ordinance, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall not be construed to prevent the development of the lot in accordance with requirements for nonconforming lots established in this zoning ordinance, nor shall it be construed to prevent the continuation of the existing building or structure that otherwise conforms to the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 6. - AGRICULTURAL AND CONVENTIONAL RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6.1. - A, Agricultural District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description. The Agricultural District is established to maintain those areas within the City of Flowery Branch that are not intended to convert to urban or suburban development in the short term. 
(b)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." 
(c)  Dimensional Requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." 
Sec. 6.2. - R-1, Residential, Detached Single Family, Low-Density District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description. This zoning district is intended to implement the "Single-family residential" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "suburban residential" character area established in the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Character. The designs of subdivisions in this district include cul-de-sacs and curvilinear streets. Houses are set back considerable distance from the street. Streets are built to relatively wide standard when compared with traditional neighborhoods. Access to this district is predominantly by automobile but pedestrian mobility is accommodated. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Land use in this district consists predominantly of detached, single-family dwellings on their own lots at a low density (no more than one dwelling unit per acre). Site-built dwellings only are permitted (no manufactured homes). Other uses that are compatible with a low-density, residential environment such as recreational, educational, and religious facilities, are permitted or conditional uses. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Dimensional requirements such as minimum building setbacks and maximum building coverage are intended to provide for spacious yards surrounding each dwelling. 
Sec. 6.3. - R-2, Residential, Detached Single Family, Moderate-Density District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description. This zoning district is intended to implement the "Single-family residential" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "suburban residential" character area established in the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Character. The designs of subdivisions in this district include cul-de-sacs and curvilinear streets. Houses are set back a significant distance from the street. Streets are built to relatively wide standard when compared with traditional neighborhoods. Access to this district is predominantly by automobile but pedestrian mobility is accommodated. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Land use in this district consists predominantly of detached, single-family dwellings on their own lots at a moderate density (no more than approximately three dwelling units per acre). Site-built dwellings only are permitted (no manufactured homes). Other uses that are compatible with a low-density, residential environment such as recreational, educational, and religious facilities, are permitted or conditional uses. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Dimensional requirements such as minimum building setbacks and maximum building coverage are intended to provide for yards surrounding each dwelling. 
Sec. 6.4. - R-3, Residential Multi-Family District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description. This zoning district is intended to implement the "Multi-family residential" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "urban density communities" character area established in the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Character. This district allows for higher density, urban living environments that provide primarily rental housing opportunities. Access to this district is primarily by automobile, but convenient pedestrian access within the district and with connections to surrounding destinations is required. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Land use in this district consists predominantly of multi-family dwellings at urban densities (from six to no more than twelve dwelling units per acre). Acceptable uses include multi-family development (apartment complexes and townhouses but not including manufactured home parks) and may also include detached, single-family and two-family dwellings on their own lots. Site-built dwellings only are permitted (no manufactured homes). Other uses that are compatible with the urban density residential environment such as recreational, educational, and religious facilities, are permitted or conditional uses. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Dimensional requirements such as minimum building separation and maximum building coverage are intended to provide for some open space or yards surrounding dwellings. 
Sec. 6.5. - MHP, Manufactured Home Park District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description. This zoning district is intended to implement the "Multi-family residential" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch as it pertains to existing manufactured home park use. It is also intended to implement the "urban density communities" character area established in the comprehensive plan, as it pertains to existing manufactured home park use. 
(b)  Character. This district allows for higher density, urban living environments that provide opportunities to rent manufactured homes. Access to this district is primarily by automobile. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Land use in this district consists predominantly of manufactured homes on spaces within a park setting. Other uses that are serve the urban density residential environment such as recreational, educational, and religious facilities, are permitted or conditional uses. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts." Dimensional requirements such as specifications for manufactured home spaces shall be as designated on an approved site plan. 
(e)  Limitations on Rezoning. There shall be no rezoning to the MHP zoning district, unless it is contiguous to an existing MHP zoning district, or unless it is designated MHP at the time of annexation into the city limits. 
_____ 
Table 6.1 
Permitted and Conditional Uses in 
Agricultural and Conventional Residential Zoning Districts 
(P = Permitted Use  C = Conditional Use  X = Prohibited) 

 
( Ord. No. 348-11, § 9, 11-18-2010 ) 
Table 6.2 
Dimensional Requirements for Agricultural and 
Conventional Residential Zoning Districts 

 
(1)  Where on on-site sewage system is used, minimum lot size requirements of the Hall County Environmental Health Department shall be required and may exceed these minimums. 
_____
ARTICLE 7. - TND, TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2018, repealed former Art. 7, §§ 7.1—7.5, and enacted a new Art. 7 as set out herein. Former Art. 7 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 348-11, § 10, 11-18-2010. 

Sec. 7.1. - Purpose and Description. 
This zoning district is intended to provide for neighborhoods that are designed according to the principles of "new urbanism" with a grid or modified-grid street network, pedestrian scale and orientation, shallow front yards, relatively narrow local streets planted with shade trees and provided with wide sidewalks, and with automobile garages located to the rear or side of residential lots. TND districts are further distinguished from conventional suburban subdivision developments in their provision of public greens or common areas, when new neighborhoods are created. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 7.2. - Character. 
Development within this district consists mostly of residential neighborhoods in a rectangular or square block, lot, and street pattern. 

Source: Kindell, Peter J., "Building Types," p. 189 in Planning and Urban Design Standards . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2006) 

Source: Hill, John, W. Design Characteristics of Maryland's Traditional Communities, Figure 4, p. 5.1-2 in Time Saver Standards for Urban Design (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003) 
Consistent: Dwelling contains front porch and is located close to street. Minimal side yard setbacks. Garage is detached and located at rear of lot. 
Consistent: TND Street View - the original settlement pattern sets the character and establishes building themes that should be continued, including location of buildings close to the street and porches on the front of dwellings. 
_____ 
Source: Nashville, Tennessee, Metro Planning Department. 31st Avenue/Long Boulevard Urban Design Overlay. Adopted 3/16/04. Attachment to Ordinance No. BL 2004-151. 
_____
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 7.3. - Permitted and Conditional Uses. 
Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 7.1, "Permitted and Special Uses in Traditional Neighborhood Development Districts." 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 7.4. - Dimensional Requirements. 
Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 7.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Traditional Neighborhood Development Districts." 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 7.5. - Additional Development Requirements. 
(a)  Maximum Block Width and Block Length. When a new subdivision is created within this district, the lots shall be designed in a grid-like pattern of blocks and interconnecting streets, where no new block created shall have a length or width exceeding 800 feet in length without an alley or intervening (mid-block) pedestrian footpaths. 

Source: Arendt, Randall. 1999. Crossroads, Hamlet, Village, Town: Design Characteristics of Traditional Neighborhoods, Old and New . PAS Report No. 487/488, Figure 90, p. 58. Chicago: American Planning Association. 
(b)  Front Porches. Any new, detached dwelling shall have a front porch no less than sixteen feet in width as measured along the street frontage and no less than six feet in depth measured from the front property line to the interior of the lot. 
(c)  On-site Parking. A two-car garage or carport located in the rear or side yard is required. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Table 7.1 
Permitted and Conditional Uses in 
Traditional Neighborhood Development Districts 
(P = Permitted Use   C = Conditional Use  X = Prohibited) 

 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Table 7.2 
Dimensional Requirements for Traditional  Neighborhood Development Districts 

 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 8. - PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 8.1. - Description and Intent. 
This zoning district is intended primarily to implement the "Single-family residential" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch, in a way that meets objectives that cannot necessarily be accomplished by conventional residential zoning districts. It is also intended to implement the "suburban residential" character area established in the comprehensive plan but may also be used to implement the "traditional neighborhood development" character area. 
Sec. 8.2. - Objectives. 
The Planned Unit Development District is intended to meet the following objectives: 
(a)  Allow and encourage more unique, flexible, creative, and imaginative arrangements and mixes of land uses in site planning and development than are permitted through conventional land use requirements. 
(b)  Encourage a broader mix of residential housing types, including detached and attached dwellings, than would normally be constructed in conventional subdivisions. 
(c)  Allow and encourage the development of tracts of land as single developments that are planned neighborhoods or communities, including civic and semi-public uses (e.g., schools, playgrounds, meeting halls, etc.) that help to make up a community. 
(d)  Preserve the natural amenities of the land through maintenance of conservation areas and open spaces within developments. 
(e)  Provide for the more efficient use of land through clustering and other flexible, innovative development arrangements that will result in smaller networks of utilities and streets and thereby lower development and housing costs. 
(f)  Provide a more desirable living environment than would be possible through the strict application of conventional residential zoning requirements. 
(g)  Establish application requirements that are more rigorous than rezoning applications and conditional use permits but no more onerous than necessary to enable thorough analyses. 
(h)  Ensure that the design of building forms is interrelated and architecturally harmonious. 
Sec. 8.3. - Character. 
Design of detached single-family neighborhoods and residential communities in the PUD district may follow principles of conventional suburban subdivision design which typically include curvilinear streets with some cul-de-sacs. However, PUD districts are intended to differ from conventional subdivisions in that they provide greater pedestrian access and interconnections between and among units of the neighborhood. In addition, neotraditional development or conservation subdivision design principles are particularly encouraged when this district is applied to urban and suburban areas, respectively. This district is primarily envisioned to apply to urban and suburban areas with sanitary sewer and public water service, though it may be used to provide for imaginative site arrangements in rural areas at exurban/rural densities. 
Sec. 8.4. - Permitted Uses. 
Permitted uses shall be proposed by an applicant for rezoning to PUD and shall be limited to those uses approved by the Governing Body; provided, however, that the following shall apply when the site proposed to be rezoned and developed is designated as residential on the adopted future land use map of the City of Flowery Branch: 
(a)  Retail, service, office, and civic and institutional residential uses shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the total site area of the district. 
(b)  Industrial uses shall not normally be considered appropriate for inclusion in planned unit developments but if proposed and approved shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total site area of the district, and such area shall be counted within the percent limit for uses specified in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  At least twenty (20) percent of the total area of the planned unit development shall be conservation, open space, and/or landscaped area. 
(d)  At least seventy (70) percent of the units proposed and approved as part of the planned community development shall be detached, single-family dwellings. 
In the case of a PUD zoning district that was already developed or partially developed on the effective date of this zoning ordinance, said development shall continue to be governed by the conditions of zoning, site or development plan approval, architectural elevations, approved mixes of uses, and any other development-specific stipulations of the original PUD approval, until or unless otherwise amended by the Governing Body, and the land use parameters described in this Section shall not apply to such prior PUD zoning district approvals by the Governing Body. 
The applicant for PUD zoning shall include in the application a list of all land uses proposed to be included in the PUD, which shall be limiting on the application if approved, unless otherwise specifically provided by the Governing Body. In addition, the application shall contain a development schedule indicating the approximate dates for beginning and completing the project, or each phase if the development is to be phased, and the extent of development and types of land uses in each phase. This information shall also specify the number of residential units by type and density, and the total square footage of buildings devoted to non-residential uses. 
Sec. 8.5. - Dimensional Requirements. 
Lot sizes, maximum densities (units per acre), setbacks and yards, building coverage, building heights, and other dimensional requirements shall be proposed by an applicant for rezoning to PUD and as may be approved by the Governing Body. The applicant for PUD zoning shall submit the dimensional requirements for, at minimum, the types of requirements for conventional residential zoning districts as specified in Table 6.2 of this zoning ordinance and compare the proposed dimensional requirements with said requirements in Table 6.2 for the R-1 and/or R-2 zoning district. Standards proposed by the developer are legally binding on the development if approved, unless otherwise specified by the Governing Body. 
In addition, other dimensional requirements of this zoning ordinance, including but not limited to Article 25 (regulations for steep slopes) where applicable, shall also be proposed by the applicant. 
Sec. 8.6. - Design Review. 
Design review and approval shall be required, except in the following instances: 
(a)  For uses that have been lawfully established on a lot of record that existed on the effective date of this zoning ordinance, no design review shall be required. 
(b)  For uses that are a part of a previously approved PUD, and which have no architectural elevations on record with the Zoning Administrator that were made a part of the development application and have been approved by the Governing Body, design review and approval shall be required. 
An applicant must apply for design review and approval at the time of rezoning to PUD. Major revisions to development plan approval shall also require design review and approval. The Zoning Administrator may authorize minor revisions to development plan approval and the erection of accessory buildings and structures via design review and approval (See Article 40 of this zoning ordinance). 
Sec. 8.7. - Design Guidelines. 
The following provisions are not requirements per se, but may be made requirements as a part of rezoning approval. Substantial deviation from, or inconsistency with, the guidelines in this Section shall be grounds for denial of a rezoning to the PUD district. 
(a)  Open spaces. Open spaces such as town greens and public squares, within developed portions of the development, should be located and designed to add to the visual amenities of the development. Greens and squares should be spatially defined and distributed throughout the development so that no lot is more than a walking distance of 1,350 feet from a green, square, park or open space. Greens and squares should not be less than 8,000 square feet in area. A mix of peripheral as well as internal green space should be provided. If two PUDs are developed next to each other, there should be contiguous open space between the two PUDs. 

Source: Arendt, Randall. 1999. Crossroads, Hamlet, Village, Town: Design Characteristics of Traditional Neighborhoods, Old and New. PAS Report No. 487/488, Figure 109, p. 67. Chicago: American Planning Association. 
(b)  Greenspace. Preserve patches of high-quality habitat, as large and circular as possible, feathered at the edges, and connected by wildlife corridors. When continuous greenspace corridors cannot be provided or must be broken up for road access or other valid reasons, patches should be retained as "stepping stones" for wildlife corridors. 

Source: Dramstad, Wenche, James Olson, and Richard Forman. 1996. Landscape Ecology Principles in Landscape Architecture and Land Use Planning. Washington, DC: Island Press. Figure M6, page 43.(top) and Figure C6, page 37 (bottom) 
(c)  Drainage. Natural on-site drainage patterns should be used where practicable. Detain runoff with open, natural drainage systems where possible. Man-made lakes and stormwater ponds should be designed for maximum habitat value. 
(d)  Site clearing and grading. Developments should be designed to fit the existing contours and landform of the site and to minimize the amount of earthwork. Excavation and earthwork should be kept to a minimum to reduce visual impacts and erosion. Existing vegetation should be retained to the maximum extent possible. Clearing of native vegetation should be limited to that required for the provision of essential purposes (i.e., access, building, septic tank drainfields, etc.). Where cut and fill is required, balancing the cut and fill is highly encouraged. Abrupt or unnatural-appearing grading is strongly discouraged. Avoid the creation of harsh, easily eroded banks and cuts. Existing native vegetation should be enhanced where necessary with plantings of the same variety. 
Sec. 8.8. - Community Benefit Statement Required. 
The applicant for PUD zoning shall at the time the rezoning application is made submit a written statement identifying the relative benefits that will accrue to the community as a result of the property being developed under PUD provisions. Specific mention should be made of mix of uses included, open spaces provided, natural features retained, and architectural designs to be provided. This statement is a developer's opportunity to define why the PUD proposal merits approval and how it will serve the community better than a conventional development. 
Sec. 8.9. - Rezoning Decision Criteria. 
In considering and acting upon applications for PUDs, the Governing Body shall consider and base its decision on the following criteria (not all inclusive), and any other factors it may consider appropriate in reaching such a decision: 
(a)  Consistency with the comprehensive plan of the city; 
(b)  Consistency with the objectives of this Article; 
(c)  The character, location, and appropriateness of the proposed mix of land uses and residential dwelling types; 
(d)  The extent to which the proposed architectural features of buildings within the planned unit development are harmonious; 
(e)  The adequacy of open spaces and play areas and recreation facilities that are provided for the needs of the development occupants; 
(f)  Consistency with any design guidelines of this Article or otherwise determined to be applicable via character area designation. 
Sec. 8.10. - Amendments. 
Amendments to approved PUDs shall be permitted but governed by the procedures and provisions for changing the official zoning map as specified in Article 34 of this zoning ordinance, and any amendments shall require type 2 design plan review and approval unless waived by the Zoning Administrator in cases where design plan approval would not be warranted given the nature of the amendment proposed. 
Sec. 8.11. - Permits and Certificates. 
No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, for any new PUD that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this Article. The Zoning Administrator shall authorize the issuance of building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved PUD if they are in conformity with the approved PUD, after improvements are installed in accordance with applicable improvement requirements, and if found to be in conformance with all other applicable regulations. The Zoning Administrator shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any completed building, structure, or use located in the area covered by the PUD if it conforms to the requirements of the approved PUD and all other applicable regulations. After completion of a PUD, the use of land and construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings, structures, or uses within the area covered by the PUD shall continue to be regulated by the approved development plan, architectural elevations, conditions of zoning approval, and any other specifications for the PUD. 
ARTICLE 9. - NONRESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2018, repealed former Art. 9, §§ 9.1—9.7, and enacted a new Art. 9 as set out herein. Former Art. 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 348-11, § 11, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 348-13, §§ 4—7, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. 514, § 2, 6-24-2015; Ord. No. 523, §§ 4—7, 7-7-2016; Ord. No. 524, § 1, 7-7-2016; Ord. No. 545, § 1, 3-15-2018. 

Sec. 9.1. - O-P, Office-Professional District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description . This zoning district is intended to implement the "Office-Professional" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "Institutional Campus" character area established in the comprehensive plan and may be appropriate within neighborhood commercial and activity center classifications shown on the character area map. The Office-Professional district is intended to encourage and provide suitable areas for professional, medical, research and scientific functions, general offices, and certain related activities. This district is intended to apply to single-function office buildings and to planned office parks and planned office complexes. In some cases, the OP district may be appropriate as a transition between a commercial zoning district and a single-family or multi-family residential zoning district. 
(b)  Character . Access to this district is predominantly by automobile but pedestrian mobility is accommodated. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses . Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 9.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 9.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 9.2. - INST, Institutional District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description . This zoning district is intended to implement the "Public Institutional" and "transportation, communications and utilities" designations of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "Institutional Campus" character area established in the comprehensive plan. The Institutional zoning district is intended to encourage and provide suitable areas for institutional campuses including the Atlanta Falcons Training Facility, Hall County public schools, and large churches. 
(b)  Character . These are mostly single-function land use districts where public access is controlled or limited. Areas are sometimes designed for trucks and individual establishments are not connected with one another. In the case of schools, pedestrian accessibility is provided, but other institutions are largely reliant on the automobile for access. Campus-style site planning and generous landscaping are required. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 9.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements . Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 9.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 9.3. - NS, Neighborhood Shopping District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description . This zoning district is intended to implement the "commercial" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "neighborhood commercial" character area established in the comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Character . Neighborhood commercial districts are intended to provide areas for limited, small-scale commercial uses of a convenience nature serving nearby residential neighborhoods as opposed to a regional market. This district provides for attractive, non-auto related neighborhood businesses and services, with distinctive architectural features and a scale compatible with pedestrians and connected to adjacent residential neighborhoods. Uses within neighborhood commercial character areas generally occur within enclosed buildings with no outside storage and limited outdoor display of goods and merchandise. Pedestrian accessibility is promoted via sidewalks connected to nearby neighborhoods but uses are mostly reliant on the automobile for access. Nonetheless, buildings and developments are scaled to be compatible with and promote pedestrian activity. Entrances, frontages, and building facades are softened with landscaping and low-lying identification signs. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 9.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." Auto-related, highway-oriented commercial uses are not permitted. With the exception of convenience stores with gasoline pumps, neighborhood commercial districts are not intended to permit or accommodate automotive uses or other types of more intensive highway business activities, or those uses that generate excessive traffic, noise, odors, pollution, safety hazards, or other adverse impacts which would detract from the desirability of adjacent properties for residential use. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 9.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." Business establishments do not exceed 2,500 square feet in any one tenant space, to keep the bulk and intensity in scale with the needs of adjacent neighborhoods. Open space is limited to suburban plazas or small open spaces. A three-story height limit is imposed. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 9.4. - HB, Highway Business District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description . This zoning district is intended to implement the "commercial" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "activity center" and "mixed use" character areas established in the comprehensive plan. Centered at the interchange of Spout Springs Road and I-985, and also extending north and south along Hog Mountain Road, this zoning district will be an accessible center of businesses, services, and complementary uses, which may include traditional neighborhood development and mixed-use developments, contributing extensively to the economic base of the city. 
(b)  Character . This district is dominated by commercial uses but also intended to accommodate mixed-use developments. A grid block pattern of streets (connected local network) is provided, along with sidewalks and street trees. Pedestrian accessibility is promoted, although most activity is via the automobile for access. Entrances, frontages, and building facades are softened with landscaping and low-lying identification signs. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses . Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 9.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." The widest possible range of uses is contemplated in this zoning district, except for industry and single-family, detached or manufactured homes. This character area is the proper place for big box retail, shopping centers, lodging and auto-related uses. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements . Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 9.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 9.5. - CBD, Central Business District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description . This zoning district is intended to implement the redevelopment element of the Flowery Branch Comprehensive Plan, as amended. This zoning district is also intended to implement the "Central Business" designation of the Future Land Use Map contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "Old Town" character area established in the comprehensive plan, as amended. All construction projects require approval by the City Council of Flowery Branch. For lots zoned CBD which are within the city's local historic district, compliance with the city's historic preservation ordinance is also required. 
(b)  Character . This district is a compact area corresponding with the city's downtown core. It is characterized by a grid block pattern with skinny streets, sidewalks composed of distinctive materials (e.g., stamped concrete) and lined with street trees. Developments are built to a pedestrian-friendly scale (i.e., "Main Street Commercial") and include plazas and small urban pocket parks. Buildings and structures which are considered "historic" are retained to maintain the overall historic character of the area. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses . Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 9.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements . Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 9.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
(e)  Construction Approval . Any proposed construction project must be approved by the City Council prior to issuance of any permit. 
(f)  Construction Approval Requirements . All construction proposals shall submit at a minimum the following: 
1.  Legal description of the property; 
2.  Survey of the property; 
3.  Existing conditions analysis of the site to be redeveloped, including any existing buildings, structures, and/or uses on the subject site, and the existing land uses and description of buildings, structures, and uses on all adjacent lots; 
4.  Letter of intent describing the proposed use(s) of the property or other action requested (redevelopment project approval). The applicant must be comprehensive in terms of describing all principal uses that will be included - these will become limiting and binding on the developer - refer to the permitted uses listing in Table 9.1 of Article 9 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. For complex projects, the applicant should describe the intended phasing of the project, if applicable. The letter of intent shall address the following: 
a.  How the proposed action compares (and is consistent with) the goals, policies, and development requirements of the Old Town Redevelopment Plan; 
b.  How the project will be consistent with any adopted design guidelines for the type of development and/or the proposed use; and 
c.  How the general design, the character and appropriateness of design, scale of buildings, arrangement, texture, materials, and colors of buildings in the proposed redevelopment project will be appropriate in its surroundings; 
5.  Two copies and one electronic copy of a site plan of the property, at an appropriate engineering scale, showing the proposed use and relevant information (buildings, parking, open spaces, etc.) regarding proposed improvements; 
6.  Statistics regarding the proposed development (this may be incorporated into the letter of intent, or shown on the site plan, or both). At minimum, such statistics shall include the total square footage of the redevelopment project, including any existing buildings to be retained, the total gross square footages of building(s) devoted to each use, and proposed building heights for all buildings and structures proposed in the redevelopment project; 
7.  Two copies and one electronic copy of all exterior elevation drawings of all building faces that will front on a public or private street, and rear and side elevations of same if requested by Zoning Administrator, drawn to an architectural scale and signed by an architect. If structured parking is proposed, elevations of the parking structure must also be submitted. Said exterior elevation drawings shall clearly show in sufficient detail the exterior appearance and architectural design of proposed principal buildings. Each application shall also indicate proposed materials, textures and colors and provide samples of materials and colors. In cases where an applicant has already made application for approval of a certificate of appropriateness (COA), the applicant can submit the complete application for certificate of appropriateness as submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission. Where an applicant has already received a certificate of appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission, resubmission of the approved application for certificate of appropriateness shall constitute compliance with this application requirement unless the Zoning Administrator notifies the applicant that additional information is needed for aspects not covered in the approved COA application; 
8.  Facility impact analyses, including the following: 
a.  Proof of water and sewer availability from the Public Works Director and Wastewater Treatment Plant Superintendent. 
b.  Analysis of the adequacy of drainage for the site (description and assessment of adequacy of stormwater facilities on-site and off-site). 
9.  A written development agreement, if the developer requests city participation in the provision of on-site or off-site facilities, such as the sharing of costs for facilities, shared parking, etc. which may or may not be available from the city. If accepted by the city, the development agreement may become a condition of project approval or it may be considered and approved separately from redevelopment project approval; 
10.  If any variances or administrative variances are required, the applicant will file a separate application following submission requirements and processes for the type of variance sought. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 9.6. - M-1, Light Manufacturing and Industrial District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description . This zoning district is intended to implement the "light industrial" and "transportation, communication and utilities" designations of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "industrial/employment" character area established in the comprehensive plan. It provides a concentration of employment and job activity, contributing substantially to the economic base of the city. 
(b)  Character . Truck traffic is frequent, and individual manufacturing establishments are not necessarily connected with one another. Driveways and curb radii are designed to accommodate large trucks. Pedestrian accessibility is generally not anticipated, though pedestrian access is required along road frontages. Entrances, frontages, and building facades are softened with landscaping and low-lying identification signs. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 9.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." Light industries are the primary permitted uses. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements . Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 9.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
(e)  Design Requirements . Please see Article 14 sec. 14.13 of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 9.7. - M-2, Heavy Manufacturing and Industrial District. 
(a)  Purpose and Description . This zoning district is intended to implement the "heavy industrial" designation of the future land use plan contained within the comprehensive plan of the City of Flowery Branch. It is also intended to implement the "industrial/employment" character area established in the comprehensive plan. It provides a concentration of employment and job activity, contributing substantially to the economic base of the city. 
(b)  Character . Truck traffic is frequent, and individual manufacturing establishments are not necessarily connected with one another. Driveways and curb radii are designed to accommodate large trucks. Pedestrian accessibility is generally not anticipated, though pedestrian access is required along road frontages. Entrances, frontages, and building facades are softened with landscaping and low-lying identification signs. 
(c)  Permitted and Conditional Uses . Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 9.1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." Light and heavy industries are the primary permitted uses. 
(d)  Dimensional Requirements . Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 9.2, "Dimensional Requirements in Nonresidential Zoning Districts." 
(e)  Design Requirements . Please see Article 14 sec. 14.13 of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
_____
Table 9.1 
Permitted and Conditional Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts 
(P = Permitted Use   C = Conditional Use   X = Prohibited) 

 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Table 9.2 
Dimensional Requirements for Nonresidential Zoning Districts 

 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Note 1. Building Height and Number of Stories. The maximum height of any building, including those on lots subsequently zoned CBD after the effective date of this zoning ordinance amendment, shall be three stories and 45 feet, except as follows: 
The maximum building height shall be four stories and 60 feet for the following city blocks: The city block bounded by Railroad Avenue, Pine Street Extension, Church Street, and Chestnut Street; the city block bounded by Railroad Avenue, Main Street, Church Street, and Pine Street Extension; and the city block bounded by Railroad Avenue, Bailey Drive, Church Street, and Main Street. The building height may project 6 feet above the maximum for purposes of screening roof mounted equipment, safety railings and/or other service equipment. 

ARTICLE 10. - DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES 

Sec. 10.1. - Applicability. 
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise as specifically provided in this Article, the development requirements and guidelines are intended to apply to all land uses except for detached, single-family dwellings. 
Sec. 10.2. - Interpretation. 
When the terms "shall", "should and "are encouraged" are used, those provisions are a regulation and must be followed. However, flexibility toward compliance with these regulations may be given if it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that the spirit and intent of the regulation is being followed. 
( Ord. No. 348-11, § 12, 11-18-2010 ) 
Sec. 10.3. - General Compatibility. 
(a)  The site plan, building design, and landscaping of new development should achieve high quality and appearance which will enhance and be compatible with the character of the surrounding area. 
(b)  Site planning and design of projects proposed adjacent to dissimilar land uses should carefully address the potential undesirable impacts on existing uses. These impacts may include traffic, parking, circulation and safety issues, light and glare, noise, odors, dust control and security concerns. 
_____ 
_____
Sec. 10.4. - Environmental Compatibility. 
(a)  Evaluate the proposed development's compatibility with the existing environment to determine the limitations and capabilities of the site for development. Conserve and protect natural resources, including air quality, trees, natural vegetation, existing topography, streams, creeks, wetlands, watersheds, water quality, and wildlife habitat. Development should be limited to a level that does not exceed the capabilities and requirements of a healthy environment. 
(b)  Significant site features such as habitats, natural ground forms, existing site vegetation, large rock outcroppings, water, and significant view corridors should be identified and incorporated into development plans. Where possible, a diversity of habitats is preferred. 
(c)  Riparian zones, stream corridors, and wetlands should be protected for their wildlife habitat and other values. Development plans for these areas should treat these components as assets. A continuous, connected, natural vegetative corridor should be preserved along all creek and stream corridors to provide stream quality protection and for the efficient movement of wildlife throughout the area. No fill, removal, or modification of a riparian area should take place, unless there is no reasonable and feasible alternative. The alteration or improvement of significant natural resource areas where permitted, should ensure that potential losses are mitigated and best management practices are employed to minimize permanent damage. 
(d)  Existing vegetation should be retained to the maximum extent possible. Clearing of native vegetation should be limited to that required for the provision of essential purposes (i.e., access, building, sewage disposal, etc.). Where appropriate, existing native vegetation should be enhanced with plantings of the same variety. 
(e)  Preserve patches of high-quality habitat, as large and circular as possible, feathered at the edges, and connected by wildlife corridors. 
Sec. 10.5. - Grading. 
(a)  Developments should be designed to fit the existing contours and landform of the site and to minimize the amount of earthwork. Excavation and earthworks should be kept to a minimum to reduce visual impacts and erosion. Where cut and fill is required, balancing the cut and fill is highly encouraged. 
(b)  Abrupt or unnatural-appearing grading is strongly discouraged. Avoid the creation of harsh, easily eroded banks and cuts. 
(c)  The height and length of retaining walls should be minimized and screened with appropriate landscaping. Tall, smooth-faced concrete retaining walls should be avoided in highly visible areas. Terracing should be considered as an alternative to the use of tall or prominent retaining walls, particularly in highly visible areas on hillsides. 
(d)  Disturbed areas which are not used for roads, buildings, or other auxiliary uses should be replanted. 
Sec. 10.6. - Drainage. 
(a)  Natural on-site drainage patterns should be used where practicable. Detain runoff with open, natural drainage systems where possible. 
(b)  Design man-made lakes and stormwater ponds for maximum habitat value and/or to serve as amenity features. Stormwater ponds and facilities that are visible from the public right-of-way shall be landscaped with a combination of densely planted shrubs and ground cover. Any fencing surrounding a stormwater pond that is visible from the public right-of-way shall be decorative in nature. 

( Ord. No. 348-11, § 13, 11-18-2010 ) 
Sec. 10.7. - Architectural Design. 
(a)  Architectural design should be compatible with the developing character of the neighboring area. Design compatibility includes complementary building style, form, size, color, materials, and detailing. The designer should consider each of the following contexts as part of the design process: 
1.  Size (the relationship of the project to its site). 
2.  Scale (the relationship of the building to those around it). 
3.  Massing (the relationship of the building's various parts to each other). 
4.  Fenestration (the placement of windows and doors). 
5.  Rhythm (the relationship of fenestration, recesses and projections). 
6.  Setback (in relation to setback of immediate surroundings). 
7.  Materials (their compatibility with the historic district). 
8.  Context (the overall relationship of the project to its surroundings). 
(b)  Efforts to coordinate the height of buildings and adjacent structures are encouraged. This is especially applicable where buildings are located very close to each other. It is often possible to adjust the height of a wall, cornice or parapet line to match that of an adjacent building. Similar design linkages such as window lines should be placed in a pattern that reflects the same elements on neighboring buildings. 
(c)  Diversity of architectural design should be encouraged. "Theme" or stylized architecture which is characteristic of a particular historic period or trend is not encouraged, unless the existing building or site is historically important to the district or necessary for architectural harmony. 
(d)  Multiple buildings on the same site should be designed to create a cohesive visual relationship between the buildings. 
(e)  Long or continuous wall planes shall be avoided, particularly in pedestrian activity areas, where buildings should exhibit more detail and elements appropriate for close range pedestrian view. Recesses and projections should be used along the front facade to break up long expanses of wall planes. 
(f)  The walls of buildings for office, institutional, commercial, and industrial use shall not extend more than 200 linear feet parallel to a street unless the front facade of the building is designed in a way that breaks up the building face into discrete architectural elements, which can be accomplished through the following: 
Facade modulation: stepping back or extending forward a portion of the facade; and/or 

Providing bay windows or repeating window patterns at regular intervals; and/or 
Providing a porch, patio, deck, covered entry to portions of the facade at the ground level, or in the case of buildings containing two or more story, balconies; and/or 
Changing the roofline by alternating dormers, or using stepped roofs, gables, or other roof elements; and/or 
Changing materials with the change in building plane; 
Consistent: Roof planes should be varied to increase visual interest, and awnings above windows and entrances also help to provide visual interest; 

Inconsistent: Flat roofs and lengthy, non-articulated walls; 

Consistent: A line of mature trees that almost entirely screens what would otherwise be a large, imposing side wall of a big box; 

Inconsistent: The rear side of this shopping center consists of a finished but monotonous wall. Trash receptacles are not enclosed. 

(g)  Outside of pedestrian retail districts, building surfaces over two stories high or fifty feet in length should be relieved with changes of wall plane (i.e., recesses and projections) that provide strong shadow or visual interest. 
(h)  All sides of a building may impact on its surroundings and should be considered for treatment with an architectural finish of primary materials (i.e., brick and stone), unless other materials demonstrating equal or greater quality are used. As a general rule, front facades should be at least fifty percent brick and stone. Side facades should be at least fifty percent brick and stone. Rear facades do not have a minimum suggested standard for primary materials unless they are visible from a public right-of-way. Requirements for brick or stone may be modified to accommodate creatively designed structures as determined by the city planner. 
(i)  Exterior building materials on the primary structure should not include smooth-faced concrete block, tilt-up concrete panels, or prefabricated steel panels. Exterior building elevations within employment/industrial character areas may be split face (integrated block), tilt-up concrete panels accented with steel panels. However, elevations visible from the public right-of-way must be permanent, non-metal construction. 
(j)  The following types of building materials should not be used: highly reflective, shiny, or mirror-like materials; mill-finish (non-colored) aluminum metal windows or door frames; exposed, unfinished foundation walls; exposed plywood or particle board; and unplastered, exposed concrete masonry blocks. 
(k)  Material or color changes generally should occur at a change of plane. Piecemeal embellishment and frequent changes in material should be avoided. A horizontal accent stripe (e.g., a foot wide stripe of different color) should be used to help reduce the monotonous color and break up the appearance of large building walls. 
(l)  Facade colors should be low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. High-intensity colors, metallic colors, black, or fluorescent colors should not be used. Building trim and accent areas may feature brighter colors, including primary colors, provided that the width of the trim shall not exceed four (4) feet. 
(m)  Building colors should be carefully chosen so that each building complements that of its neighbors. Colors can be classified as the "base" color (used on the majority of the building surface), "trim" color (used on the window trim, fascia, balustrades, and posts), and "accent" color (used on signs, awnings, and doors). The base color should consist of more subdued earth tones or brick shades. Trim colors should have contrasting lighter or darker shade than the base color. If natural brick is used, it should not be painted. 
(n)  The use of awnings on buildings are recommended so as to provide much needed protection from sun, wind, and rain, and to improve aesthetics of the building exterior. 
(o)  Awnings are recommended to be constructed with a durable frame covered by a canvas material. Awnings that are backlit through translucent materials may be acceptable but are not particularly encouraged. Aluminum and other metal canopies are acceptable in most instances, particularly when integrated into shopping center designs. Flameproof vinyl, canvas or metal awnings and canopies may be used. 
(p)  Solid colors are preferred over striped awnings, but striping is permitted if colors compliment the character of the structure or group of buildings. 
(q)  Awnings are encouraged for first floor retail uses to provide architectural interest and to encourage pedestrian activity. Where awnings are used, they should be designed to coordinate with the design of the building and any other awnings along the same block face. 

(r)  The design of fences and walls shall be compatible with the architecture of the main building(s) and should use similar materials. All walls or fences fifty feet in length or longer, and four feet in height or taller, should be designed to minimize visual monotony though changes in plane, height, material or material texture or significant landscape massing. Chain link fencing is discouraged. Use of special fencing design or materials should be discussed in cases where site security is paramount. If used, chain link fences should be vinyl coated (black or green colored vinyl encouraged). 
(s)  All commercial, industrial, large multifamily residential and institutional sites must provide appropriate refuse dumpsters and other similar areas devoted to the storage of waste materials and grease or oil containers. The minimum area for said requirement shall be 36 square feet. All garbage dumpsters and other similar areas devoted to the storage of waste materials and grease or oil containers should be screened on three (3) sides of said dumpster or area with a minimum six (6) foot high solid wooden fence, or a wall constructed of materials substantially similar in appearance to the building on site. In addition, said dumpster areas should be gated on the fourth side with a material that provides opaque screening, should be screened on three (3) sides of said dumpster or area with a minimum six (6) foot high solid wooden fence, or a wall constructed of materials substantially similar in appearance to the building on site. In addition, said dumpster areas should be gated on the fourth side with a material that provides opaque screening. 

(t)  Rooftop mechanical and electrical equipment shall be screened from public view by building elements that are designed as an integral part of the building architecture, or by a parapet wall. 

( Ord. No. 348-11, § 14, 11-18-2010 ) 
_____
Sec. 10.8. - Pedestrian Retail. 
(a)  These areas of commerce are designed first and foremost with attention to the pedestrian rather than the automobile. Sidewalks are wide enough for significant pedestrian activity and auto and truck access is limited in areas of pedestrian activity. Buildings frame the street by being located close to the street and with a height of at least 1.5 stories. The buildings, many of which are retail shops, have awnings and storefront windows, that add interest to pedestrians. Signs are smaller and closer to the ground, rather than being sized and located to attract motorists. 
Consistent: 1.5-story or taller building heights, canopies and awnings, wide sidewalks with street trees, on-street parking. 

Source: Arendt, Randall, et al. Rural By Design: Maintaining Small Town Character , Figure 9-11, p. 126. (Chicago: Planners Press, 1994). 
Consistent: Building frames the street. Sidewalk provided. Street tree planting strip in between on-street parking and the sidewalk. 

Consistent: Store-front retail spaces have awnings and are located abutting a wide sidewalk. On-street parking and street trees. 


Source: Aaron Fortner, Market + Main, and Richard Dagenhart. Commercial Corridors, p. 418 in Planning and Urban Design Standards (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2006). 
_____
(b)  Building Placement. Buildings should be placed close to (with little if any setback from) streets internal to the development, or along public streets abutting the development area, as determined in the development review and approval process. The buildings should be generally placed so that the main entrance is oriented to the street sidewalk. 

Source: Morris, Marya, ed. 1996. Creating Transit-Supportive Land Use Regulations. PAS Report No. 468. Figure 1-9, p. 10. Chicago: American Planning Association. 
(c)  Building Lines. Buildings should observe the setbacks or "build-to" lines requirements established by buildings on either side of the proposed building. 

(d)  Ground Floors. The ground level of multi-story buildings should contain retail or entertainment uses with direct entry from the street to provide pedestrian interest along sidewalks. Pedestrian interest can be enhanced with use of windows, entrances, and architectural details. Pedestrian signage, awnings, and ornamentation are encouraged. 
(e)  Uses on Shopfront Streets. Within buildings fronting storefront streets in Traditional Neighborhood Development, Old Town, or mixed use areas only commercial, office, civic, or institutional uses shall occupy the ground-level floor. Floors above the ground level may be occupied by office or residential uses. 

Consistent: Storefront windows should be transparent. Mirrored glass, faux windows or display casements are strongly discouraged. 

(f)  Storefront Windows. In designated shopfront areas, at least 75 percent of the building's front facade should consist of clear glass window and/or door. Windows should be at least ten feet (10') in height and no more than three feet (3') above the sidewalk. 

(g)  Minimum Building Frontage. The percentage of the lot's street frontage that is occupied by one or more principal buildings should be compatible and consistent with buildings on either side of the proposed building 

Consistent: Grid block pattern. Buildings are not set back much if any from streets and they frame the street frontage and street corners. Two-story height for buildings desirable. Parking is mostly behind buildings (some on-street parking is permitted). 
Inconsistent: Mostly single-story development with parking in the front of buildings. Strip shopping center has little if any articulation (projections and recesses). Individual development sites are not coordinated with one another. 


Source: Arendt, Randall, et al. Rural By Design: Maintaining Small Town Character , Figure 9-2, p. 118. (Chicago: Planners Press, 1994). 
(h)  On-street Parking. On-street parking shall be permitted on all streets within Urban and Traditional Neighborhood character areas, except within twenty-five feet of the right-of-way of an intersecting street. On-street parking is required in all Urban and Traditional Neighborhood character areas designated as storefont streets. 


 
_____
(i)  Signs. Within pedestrian retail districts, projecting signs are permitted and encouraged. 

(j)  Sidewalk Clear Zone and Street Furniture Zone. In pedestrian retail areas, the street sidewalk should consist of a minimum five foot wide (5') clear zone. Between the clear zone and street curb, there should be a five-foot wide street furniture zone for the placement of light poles, benches, bicycle parking, trash receptacles, tree planting, and planter boxes. 
(k)  Pedestrian Crossings of Driveways and Intersections. The color and composition of sidewalk shall be continued as it crosses vehicular driveways and street intersections. Where the sidewalk color and composition of the sidewalk is not otherwise distinguishable from the driveway or roadway composition and color, the sidewalk shall be composed of material with color and texture that demarcates the pedestrian crossing. This provision is required to promote safety of pedestrians, as different textures or colors of pedestrian crossings alert or remind the motorist pedestrians are present. 
_____ 
_____
Sec. 10.9. - Activity Centers Including Automobile-Related Establishments. 
(a)  Within an activity center, a logical hierarchy of building forms should be created. Building heights and masses should be greatest in the focus area and inner portion of the support area (the part closest to the focus area), and should transition to lower heights and less mass outward from the focus area to the outer edge of the support area. Building massing should be varied to create a logical hierarchy of building forms, to break up long expanses of facade, and to create shade and shadow. Buildings at the outer edge of an activity center's support area should be comparable in height and mass with the surrounding neighborhood beyond the support area. 

(b)  Building location, setbacks, and orientation should be carefully considered so as to increase pedestrian comfort. 
(c)  As far as practicable, buildings in activity centers should not be separated from fronting streets by large parking lots. At a minimum, placement of outparcel buildings between a large parking lot and the street should be used to help define the streetscape, and lessen the visual impact of the parking lot from the street. 
(d)  Provide a grid pattern of local streets. There should be at least one public or private through-street for every 600 feet of property frontage along a local road (not a state route), connecting to the local road. Smaller block widths (one per 400-500 feet) are preferred in activity center character areas. Blocks with a perimeter of 2,000 feet or less are encouraged. 
(e)  Auto service facilities should not have their service bays facing the street, and parking for all uses should be located to the side or rear of the building rather than in the front yard. Regardless, service areas and/or service bays shall be screened or sited so they are not visible from the street. 
(f)  Convenience stores should locate gas pumps behind the principal structure in order to effectively screen the pumps from view of the street. However, if fuel pumps are not located in the rear of the building, then additional landscaping should be required. Vent pipes for fuel pumps should be screened or located inside the canopy. 

(g)  Vehicles under repair shall be kept either inside a structure or in an area which is screened from views from the street. 
(h)  Service areas shall provide adequate queuing space that does not impede vehicle circulation through the site or result in vehicles stacking into the street. 
(i)  Perimeter and security fencing, when needed, should be constructed of attractive materials which are compatible with the design and materials used throughout the project. Razor wire or electric fencing shall not be used, and chain link fencing is discouraged but if used shall be black, vinyl coated. 
(j)  Separate structures (canopy, car wash, cashier's booth, etc.) on the site should have consistent architectural detail and design elements to provide a cohesive project site. If a car wash is incorporated into the project, it should be well integrated into the design. The car wash opening should be sited so that it is not directly visible as the primary view from the street into the project site. 
(k)  All areas devoted to the outside storage of vehicles, merchandise, and/or equipment not intended for display for public rent, lease, or sale, shall be screened from view from the right-of-way of the highway or public road along the entire property frontage, except in areas where access crossings have been approved. Screening may be accomplished by a natural vegetative buffer, by a building, by an earthen berm, by a 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or wall, or combination of these screening methods. The use of low-lying landscaping that does not screen the display areas from view from the public right-of-way shall not be deemed to comply with this policy. 
Inconsistent: Buildings are long and not articulated. Parking provided entirely in front of the shopping center is discouraged. 

Source: Arendt, Randall, et al. Rural By Design: Maintaining Small Town Character , Figure 3-1, p. 28. (Chicago: Planners Press, 1994). 
Consistent: Shopping center is buffered from major highway, and access is from a collector street instead of directly onto the highway or frontage road. Parking lot is broken up by outparcel. 

Source: Arendt, Randall, et al. Rural By Design: Maintaining Small Town Character , Figure 3-1, p. 28. (Chicago: Planners Press, 1994). 
Consistent: Shopping center has highly articulated architecture, with pitched roofs and other special architectural features including stacked stone. Sign is externally rather than internally illuminated. Cut-off fixtures are used for exterior lighting of the parking lot. 

Inconsistent: No landscaping in the parking lot. 
(l)  Live/Work Units. Activity centers and mixed use developments may include live/work units. 
_____ 

Source: Nashville, Tennessee, Metro Planning Department. 31 st Avenue/Long Boulevard Urban Design Overlay. Adopted 3/16 /04. Attachment to Ordinance No. BL 2004-151. 
(m)  Land Use Mix. The following guideline is provided for mixing land uses within an activity center (based on land area within the development). 

 
Sec. 10.10. - Office, Institutional, Business, and Industrial Parks and Campuses. 
(a)  Buildings for institutions should be dispersed throughout the site in a campus arrangement. Substantial wooded buffer should remains along the perimeter streets, and riparian areas should remain undeveloped. Parking should be distributed throughout the site. Greens should be provided within the campus in areas likely to be used by patrons and visitors. 

Source: Arendt, Randall, et al. Rural By Design: Maintaining Small Town Character , Figure 22-10a, p. 392. (Chicago: Planners Press, 1994). 
_____
(b)  A monument-style sign should be used to mark the entrance to the campus or park. Entrances shall be attractively landscaped, including street trees and flowers planted at the base of monument signs. 

Sec. 10.11. - Signage. 
(a)  In pedestrian retail districts (Old Town and Mixed Use Character Areas), where possible, directory signs should be integrated onto buildings rather than free-standing. 

(b)  Signs within locally established historic districts require review and approval by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
(c)  Monument signs, i.e., those with a brick or stone base, are preferred and may be required in certain character areas. 

(d)  "The height of signs should be kept as low as possible while still maintaining visibility by motorists. 

( Ord. No. 348-11, § 15, 11-18-2010 ) 
_____
Sec. 10.12. - Exterior Lighting. 
(a)  Exterior lighting should be architecturally compatible with the building style, material and colors. Galleria style and shoe box styles (cutoff fixtures) are preferred over cobra type light fixtures and directional flood lights. Fixture mounting height should be appropriate for the project and the setting. The mounting height of fixtures in smaller parking lots or service areas should not exceed twenty feet, with lower mounting heights encouraged, particularly where adjacent to residential areas or other sensitive land uses. Use of low, bollard-type fixtures, 3-4 feet in height, are encouraged as pedestrian area lighting. 

(b)  Exterior lighting of the building and site should be designed so that light is not directed off the site and the light source is shielded from direct offsite viewing. All outdoor light fixtures should be fully shielded or be designed or provided with light angle cut-offs, so as to eliminate uplighting, spill light, and glare. 

_____
Sec. 10.13. - Parking Lot Landscaping. 
(a)  Parking lots that face a street should be partially screened from the street by a low fence, wall, hedge, berm, or vegetated buffer. If a parking lot fronts an arterial or major collector street, and is of such a size that it dominates views from the fronting arterial/collector street and detracts from the overall streetscape and community appearance, then the parking lot should be screened or buffered with vegetation in its entirety from view along the fronting roadway(s) within the required right-of-way frontage planting strip. 
(b)  Tree wells of sufficient size to contain one canopy tree should be provided within parking areas with ten (10) or more spaces and located in such a manner so as to divide and break up the expanse of parking areas. Tree wells should be located at the end of each row of parking spaces in the interior of the parking lot. In addition, one tree well should also be provided for every 150 linear feet of parking spaces, whether at the periphery or in the interior of the parking lot. 

(c)  Parking Lot Landscaped End Islands. Landscaping at end islands of parking aisles shall not inhibit sight distance as required for motorist safety. Parking aisle end islands shall be curbed. Painted end islands are ineffective and are not permitted. 

(d)  In large parking lots, landscape dividers are encouraged to be installed every fourth row of parking spaces so as to divide the expanse of the parking lot and avoid improper and dangerous circulation habits, or other acceptable means such as the staggered provision of planting islands. Where appropriate sidewalks may be installed within wide landscape dividers. 
_____ 
_____
Sec. 10.14. - Parking Lot Paving and Design for Pedestrians. 
Utilizing porous pavements and grass pavers also reduces or eliminates land dedicated to surface storm water management facilities. Porous pavement designs and grass pavers are appropriate in some instances. Other types of stormwater management facilities are also more environmentally compatible, such as vegetative swales and bioretention. 
Pedestrian circulation should take precedence over vehicular circulation. Where pedestrian circulation crosses vehicular routes, a change in grade, materials, textures or colors should be provided to emphasize the conflict point and improve its visibility and safety. Accent strips of brick or textured paving may also be appropriate for defining pedestrian walkways. 

Consistent: Pedestrian crossing a high traffic area is marked with change in paving materials. The central aisle provides a direct connection for pedestrians. 
Sec. 10.15. - Noise. 
(a)  Flowery Branch is bisected by Interstate 985. The potential impacts of noise on adjacent and nearby land uses is a concern, particularly for residential properties. Residential developments, if located near the interstate corridor, will need to carefully consider the potential impacts of noise on residential living conditions. 

(b)  Noise analysis is performed by determining existing and future traffic noise levels for a site and surrounding areas. Noise impacts can be very subjective, since the data is dependent on the relative distance of the observer or receptor from the source of noise. 
(c)  Maximum acceptable noise levels as shown in the Table below shall not to be exceeded. When the development is located near the I-985 highway corridor or otherwise involves machinery, equipment or other significant sources of noise, the Zoning Administrator may require an acoustical analysis and mitigation measures prior to development plan approval. 
Sound Acceptability Thresholds 

 
Sec. 10.16. - Access Management. 
(a)  Access management specifications need to be applied when existing development is modified or new buildings are added. It is desirable to limit access onto arterial roads to mostly from existing access points. For those parcels that do not currently have direct access to abutting arterials, it is desirable to provide connections to access roads as opposed to new curb cuts or access points directly onto the arterial. The necessary spacing of driveways (and roads) depends on speed limits and must account for driver perception and reaction time. On state highways, driveways are subject to Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control, dated March 2, 2004, updated 12/01/04, or any official revisions thereto, and other adopted local or state regulations. By providing for the connections among parcels via frontage roads and inter-parcel access easements, the number of additional access points onto arterial roads can be minimized. 
(b)  Aligning access points on opposite sides of a road or highway is important in terms of vehicular safety and the economy of road construction. Aligning access points (curb cuts) on opposite sides of the roads is considered essential when the road is divided by a median and a median break occurs. The entire parcel, rather than simply a particular project, needs to be considered in formulating and approving access plans. 
(c)  In the event that a subdivision or land development required to file development plans with the City has access to a city street which is an unimproved or substandard road, improvements need to be considered through a development agreement. 
Sec. 10.17. - Interparcel Access. 
(a)  Consideration needs to be given to how each land development will connect with compatible land use developments that it abuts. In order to do so, each land development has to be planned with driveway connections across property lines, when the abutting land uses are compatible. When cut or fill is involved in the grading of an individual building pad or development site, the finished grade of the parking lot or driveway needs to be terminated far enough inside the property to allow for the slope to return to that of the natural ground at the property line. 
(b)  In cases where a parcel has access to a state highway or arterial street, shared driveways between two parcels, including common access easement at the property line, may be needed. In such cases, each property owner provides for and grants a common access easement to facilitate the movement of motor vehicles across the site. 

Inconsistent: Single-function, separated land uses. Conventional development patterns shown here provide no connections among different land uses. In this illustration, the residential subdivisions could be, but are not, connected with a pedestrian access-way to the school site and beyond. 

Source: Calthorpe, Peter. "The Regional City." Figure 4, p. 1.5-4. In Time-Saver Standards for Urban Design , edited by Donald Watson, Alan Plattus, and Robert Shibley. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2003. 
(c)  The finished grade of any parking lot or driveway should be no more than fifteen (15) percent higher or lower than the natural ground elevation of the property at each abutting property line with frontage on the highway, to allow for driveway connections at acceptable grades. In addition to transportation benefits, proper grading at property lines also provides for a blending of the finished site elevations in a manner so that stark contrasts in the landscape will not occur and so that grading practices will be more in keeping with the natural topography. 
Consistent: Inter-parcel access provided. Storm drainage located to the rear of lots. Parking is provided to the side and rear of the lot. 
_____ 
Source: Peirce County, Washington. Title 18J - Development Regulations - Design Standards and Guidelines. 
_____
Sec. 10.18. - On-site Circulation Standards for Land Development. 
(a)  Service functions (e.g., deliveries, maintenance activities) need to be integrated into the circulation pattern in a manner which minimizes conflicts with vehicles and pedestrians. Access for service vehicles, trash collection and storage areas need to be located on alleys where alleys exist. When no alley exists, access needs to be provided to the rear or sides of buildings being served. Larger commercial developments need to have service and loading areas separate from main circulation and parking areas. 
(b)  Developers should strive to provide a100 foot deep clear zone between the pavement of an arterial road and the first turning movement from an internal driveway. On any other road (city street) the clear zone or throat length should be at least 50 feet before a turning movement occurs (including parking), to provide sufficient queuing room for cars and/or delivery vehicles exiting the street. This provision may be modified by the Zoning Administrator after review by a Traffic Engineer or City Engineer. 

Source: Stover, Vergil G., and Frank J. Koepke. 2002. Transportation and Land Development (2 nd Ed.). Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers. Figure 7-22, p. 7-31. 
(c)  Except for detached, single-family dwellings, pedestrian access needs to be provided to individual developments and each establishment within the development. Pedestrian ways need to be well defined, take as direct a path as possible, and they separated where practical from automobile access ways. Parking aisle dividers are appropriate locations for pedestrian access facilities. 

Source: Stover, Vergil G., and Frank J. Koepke. 2002. Transportation and Land Development (2 nd Ed.). Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers. Figure 8-28, p. 8-35. 
Sec. 10.19. - Extension of Downtown Street Grid. 
To ensure compatibility with the unique street grid pattern in Flowery Branch's downtown, development in and near the downtown core should be served with adequate road capacity, pedestrian-friendly design features, good connectivity, and improved streetscapes. From a town planning standpoint, the small block pattern found in the center of downtown should be extended as more dense, urban development proceeds outward. 
Sec. 10.20. - Traffic Impact Studies. 
A traffic impact study for developments generating 100 or trips in a peak hour or 1,000 vehicle trips per day shall be required to determine the most appropriate road improvements, including driveway locations, and as a basis for determining improvements required to the road system. Prior to development approval, additional road right-of-way for a local road or frontage road may be needed at intersections or at other locations fronting the property where turning lanes, storage lanes, medians, or realignments are required for traffic safety, and where the existing right-of-way would be inadequate to accommodate the road, drainage, and utility, and other improvements necessitated by the development. 
ARTICLE 11. - BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, AND USES ACCESSORY TO SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS 

Sec. 11.1. - Accessory Use or Structure. 
(a)  Location. Buildings accessory to detached, single-family residential uses except for well houses in residential zoning districts shall be located in a rear yard or side yard. 
(b)  Relationship to Principal Use. No accessory building, structure, or use shall be erected on a lot until construction of the principal building or establishment of principal use has commenced. Accessory buildings and structures must be constructed in conjunction with, or after, the principal building is lawfully approved and use is established. 
(c)  Interpretation. When an accessory building is attached to a principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar means, the accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building and shall comply with the yard requirements for a principal building. 
Sec. 11.2. - Customary Residential Accessory Uses and Structures. 
Customary residential accessory buildings are permitted in residential zoning districts, subject to permitted use provisions for the zoning district in which the property is located and the requirements of this Article, where applicable. Each of the following uses, as may be more specifically regulated in this or other Articles of this zoning ordinance, is considered to be a customary accessory use to a dwelling and shall be situated on the same lot with the principal use (dwelling) to which it serves as an accessory. This list is not necessarily exhaustive of possible permitted accessory uses and structures on the same lot as a dwelling. 
(a)  Garage or carport for storing vehicles. 
(b)  Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. 
(c)  Children's playhouse and play equipment. 
(d)  Quarters for the keeping of pets owned by occupants for non-commercial purposes provided that such use does not generate a nuisance to adjoining properties. 
(e)  Private recreational facility, such as a swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana, or tennis court, subject to applicable requirements of this Article. 
(f)  Deck or patio, whether on water or over land. 
(g)  Fences and walls, subject to subject to applicable requirements of this Article. 
(h)  Guest houses, subject to applicable requirements of this Article. 
(i)  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of man-made or natural catastrophes. 
(j)  Vehicle parking, subject to the requirements of this Article and Article 21. 
Sec. 11.3. - Buildings Accessory to a Dwelling. 
Customary residential accessory buildings shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Height. Accessory buildings shall not exceed two stories; provided, however, that agricultural-related accessory buildings (e.g., barns or livestock quarters) where permitted) may be constructed to the maximum height specified for principal buildings in applicable zoning district regulations. 
(b)  Setback. Single-story accessory buildings shall be set back at least five (5) feet from any side or rear property line. Two-story accessory buildings, where permitted, shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any side or rear property line. Other setbacks for accessory buildings may apply as specifically provided in this Article. 
(c)  Area. Accessory buildings or structures shall not exceed the gross floor area (in square footage) of the principal building to which it is accessory, and where more than one accessory building or structure is permitted and provided on a given lot, the total area of accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed the square footage of the principal building or structure to which they are accessory; provided, however, that an agricultural-related accessory buildings (e.g., barns or livestock quarters) where permitted may exceed the gross floor area (in square footage) of the principal building. 
Sec. 11.4. - Accessory Apartment. 
In zoning districts where permitted, accessory apartments (detached or attached) shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Number Limited. Only one accessory apartment shall be permitted on a lot. An accessory apartment shall not be permitted on the same lot as a home occupation. 
(b)  Dimensional Requirements. Accessory apartments are subject to the height and placement (setback) requirements for buildings accessory to dwellings as specified in this Article. 
(c)  Parking. One additional off-street parking space is required and shall be provided, which shall be located in a side or rear yard. 
(d)  Floor Area. At least three hundred (300) square feet of heated floor area shall be provided per adult occupant. The heated floor area for an accessory apartment shall be at least 300 square feet and shall not exceed 1,000 square feet or the size of the principal dwelling, whichever is less. 
(e)  Entrance to Unit. The entrance to an accessory apartment shall be from a rear or side yard and shall not face the street to which the principal dwelling is oriented. 
(f)  Exterior Finish. Accessory apartments, whether attached or detached, shall have exterior finishes or architectural treatments (e.g., brick, wood, stucco, etc.) of an appearance substantially similar to those on the principal dwelling. 
(g)  Water and Sewer. The Hall County Environmental Health Department must certify that the septic tank facilities meet applicable countywide health rules; or if served by public water and/or sanitary sewer, the Hall County Environmental Health Department must certify those utilities are adequate to serve both the principal dwelling and the accessory apartment. 
(h)  Occupancy. Either the accessory apartment or the principal dwelling unit shall be owner-occupied. 
Sec. 11.5. - Amateur Radio Antenna. 
Amateur radio antennas and antenna structures are a permitted accessory use to a dwelling in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Height. No antenna or antenna structure, including any support upon which it may be constructed, shall exceed a height of seventy (70) feet, except by approval of a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Location. Amateur radio antennas and structures shall be setback a distance of at least one-half the height of the tower or structure from all property lines. 
Sec. 11.6. - Fences and Walls. 
(a)  Height. Fences or freestanding walls constructed in a front yard of a residential lot shall not exceed four feet in height. In other locations, fences shall not exceed eight feet in height. Fences or freestanding walls with a height of greater than four feet, if permitted in locations other than the front yard of a residential lot, shall require a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Setback and Location. No fence or freestanding wall shall be erected in a manner that obstructs visibility at street intersections or driveways. Fences and walls must be set back two feet from any side or rear property line for purposes of maintenance; provided, however, that a fence may be established along a side or rear property line after securing a permit from the Zoning Administrator, if there is a written and signed agreement between the property owner of the lot and the abutting property owner to permit the fence at or along a common property line. In such cases, as a part of the permit application process, the Zoning Administrator may require a letter, plat or deed as evidence of such agreement. 
(c)  Composition and Materials. Fences shall not be constructed of materials that would be incompatible with the residential character of the lot and neighborhood. Walls or fences composed or constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk, or other discarded materials shall not be permitted. Walls and fences in the front yard shall present a finished and attractive surface to the frontage of the property. If chain-link fencing is utilized within the front yard of the lot, it shall be coated with vinyl with a black color. This provision shall not be construed to require black vinyl coating of chain link fences in side or rear yards. Barbed-wire strands shall not be permitted except in the case where livestock is lawfully housed on the lot. 
Sec. 11.7. - Guest House. 
Guest houses, as defined, shall be permitted as accessory buildings to a dwelling, subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Accessory Use. The guest house must be an accessory use to a single-family detached dwelling already existing on the lot. No more than one guest house may be located on any lot. 
(b)  Lot Area Requirement. A guest house shall be permitted only on a lot having 15,000 square feet or more in area. 
(c)  Location. The guest house must be constructed within the rear yard of the residential lot separated by a distance of at least 15 feet from the principal building. 
(d)  Architecture and Building materials. The guest house shall have an architectural design and exterior building materials that are compatible with the principal building (single-family dwelling). 
(e)  Maximum Floor Area. The gross building floor area of the guest house may not exceed 60 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling. 
(f)  Use. Guest houses shall not be rented or otherwise occupied separately from the principal dwelling, except for non-paying guests or domestic employees residing on the premises and sharing meals in the principal dwelling. 
Sec. 11.8. - Home Occupation. 
Home occupations may be established in a portion of a dwelling as provided in permitted uses requirements for the zoning districts established by this Zoning Ordinance. No more than one home occupation may be established in a single dwelling. In districts where permitted, the following regulations shall apply to home occupations, and failure to meet one or more of these regulations at any time shall be unlawful and grounds for immediate revocation of business registration: 
(a)  Physical Limitations. The gross floor area of a dwelling unit devoted to a home occupation shall not exceed 1,000 square feet, or 30 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less. An accessory building may be used for the home occupation, but in no case shall the total area within the accessory building devoted to such use be greater than 500 square feet. If part of the dwelling unit and an accessory building are devoted to a home occupation, no more than 1,000 square feet of combined gross floor area shall be used for such activity. 
(b)  Building Alterations. The exterior appearance of the dwelling and any accessory building used for a home occupation must remain that of a dwelling, or accessory use to a dwelling. No external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the dwelling or accessory building are permitted. 
(c)  Parking of Vehicles. Vehicles kept on site in association with the home occupation shall be used by residents of the dwelling only. Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation. Incoming vehicles related to the home occupation, if any, shall at all times be parked off-street within the confines of the residential driveway or other on-site permitted parking. 
(d)  Visits by Patrons Limited. Except for family day care homes, there shall not be more than three (3) nonresident persons on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the residential business whether they are students, clients, patients, or customers. 
(e)  Transportation of Goods and Deliveries. The transporting of goods by a truck larger in size than a customary passenger vehicle, truck, or sport utility vehicle in connection with a home occupation is prohibited. There shall be no goods, products or commodities received on or shipped from the premises; provided, however, that this provision shall not prevent the non-routine delivery or pickup of packages by Federal Express, United Parcel Service, or other commercial carrier. 
(f)  Equipment, Off-site Impacts, and Nuisances. No home occupation shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light, or dust that is offensive or that creates a nuisance. There shall be no exterior lighting of the building or property that is not in character with a residential neighborhood. No equipment that interferes with radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. Home occupations must exclude the use of machinery or equipment that emits sound (e.g., saws, drills, musical instruments, etc.) that is detectable beyond the property. Chemical, electrical, or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment and which is used primarily for commercial purposes shall not be permitted if it is detectable in terms of sight, hearing, or smell from a property line. 
(g)  Signs. There shall be no signs permitted in conjunction with a home occupation, whether placed on the premises or on a vehicle parked on the premises. This Section shall not be construed as limiting a property owner from erecting signs permitted on the lot pursuant to Article 24 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(h)  Employees. Only occupants of the dwelling, and one additional worker who does not reside on the lot, shall be authorized to work on the premises in connection with a home occupation. 
(i)  Licenses. Any occupational licenses, including business registrations, required by state and/or city regulations must be obtained. Proof of state registration, if required for the home occupation, shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a business registration. 
(j)  Storage and Display. Outdoor storage of materials of any kind associated with a home occupation is prohibited. There shall be no display of merchandise or materials in connection with a home occupation. 
(k)  Uses Prohibited. The following uses are specifically prohibited as home occupations: auto sales or auto repair; restaurants; animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, kennels, or the keeping of animals; funeral homes; retail or wholesale shops; machine shops; special event facilities; and lodging services. 
(l)  Approval. All home occupations shall be subject to the Zoning Administrator's approval. The applicant for a home occupation shall file for approval from the Zoning Administrator on forms provided by the Zoning Administrator. Information required by the Zoning Administrator to approve a home occupation shall be as established in a home occupation application and may include but shall not be limited to the following: (1) Address and reference to recorded plat; (2) A site plan of the lot on which a home occupation is proposed, showing the location of the principal building, accessory building if proposed to be used in conjunction with the home occupation, and parking areas. The Zoning Administrator may require the site plan to be based on a boundary survey or on a engineering scaled plat; (3) Written narrative which shall at minimum describes the home occupation (use) and how the home occupation complies with the regulations in this Section. 
(m)  Modification by Conditional Use. Where an application for home occupation does not meet the strict terms of this Section, the provisions of this Section may be modified or varied by application filed by the property owner and approved by the Governing Body for a conditional use, according to procedures specified in Article 34 of this Zoning Ordinance. The Zoning Administrator may provide a recommendation whether or not the Governing Body should approve the application, and what if any conditions of approval are recommended. 
Sec. 11.9. - Junk Vehicle or Material. 
It shall be unlawful on any residential or vacant lot to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, used appliances, or any other miscellaneous scrap material that is visible from a public road or adjacent or abutting property. 
Sec. 11.10. - Swimming Pool. 
This Section shall apply only to said use when it is accessory to a detached, single-family dwelling. 
(a)  Location. Swimming pools accessory to detached, single-family dwellings shall be located in rear or side yards. 
(b)  Setbacks. All swimming pools shall be located at least ten (10) feet from all property lines. 
(c)  Fencing. Swimming pools must be enclosed by a fence or wall at least five (5) feet in height (or as otherwise specified in any applicable swimming pool code or building code) and maintained in good condition with a gate. 
Sec. 11.11. - Tennis or Other Recreational Court. 
This Section shall apply only to said use when it is accessory to a detached, single-family dwelling. A private tennis court shall meet the following regulations: 
(a)  Location. The tennis court must be constructed within the rear yard of the residential lot separated by a distance of at least 20 feet from the principal building and setback at least 20 feet from any side or rear property line. 
(b)  Lighting Restrictions. Private tennis courts shall be unlighted, except as may be otherwise approved after application for and approval by the Governing Body of a conditional use permit. 
Sec. 11.12. - Vehicle Parking. 
(a)  Location and number of vehicles limited. On lots containing a detached single-family dwelling, the parking of automobiles is permitted in garages, carports, or outdoors. Unenclosed parking shall not exceed four outdoor automobiles in any front yard of a lot. Parking shall be permitted only in designated hard surfaced areas with concrete, asphalt, or gravel surfacing and shall not be permitted outside such surfaced areas (i.e., no parking in yards). 
(b)  Recreational Vehicles. Parking or storage of such recreational equipment or vehicles shall not take place on any vacant residential lot. On any lot containing a detached, single-family dwelling, vehicles such as boats, boat trailers, travel trailers, recreational vehicles, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, motor coaches, tent trailers and other similar vehicles may be parked or stored only in side yards, rear yards, carports, or in an enclosed building. Recreational vehicles may be parked or stored anywhere on residential premises except within a front yard for a period not to exceed two weeks (see Article 2 for definition of front, side and rear yard areas). 
(c)  Commercial Vehicles. Parking or storage of commercial vehicles shall not take place on any vacant residential lot. It shall be unlawful to park or store commercial vehicles (including but not limited to dump trucks and delivery trucks) or school buses in front yards of lots containing a detached, single-family dwelling. One commercial vehicle, not exceeding two axles, may be parked or stored in a front, side or rear yard of a lot containing a detached, single-family dwelling, but if stored regularly in a front, side or rear yard, the vehicle shall be parked on an area surfaced with gravel, asphalt, or concrete. 
Sec. 11.13. - Vehicle or Equipment for Sale. 
Within a front yard of a lot containing a detached, single-family dwelling, one licensed vehicle, boat, or piece of equipment at any time may be displayed for sale, subject to the following regulations: 
(a)  Ownership. The property owner or occupant of the dwelling shall hold title to or otherwise own the vehicle, boat or piece of equipment offered for sale. 
(b)  Limitation in Number. No more than one vehicle, boat, or piece of equipment shall be permitted to be offered for sale at any one point in time. 
(c)  Sign. There shall only be one sign, unlighted, which must be attached to the item being sold, and which shall not exceed four square feet in area and shall not be placed at a greater height than the tallest point of the item being sold; provided, however, if the item is of a size such that the sign cannot reasonably be attached to the item being sold, it may be secured on the ground within five feet of the item being sold at a height not greater than four feet. 
(d)  Recurring Sales a Violation. It shall be considered unlawful for a property owner or occupant to offer for sale on a regular basis or in a more-or-less continuous fashion vehicles, boats or other equipment, and the Zoning Administrator may issue notices of violations and citations for recurring or regularized sales described in this Section. 
Sec. 11.14. - Yard Sale. 
Yard sales, where permitted, shall be subject to the following requirements. 
(a)  Duration. A single yard sale shall not exceed seventy-two (72) hours. 
(b)  Limitation on Number. A yard sale shall not occur more frequently than four (4) times annually on the same property. 
(c)  Merchandise. All merchandise must be the property of those holding the sale and not be purchased for the purpose of resale; provided, however, that this shall not prevent property owners or occupants of different dwellings from holding a joint yard sale at one location. 
ARTICLE 12. - REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC RESIDENTIAL PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 12.1. - Commercial Recreation Facility. 
Within a residential subdivision or multiple-family residential development, community recreation facilities as defined by this Zoning Ordinance must be platted when a part of a subdivision or part of the site plan approval for a multiple-family residential development. Community recreation facilities shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(a)  Exterior lighting. If lighted, exterior lighting shall require a lighting plan to be submitted and approved prior to installation. See Article 23 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Swimming Pools and Tennis Courts. Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from all property lines of the tract of land devoted to community recreation, with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along all property lines of said tract. See Article 19 of this Zoning Ordinance for landscape strip specifications. 
(c)  Buildings. Buildings (excluding accessory structures) shall be setback a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of the tract. If outdoor patios or decks are provided, they shall be located no closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the property line of the tract and a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip shall be provided between said outdoor patio or deck and the property line or boundary of said tract. See Article 19 of this Zoning Ordinance for landscape strip specifications. 
(d)  Parking. Parking shall be provided per the requirements of Article 21 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 12.2. - Model Home. 
A dwelling unit may be constructed and used as a model home or temporary office for the sale of lots under the following conditions: 
(a)  Time of Construction. The model home is typically constructed before approval of a final plat, and hence the model home is the principal use of the entire unsubdivided parcel until the final plat is approved. 
(b)  Location on a Lot. The model home shall be placed on a lot designated on the approved preliminary plat and shall be placed in a manner that meets the applicable zoning district dimensional requirements so that it complies at the time it is erected and when it is sold and/or converted for single-family residential use. 
(c)  Sales. Sales shall be limited to the lots and buildings within the subdivision where the model home is located. 
(d)  Certain Buildings Prohibited. A manufactured home or portable building shall not be used as a model home or temporary sales office. 
(e)  Duration and Discontinuance. The use of the model home for a sales office shall be discontinued within 30 days after Certificates of Occupancy have been issued on 90 percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
(f)  Parking and Accessibility. The model home shall comply with off-street parking and applicable accessibility standards. 
Sec. 12.3. - Multi-family Development. 
(a)  Condominiums. If a condominium form of ownership is proposed, the development shall meet all current applicable state laws including the Georgia Condominium Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq.). Proposed bylaws and the articles of incorporation for the condominium association shall be submitted with the application for development approval. 
(b)  Laundry facilities. On-site accessory laundry facilities are permitted accessory uses for developments with 25 or more units. 
(c)  Setbacks. Buildings within multi-family developments shall be subject to the setbacks for the entire lot as established in applicable zoning district dimensional requirements. There shall be no requirements for setbacks from private driveways within the multi-family development, except as may be determined by the Zoning Administrator to be essential to meet building or accessibility codes, to meet sight accessibility requirements for motorists and pedestrians, or other essential public safety considerations during the site plan review process. 
(d)  Site Plan Approval. Site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator shall be required. The Zoning Administrator may place conditions of development approval on any multiple-family site plan approval, which such conditions are specifically related to compliance with a requirement of this Zoning Ordinance or other applicable regulation. Furthermore, reasonable conditions may be placed on the development through site plan approval by the Zoning Administrator in order to (1) ensure compliance with design and development standards specified in this Zoning Ordinance for said use or (2) ensure consistency with development guidelines or policies of the comprehensive plan. 
Sec. 12.4. - Relocated Residence. 
A relocation permit is required to relocate a residential structure, whether it is to be moved out of or into the city limits. The relocation permit is not a building permit for the placement of the structure at a new location. The applicant shall include the following with the application for the relocation permit: 
(a)  Picture. A photograph of the structure at its present location. 
(b)  Existing Location. The current location (address and tax parcel number) where the structure is now located. 
(c)  Proposed Location in City. If the structure is to be relocated inside the city limits, the proposed location (address and tax parcel number) of the structure. To ensure compliance with the applicable zoning district dimensional requirements, when the relocated residential structure is proposed to be located within the city limits, the Zoning Administrator shall require submission of the proposed location (address and tax parcel number) and a copy of the recorded plat of the lot on which the structure will be placed (if none exists the applicant shall be required to comply with subdivision requirements of the city's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance). 
(d)  Floor Area. The total heated floor area of the existing structure and, if to be located within the city, the renovated structure. 
(e)  Building Permit. A building permit shall be required. 
(f)  Exterior Improvements. All exterior improvements to the structure once relocated shall be completed within six months of relocation. 
(g)  Historic Preservation. If located or proposed to be located within a historic district as recognized in this Zoning Ordinance or other historic preservation ordinance of the city, there must be a copy of the approved Certificate of Appropriateness from the Historic Preservation Commission prior to relocating the residential structure. 
(h)  Inspection. The Zoning Administrator shall inspect or arrange for the inspection of the structure for compliance with the minimum standards of the zoning district proposed for location and other applicable regulations and codes. 
Sec. 12.5. - Subdivision Entrance Monuments. 
No subdivision entrance monument shall be permitted to be erected unless it meets the following requirements: 
(a)  Design. The subdivision entrance monument and the landscape surrounding the monument shall be designed by a registered landscape architect. 
(b)  Design Review. Design plan review and approval is required. See Article 40 of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 12.6. - Townhouses. 
In zoning districts where permitted, fee-simple townhouses shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Lot Frontage and Lot Width. Each platted lot shall have a minimum of twenty (20) feet of frontage on a public street or private road that meets public street standards, and each lot shall have a minimum lot width of twenty (20) feet. 
(b)  Lot Size. The minimum size of a lot for each fee-simple townhouse lot (i.e., the extent of land owned by the owner of the unit) shall be 2,000 square feet in lot area. 
(c)  Front Building Setbacks. There shall be a minimum twenty (20) foot front setback from any perimeter boundary of the fee-simple townhouse subdivision and a 30 foot front setback from any public or private street exterior to or within the subdivision. 
(d)  Side Setbacks and Zero Lot Line. Zero lot line between units within the same building shall be permitted, subject to applicable fire and building codes. 
(e)  Rear Setbacks. There shall be a minimum twenty (20) foot rear setback from townhouse lot boundaries for all buildings and structures, except when the rear property line abuts an alley, in which case no setback shall be required. 
(f)  Building Separation. There shall be a minimum building separation of twenty (20) feet between townhouse buildings. 
(g)  Building Unit Offsets. To avoid a monotonous appearance, for any given building, no more than six (6) units may have common walls. Any building containing more than three (3) units with common walls must have the front facade and the roof of each attached unit distinct from the other through separation, staggering, or offsets in design. 
(h)  Rear Access for Fire Protection. Townhouse developments shall be designed to provide proper access to all dwelling units for fire fighting purposes, as may be determined by applicable codes. Rear access, if required for fire fighting purposes may and is encouraged to be accomplished by alleys. 
(i)  Parking. Two enclosed parking spaces minimum per unit shall be provided. 
(j)  Subdivision Plat Approval. Each townhouse development or phase thereof shall require preliminary and final subdivision plat approval in accordance the City of Flowery Branch Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 13. - BUILDINGS AND USES ACCESSORY TO NONRESIDENTIAL PRINCIPAL BUILDINGS AND USES 

Sec. 13.1. - Accessory Use or Structure. 
(a)  Location. Buildings accessory to principal non-residential uses shall be located in a rear yard or side yard. 
(b)  Relationship to Principal Use. No accessory building, structure, or use shall be erected on a lot until construction of the principal building or establishment of principal use has commenced. Accessory buildings and structures must be constructed in conjunction with, or after, the principal building is lawfully approved and use is established. 
(c)  Interpretation. When an accessory building is attached to a principal building by a breezeway, passageway, or similar means, the accessory building shall be considered part of the principal building and shall comply with the yard requirements for a principal building. 
Sec. 13.2. - Amateur Radio Antenna. 
Amateur radio antennas and antenna structures are a permitted accessory use to a nonresidential use in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Height. No antenna or antenna structure, including any support upon which it may be constructed, shall exceed a height of seventy (70) feet, except by approval of a conditional use permit. 
(b)  Location. Amateur radio antennas and structures shall be setback a distance of at least one-half the height of the tower or structure from all property lines. 
Sec. 13.3. - Caretaker Residence. 
A residence for a night watchman, accessory to a business, institutional, or industrial operation, may be established in a single-family detached dwelling or as a unit located within a commercial or industrial building. The Zoning Administrator may approve one residence or dwelling with a minimum gross floor area of 600 square feet, within a principal building or in an accessory housing unit, on the site of a business, institutional, or industrial operation as an accessory use, provided that the applicant supplies evidence to the Zoning Administrator of need for full-time security or 24-hour on-site management. Design review and approval is required (see Article 40 of this zoning ordinance). 
Sec. 13.4. - Construction Field Office. 
A manufactured homes or other temporary buildings or structures shall not be occupied as a permanent office or for any other use in any district; provided, however that such manufactured homes or other temporary buildings or structures may be used for a temporary office on a site where a non-residential development is under construction, subject to the following: 
(a)  Approval and Permit. Approval by the Zoning Administrator and issuance of a building permit. Said permit shall be temporary but renewable once after a period of six (6) months. Said permit shall only be issued if plans and permit(s) have been approved for one or more permanent buildings on the subject property. 
(b)  Water and Sewer. Adequate water and sewage disposal for the structure(s) is approved by the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(c)  Additional Installation Provisions. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to require additional installation standards to ensure compatibility of appearance and functional safety of the construction field office and the site on which it is located. 
(d)  Removal Upon Occupancy. Said manufactured home(s) or temporary building or structure(s) shall be removed from the site no later than upon the occupancy of the appropriate permanent building(s) or structure(s) intended for such use. 
Sec. 13.5. - Drive-through Facility. 
In districts where permitted, and when a drive-through operation is located adjacent to a residential zoning district or existing residential use and it involves an exterior loud speaker, volumes must be monitored and controlled so as to minimize audible sound from the loud speaker at the property line. Prior to operation, or to mitigate unwanted noise after commencement of a drive-through operation, the Zoning Administrator may require noise attenuation to be installed on the site with the exterior loudspeaker, if volumes cannot be reduced below those audible at the property line, or if buffers are inadequate to mitigate noise from the exterior loud speaker. 
Sec. 13.6. - Fences and Walls. 
(a)  Height. Fences or freestanding walls constructed in a front yard of a nonresidential lot shall not exceed six feet in height. Fences or freestanding walls with a height of greater than six feet shall require a permit issued by the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Setback and Location. No fence or freestanding wall shall be erected in a manner that obstructs visibility at street intersections or driveways. Fences and walls must be set back two feet from any side or rear property line for purposes of maintenance; provided, however, that a fence may be established along a side or rear property line after securing a permit from the Zoning Administrator, if there is a written and signed agreement between the property owner of the lot and the abutting property owner to permit the fence at or along a common property line. In such cases, as a part of the permit application process, the Zoning Administrator may require a letter, plat or deed as evidence of such agreement. 
(c)  Composition and Materials. Fences shall not be constructed of materials that would be incompatible with the residential character of the lot and neighborhood. Walls or fences composed or constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, junk, or other discarded materials shall not be permitted. Walls and fences in the front yard shall present a finished and attractive surface to the frontage of the property. If chain-link fencing is utilized, it shall be coated with vinyl with a black color. Barbed-wire strands shall not be permitted. 
Sec. 13.7. - Gasoline or Fuel Pumps. 
Pumps that dispense gasoline, kerosene, propane, natural gas or diesel fuels shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from any street right-of-way line. 
Sec. 13.8. - Junk Vehicle or Material. 
It shall be unlawful on any nonresidential or vacant lot to park or continuously store abandoned, wrecked, junked or inoperable vehicles, power-driven construction equipment, used lumber or metal, used appliances, or any other miscellaneous scrap material that is visible from a public road or adjacent or abutting property. 
Sec. 13.9. - Outdoor Storage. 
Except for open air business establishments, outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be screened from view by an opaque fence or freestanding wall no less than six (6) feet in height. The outside storage of products in conjunction with an enclosed retail trade establishment shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the lot. 
Sec. 13.10. - Project Identification Monument. 
No nonresidential subdivision or business or industrial park entrance monument shall be permitted to be erected unless it meets the following requirements: 
(a)  Design. The project entrance monument and the landscape surrounding the monument shall be designed by a registered landscape architect. 
(b)  Design Review. Design plan review and approval is required. See Article 40 of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 13.11. - Retail and Restaurant Uses Accessory to Certain Uses. 
It is the intent of this Section to permit small-scale, accessory retail uses in office complexes, business and industrial parks, lodging facilities and institutional uses with gross floor areas of 10,000 square feet or more, including without limitation, barber shops, beauty shops, dry cleaning, drug stores, book stores, florists, gift shops, convenience food stores, news stands, and cafeterias, sandwich shops, and restaurants, subject to the requirements of this Section. Retail sales and services accessory to the operation of such specified facilities with 10,000 or more gross square feet of floor area are permitted where otherwise not listed as a permitted use, subject to the requirements of this Section: 
(a)  Enclosure. The activity must be conducted wholly within the building in which the principal use is located and shall be limited to 15 percent of total gross floor area of the building. No merchandise shall be stored or displayed outside the structure in which the principal use is located. 
(b)  Entrance. The public entrance or entrances to the activity shall be from a lobby, hallway, or other interior portion of the building in which the principal use is located, except for restaurants located within an office building, business or industrial park or lodging which shall be permitted one exterior public entrance. 
Sec. 13.12. - Special Temporary Outdoor Event. 
A special temporary outdoor event is an activity accessory to a business or organization that is not part of its normal daily activities, such as a grand opening or closeout sale, or any temporary event conducted by a civic, philanthropic, educational or religious institution, such as a fund-raising or membership drive. A special temporary outdoor event may be authorized subject to permit approved by the Zoning Administrator and in compliance with the following: 
(a)  Duration. The duration of the event shall not last longer than 30 consecutive days. 
(b)  Frequency. Special temporary outdoor events shall not take place more frequently than two (2) times in any calendar year on the same premise. Any two such events on the same premise must be separated by at least 30 consecutive days. 
(c)  Parking. Adequate parking and traffic maneuvering space must be located on the same property as the event. 
(d)  Application. A special temporary outdoor event shall be considered and approved only on the basis of a site plan and letter of intent reflecting conformance to the above requirements. The application shall address hours of operation, placement of bathroom and other public facilities, parking, and security. The application shall also address whether amplifying equipment will be used and if so Police Department review and approval shall be required. 
Sec. 13.13. - Temporary Classroom. 
On sites where educational or religious facilities are permitted, one or more temporary classrooms, which may be modular structures or manufactured homes, may be permitted as temporary uses by the Zoning Administrator, upon application and after the issuance of a building permit. The Zoning Administrator may attach reasonable conditions on the issuance of such permit to ensure compatibility and public safety. The duration of such temporary use and building permit shall not exceed one (1) year, unless an extension is granted by the Governing Body. 
Sec. 13.14. - Food Truck. 
(a)  Defined . A food truck is a licensed, motorized vehicle or mobile food unit which is temporarily placed on a privately owned lot (or in authorized instances, on public property) where food items are sold to the general public. A food truck is by definition an accessory use. 
(b)  Motor Vehicle Tag. A food truck must have a valid tag from the state's Division of Motor Vehicles. 
(c)  Food Service Rules. Food trucks shall operate in accordance with the State of Georgia's Rules and Regulations Food Service - Chapter 290-5-14, Manual for Design, Installation and Construction, Section U - Special Food Service Operations. 
(d)  Health Department License, Permit or Approval. The operator of a food truck shall make application for a license or permit as may be required to the Hall County Health Department, and the applicant shall submit evidence of health department approval as part of an application for a zoning permit. No food truck shall operate without a health department permit or approval. 
(e)  Zoning Restrictions and Zoning Permit. Food trucks are permitted in CBD and HB zoning districts only, as an accessory use to an office, institutional, commercial, or industrial establishment. A food truck shall not be located on a vacant lot. A zoning permit for a food truck shall be applied for and must be received from the Zoning Administrator prior to operation. No more than two food trucks may operate simultaneously on any lot of record, and no lot shall be approved for more than two spaces or areas for food truck operations. 
(f)  City Business License. A city business license shall be required to operate a food truck. 
(g)  On-Site Location Requirements. 
1.  Food truck operators shall obtain the signed approval of the property owner for each location at which the food truck operates. Such approval must be made available for inspection upon request. 
2.  The location for the parking and operation of food trucks must be approved by the Zoning Administrator. The approved location must be marked on a site or plot plan of the lot on which it is located, and the Zoning Administrator may require the food truck location on the ground to be marked with paint, tape, chalk, or any other easily identifiable material. 
3.  Food trucks shall be located no less than ten (10) feet from any fire hydrant, sidewalk, utility box, handicap ramp, or building entrance. No fire lane, vehicular access way, or pedestrian walkway shall be obstructed or encroached upon by the food truck or its operational area. Food trucks shall not park in handicapped accessible parking spaces; a food truck may be permitted to occupy any other private parking space, unless it is determined by the Zoning Administrator that parking demand may exceed supply at the subject location while the food truck is operating. 
(h)  Location Restrictions from Certain Adjacent Uses. No food truck shall operate (as measured in a straight line from property line to closest point of the approved food truck location, where distances are specified): 
1.  Within 750 feet of a public or private elementary, junior or high school while school is in session. 
2.  Within 150 feet of a property with a single or two-family residential dwelling. 
3.  Within 150 feet of a restaurant entrance, unless a waiver is granted by the owner of property on which the restaurant is located. 
4.  Within 300 feet of a city, county, state or private park or open space, unless a temporary permit is granted by the City Manager. 
5.  On a public or private street, or on in a city park or other open space, unless a temporary permit is granted by the City Manager. The City Manager is authorized to promulgate additional rules and regulations for the issuance of temporary permits for food trucks on public streets and public properties. 
6.  On the grounds of a school, unless authorized by the school's administration as part of a school-authorized function. 
(i)  Operational Limitations . Food trucks shall comply with the following: 
1.  Food trucks shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
2.  Food trucks shall be limited in their operation to a maximum of six (6) consecutive hours per day at any single location. 
3.  Food trucks shall not be parked in an approved operating location overnight and shall not be parked longer than one hour before or after allowable hours of operation; a food truck shall not be in a set-up/start-up or break-down/close-up mode between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
4.  No food truck shall be permitted to have a vehicular drive-through facility or drive-up window. 
5.  No amplified microphones or bullhorns shall be permitted as part of the food truck operation. 
6.  The food truck must be self-contained with regard to water and sanitary sewer needs; no temporary potable water or sanitary sewer shall be permitted. 
7.  Signage and advertising shall be limited to copy on the food truck itself, and one "sidewalk" sign as defined in the city's sign regulations, not to exceed four square feet of area, located only within the operational area approved by the Zoning Administrator. Such signage shall be in addition to that approved for the principal use on the lot. 
8.  All associated equipment, such as trash receptacles and signage, must be confined within the operational area approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(j)  Sanitation . Food truck operators shall be responsible for the proper disposal of waste and trash associated with the operation. City trash receptacles shall not be used for this purpose. Operators shall remove all waste and trash prior to leaving each location or as needed to maintain the health and safety of the public. 
( Ord. No. 524, § 2, 7-7-2016 ) 
ARTICLE 14. - SPECIFIC PROVISIONS FOR PRINCIPAL NONRESIDENTIAL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2018, repealed former Art. 14, §§ 14.1—14.13, and enacted a new Art. 14 as set out herein. Former Art. 14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 348-11, § 11, 11-18-2010; Ord. No. 545, § 1, 3-15-2018. 

Sec. 14.1. - Aircraft Landing Area. 
No person shall construct or use or authorize the construction or use of an aircraft landing area (including private use heliport) on any property owned, leased, or controlled by such person, unless and until the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Liability Insurance . No person shall use or authorize the use of an aircraft landing area on any property owned, leased, or controlled by such person until such person has obtained liability insurance coverage on the operation and use of such area. Such coverage shall be obtained from an insurer authorized or licensed to transact insurance business in Georgia and shall provide a minimum liability coverage of at least $500,000 per claim. 
(b)  Size and Approval . The proposed aircraft landing area shall be of sufficient size to meet the Federal Aviation Administration requirements for the class of airport or aircraft landing proposed, and it must be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration or other agency of the federal government with jurisdiction. There shall be sufficient distance between the end of each landing strip and the property boundary to satisfy the requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(c)  No Obstructions Permitted . There shall be no existing or proposed flight obstructions such as towers, chimneys or natural obstructions outside the proposed aircraft landing area which would be in the approach zone to any of the proposed runways, landing strips, or landing areas. In cases where air rights or easements have been acquired from the owners of abutting properties to protect approach zones, satisfactory evidence thereof shall be submitted with the application. 
(d)  Safety Barrier . The owner of the aircraft landing area shall erect a safety barrier around the peripheral area surrounding the takeoff and landing area. The safety barrier shall be a fence, wall or hedge no less than six (6) feet in height and fully enclosed with a self-locking gate. 
(e)  Environmental Impact Report . An environmental impact report shall be submitted, addressing whether the facility is consistent with the comprehensive plan; whether the use will have an adverse impact on the surrounding area; and whether the noise level will impact the surrounding area. Additionally, the applicant shall submit a plan with any mitigation techniques that may be required. The Zoning Administrator shall review, or arrange for review by an appropriate professional the environmental impact report, evaluate proposed mitigating techniques, and determine the sufficiency thereof, require any additional information relevant to the application, and make a recommendation to City Council regarding approval or denial of the conditional use application. 
(f)  Conditions of Approval . In approving an aircraft landing area, the Governing Body may provide that the approval is conditioned on measures or restrictions designed to mitigate any negative impacts of the use. The proposed location of an aircraft landing area within six-hundred (600) feet of a residential zoning district or existing residential use may form the basis for denial of the application. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.2. - Automobile Sales Establishment. 
(a)  Parking . Establishments that sell, rent, or lease automobiles must provide parking specifically identified and devoted to customers. It shall be a violation to park vehicles for sale, rent, or lease in customer parking areas, unloading zones, within landscape strips, city or county rights-of-way, or in any other grass or unpaved area. 
(b)  Loading . Adequate space must be allocated, specifically identified, and reserved on the site for the unloading of vehicles brought to the site by car carriers. 
(c)  Loudspeakers . Outside loudspeakers shall not be permitted when abutting residential zoning districts and uses. 
(d)  Lighting Plan Approval . Automobile sales establishments require submittal and approval by the Zoning Administrator of a photometric plan for all outdoor lighting (see Article 23 of this zoning ordinance). 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.3. - Church, Temples, Synagogue, or Place of Worship. 
(a)  Accessory Uses . Acceptable accessory uses include but are not limited to, a residence for the housing of the pastor, priest, minister, rabbi, etc., school buildings and temporary classrooms, gymnasiums and other indoor recreational facilities, community meeting rooms, and unlighted outdoor recreational facilities. In commercial districts, a community food or housing shelter may be operated as an accessory use to a church. 
(b)  Conditional Uses in Residential Zoning Districts. When located within a R-1, R-2, R-3, TND, or PUD zoning district, a church shall not be permitted to establish a day care center, house more than one household or family on-site, or provide lighted outdoor recreation facilities, without a conditional use permit approved by City Council. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.4. - Club or Lodge, Nonprofit. 
(a)  Setbacks and Buffers . When located on a lot within or abutting a R-1, R-2, R-3, TND, or PUD zoning district, nonprofit clubs or lodges shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line, and within the fifty (50) foot setback, a minimum twenty-five (25) foot wide natural buffer shall be provided. 
(b)  Special Uses in Residential Zoning Districts . When located within or abutting a R-1, R-2, R-3, TND, or PUD zoning district, no nonprofit club or lodge shall be permitted to establish lighted outdoor recreation facilities, without a conditional use permit approved by City Council. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.5. - Commercial Recreation Facility, Outdoor. 
(a)  Lot Area . Such uses require a minimum lot area of two acres. 
(b)  Access . Vehicular access shall be derived only from a collector or arterial street. 
(c)  Setback and Buffer . A minimum building setback of one hundred (100) feet, and a natural undisturbed buffer replanted where sparsely vegetated of at least fifty (50) feet adjacent to side and rear property lines, shall be required. 
(d)  Exterior Lighting. Uses that propose night lighting shall be required to submit a photometric plan to Zoning Administrator to enable the evaluation of impacts from illumination, and approval of said photometric plan by the Zoning Administrator shall be required. See Article 23 of this zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Evaluation . A written evaluation of noise and other off-site impacts is required at the time the following conditional uses are proposed to be established: stadiums, amphitheaters, outdoor firearms shooting ranges, and race tracks for animals and motor driven vehicles; such projects may be required to construct noise attenuation walls or otherwise address off-site noise impacts. A traffic impact analysis shall be required for amphitheaters, stadiums, racetracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, and recreational vehicle parks. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.6. - Day Care Center. 
In districts where permitted, day care centers shall have at least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area and at least thirty-five (35) square feet of indoor space provided for each child or other person served. The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a solid wooden fence or masonry wall, with a minimum height of five (5) feet, or by a building or combination wall or fence and building. Adequate and safe areas for the drop-off and pick-up of patrons shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.7. - Institutional Residential Living and Care Facilities. 
In districts where permitted, institutional residential living and care facilities shall meet the requirements of the State Board of Health and applicable rules of the State Department of Human Resources. Proof of compliance with such requirements shall be required to be on file with the Director prior to business registration approval. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.8. - Landfill. 
(a)  Access . Access from a paved collector or arterial street shall be required. Access shall not be allowed through any residential subdivision or residential development. 
(b)  Screening and Buffers . The entire landfill shall be screened from view from all property lines. To accomplish this, a minimum one-hundred (100) foot wide undisturbed buffer is required adjacent to all property lines. Areas within the one-hundred (100) foot undisturbed buffer that do not provide an opaque screen throughout the year shall be planted with additional vegetation. 
(c)  Fencing . A minimum six (6) foot high solid fence/wall shall be required inside buffers adjacent to any property line containing a residential use or abutting any residential zoning district. 
(d)  State Permit . The owner shall provide the Zoning Administrator with a current copy of a Georgia solid waste handling permit, or pending application thereof, prior to applying for a development or land disturbance permit. 
(e)  Covering of Loads . Vehicles shall be allowed into a landfill site only if waste is covered, to prevent blowing of material from the vehicle. 
(f)  Conditions of Approval . In approving a landfill, City Council may provide that the approval is conditioned on measures or restrictions designed to mitigate any negative impacts of the use. The proposed location of a landfill within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential zoning district or existing residential use may form the basis for denial of the application. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.9. - Mining, Quarrying, or Extraction. 
Any facility engaged in the extraction of earth products, such as sand, soil, gravel, rock, stone, clay, or other mining operations, etc. shall comply with the following: 
(a)  State Permits. The property owner shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a full and complete copy of all approved state permits required for operation of the mine or quarry. Whenever a revision or renewal of any such state permit is required or sought, the property owner shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a full and complete copy of all such applications pending along with relevant correspondence from governing state agencies regarding the disposition of the application for permit revision or renewal. 
(b)  Noise Studies and Sound Level Monitoring. The property owner may be required to submit to the Zoning Administrator a noise study meeting specifications and content details specified by the Zoning Administrator and providing specific measurements at multiple locations along the perimeter of the property ownership boundary. Said noise study if required shall evaluate observed sound levels with noise standards of the City of Flowery Branch as contained in its comprehensive plan and/or zoning ordinance. At any points where sound levels from such noise studies reveal that the acceptable noise threshold of the City of Flowery Branch of operational sounds (as distinguished from off-site, ambient noise) is exceeded, the professional preparing the noise study shall recommend and the property owner shall propose noise mitigation measures and a time frame for their implementation acceptable to the City of Flowery Branch. Mitigation measures may include but shall not be limited to berms and noise attenuation barriers. 
(c)  Hours of Operation . Hours of operation of a mine or quarry and any on-site tenants shall be limited to 6:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, with the exception that: Hours of operation (but not including blasting) may be extended to 24 hour a day and Sunday operations as reasonably necessary for the applicant or any tenant to supply materials to a governmental project. In all such cases the applicant for tenant shall submit a copy of the executed governmental contract for which such extended hours are reasonably necessary to the Zoning Administrator within five days of receipt of the contract. Applicant or tenant shall also supply an anticipated schedule of extended operating hours pertaining to the contract to show that such extended hours are authorized by this condition. This exception shall only be permitted for the duration of government contracts only. 
(d)  Fencing . The property owner shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a detailed site plan showing the location and nature of fencing of the mine or quarry operations and/or the mine or quarry property ownership boundary. In submitting the fencing site plan, the property owner shall indicate where new fencing (and the type of fencing) is proposed. Where no fencing is proposed by the property owner, reasons for not proposing fencing shall be given. The fencing site plan shall be subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator, and for good cause shown, the Zoning Administrator may disapprove of any site plan that does not provide adequate security of the area of mining or quarry operations and/or the entire ownership site. 
(e)  Road Surfacing . Permanent roads, defined as those to be used in excess of one year, within the excavation site shall be surfaced with a dust-free material. Roads other than permanent roads shall be treated with dust inhibitors which will reduce the generation of dust from the road surfaces as a result of wind or vehicular action. 
(f)  Activity Setback . The proposed extraction shall not take place within one-hundred (100) feet of a property line. 
(g)  Stockpiles . Product piles, spoil piles, and other accumulations of by-products shall not be created to a height more than thirty-five (35) feet above the original contour. 
(h)  Blasting . The property owner shall be continuously responsible for assuring that blasting meets the Georgia Blasting Standards Act and the safe blasting limit of 2.0 inches per second, peak particle velocity. The property owner shall achieve compliance with this regulation by monitoring blast operations. Upon request, the property owner shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a copy of all such monitoring results from a qualified professional. In addition, any correspondence between the property owner and the State Fire Marshall relative to compliance with the Georgia Blasting Standards Act shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator. Blasting shall only be done between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays (except on holidays, when no blasting shall be allowed). Blasting shall not be done at other times, except when necessary to detonate a loaded shot that could not be detonated because of adverse weather or other conditions that could not be reasonably foreseen, to maintain blasting safety, or as required to comply with applicable governmental requirements. The mine or quarry operator shall notify the Zoning Administrator of any blast that occurs outside the prescribed times of day and state why such blast occurred outside of such time within 24 hours of such blast. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.10. - Rooming House. 
(a)  Purpose and Intent . This section is intended to address concerns about dormitory-style housing in existing single-family residential neighborhoods. It is adopted in response to concerns that when a large number of people rent rooms in one home, there are sometimes negative impacts such as overcrowding, unsanitary conditions, illicit activities, cars parked in the yard, frequent parties, and other disturbances and threats to public safety. This section is designed to help protect the character and stability of the city's neighborhoods while also respecting individual property rights. 
(b)  Applicability . No person shall establish or operate a rooming house, or let a person occupy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
(c)  Business Registration of Existing Rooming Houses . No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid business registration issued in the name of the operator and for the specific dwelling. Property owners operating a rooming house shall register the rooming house as an existing business within 120 days from the effective date of this Section. It shall be unlawful to continue to use or operate a rooming house in the city after 120 days from the effective date of this section, unless the rooming house has been registered with the city. The city shall compile and maintain a list of registered rooming houses. 
(d)  Appointment of Agent and Agent Responsibilities . As part of the registration process, property owners of existing and new rooming houses shall appoint an agent, who lives in Hall County, as the person responsible for the property. The designated agent shall be available to be contacted 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The agent is the party designated to receive all notices from the city concerning the use of the property. The name and telephone number of the agent responsible for the rooming house will be provided by the city to any neighbors who contact the city with complaints about the rooming house. The designated agent for the property shall be responsible for responding expeditiously to any complaints received by the city and problems if they occur. 
(e)  Registration Application Requirements. The application for registration shall include the agent of the property and the resident manager. The applicant for a registration required by this Section shall file with the application the following: 
(1)  A copy of the recorded plat for the property; 
(2)  A site plan, if no current as-built survey exists; 
(3)  A floor plan of each floor of the building. Said floor plan shall be drawn to an acceptable architectural scale and shall show all stairs, halls, the location and size of all windows, the location and size of habitable rooms and the exits of each floor to be occupied. The intended use of every room in the building must be indicated on the floor plans submitted; and 
(4)  A written statement indicating the number of persons proposed to be accommodated or allowed on each floor, and services to be provided, if any. 
(f)  Resident Management and Occupancy Registry . A resident manager shall reside on the licensed premises. A telephone shall be located in the resident manager's living quarters. The manager of every rooming house shall keep in the office, or other place therein, a register in which shall be entered the name and residence of every person who becomes a lodger, boarder or guest therein. Such register shall also show the number or location of the room or bed occupied by such person, the date of his arrival, and the period for which he will stay. The register shall also be accessible, without charge, to the Zoning Administrator, any police officer, or other duly authorized agent of the city. An up-to-date floor plan and current list of occupants shall be maintained by the resident manager and posted in a conspicuous location. 
(g)  Occupancy Limitations. No basement, attic, or accessory building shall be used for rooming house purposes. No registration required by this Section shall be issued to any person proposing to use a basement, attic, or accessory building or any part thereof as habitable rooms for rooming house purposes. 
(h)  Air Space . No room in any rooming house shall be occupied as a sleeping room by any person unless there are at least six hundred (600) cubic feet of air space, exclusive of wardrobe and closet space, for each and every person occupying any such room. All sleeping quarters shall be served by working heating and cooling facilities and a bed with a mattress for each registered occupant. 
(i)  Minimum Basic Facilities . At least one (1) flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, connected to a water and sewerage system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for each eight (8) persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house. All such facilities shall be located within the dwelling so as to be accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. 
(j)  Food Preparation and Meals . Any rooming house where food is served shall comply with all requirements of the Hall County Environmental Health Department. 
(k)  Responsibility for Maintenance . The property owner, property agent, and resident manager of each rooming house shall be individually responsible for the maintenance of safe and sanitary conditions in every part of the rooming house. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.11. - Self-Service Storage Facilities (Mini-Warehouse). 
(a)  Access . Vehicular access shall be derived only from an arterial or collector road. 
(b)  Minimum and maximum development size. The minimum lot size for a mini-warehouse development shall be two (2) acres, and the maximum developed area for a mini-warehouse shall be four (4) acres. 
(c)  Size and use of storage units. Individual storage units shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet in area and shall not be used for the storage of hazardous materials or toxic substances. The use of individual storage units for living, sales, or hobbies is prohibited. 
(d)  Maximum building length. No individual mini-warehouse building shall be more than two hundred (200) feet long. 
(e)  Fencing . Fencing adjacent to a public right-of-way shall be required in the form of an architecturally finished wall or solid, opaque wooden fence. Fences placed on the remainder of the site may be black, vinyl-coated chain-link. 
(f)  Hours of operation. Mini-warehouse developments shall not be accessible to the general public (excluding on-site managers) between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.12. - Truck Stop. 
In zoning districts where permitted, establishments that provide refueling of trucks and cater to the needs of truck drivers are subject to the following requirements: All uses other than the dispensing of fuel or other accessory vehicle services must be contained within a single principal building. Such building may contain convenience shopping space, a restaurant, television viewing and recreation lounges, restroom facilities, and showers. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.13. - Industrial Uses. 
In M-1 and M-2 zoning districts all new construction must adhere to the following requirements in addition to any and all other requirements set forth elsewhere in this ordinance: 
(a)  20% open space requirement - landscaping and/or natural areas excluding any detention ponds unless they are built as an amenity. 
(b)  Landscape and buffer plan must be submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
1.  A significant amount of landscaping will be required to ensure proper screening. 
2.  Plans will be approved on a case by case basis taking into account the location of the project and the topography of the site. 
(c)  Minimum 75% of required parking shall be located in the rear of the primary structure(s). If on a corner lot parking shall be adequately screened from the right-of-way. 
(d)  All loading/unloading bays shall be located in the rear of the primary structure(s). 
(e)  Master sign plan must be submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(f)  Architectural renderings of the project must be submitted and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the issuance of any permits. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 14.14. - Application Requirements for Uses Specified in this Article. 
In addition to the requirements for conditional use applications as specified in this Zoning Ordinance, if applicable, all applicants for any use specified by this Article shall submit to the Zoning Administrator the following information for review and approval: 
(a)  Plat . A copy of the recorded plat for the subject property. 
(b)  Site Plan. The site plan required by this Zoning Ordinance, which must show areas proposed for the handling and storage of overburden, by-products, and/or excavated materials including the estimated type and volume of extraction. 
(c)  Operations Plan. An operations plan, which shall include: the date of commencement of operation and its expected duration and the proposed hours of operation. 
(d)  State or Federal Permit Documents. A copy of all documents submitted or prepared for submission to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or any other state or federal regulatory agency, as may be required, for the purpose of obtaining a state permit or federal authorization. 
(e)  Review by Georgia Department of Transportation. A statement from the Georgia Department of Transportation which shall identify any state-maintained road within or adjacent to the subject property, and which shall identify any repaving, repairs, alterations, turning lanes, or other additions necessary to accommodate the potential increase in traffic volume or weight occasioned by the proposed operations. 
(f)  Review by City Engineer. A statement from the City Engineer or other qualified professional which identifies all city roads within or adjacent to the property and which shall identify any repaving, repairs, alterations, turning lanes, or other additions necessary to accommodate the potential increase in traffic volume or weight occasioned by the proposed operations. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 15. - TOWERS AND WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES 

Sec. 15.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Article is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless telecommunication equipment and facilities, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennae. The regulations and requirements of this Article are adopted for the following purposes: 
(a)  To provide for the location of communication towers and communication antennas; and to protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of communication towers, poles, and antennas by restricting them in accordance with the restrictions of this Article. 
(b)  To minimize adverse visual impacts of communication towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques. 
(c)  To accommodate the growing need for communication towers and antennas while minimizing the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents. 
(d)  To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of existing and new communication towers (i.e., the use of multiple antennae operated by different providers on a single tower) as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers or poles. 
(e)  To promote and encourage placement of antennae on existing towers, where such siting options exist, and on buildings, where such siting options exist. 
(f)  To consider public health, safety, and welfare in the siting of new towers, and to avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower or pole failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures. 
(g)  To limit the siting of telecommunications facilities and towers where they will have the least adverse impact on the community and still comply with the requirements of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law No. 104-104, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)). These intentions are accomplished with restriction of locations and by enacting controls on height, setbacks, screening, color, and materials in order to minimize visibility and promote public safety and welfare. The regulations in this Chapter are reasonably related to the valid public purposes described in this Section. 
(h)  It is not the intent of the Governing Body to discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services or to prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless services in the City. It is also the intent of the city that applications to place, construct, or modify personal wireless service facilities will be acted upon within a reasonable period of time. 
Sec. 15.2. - Applicability. 
All new communication towers, poles, and communication antennas shall be subject to this Article, except that this Article shall not govern the following: 
(a)  Any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is seventy (70) feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or ham radio operator from the operator's residence. 
(b)  Antennae or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled the City of Flowery Branch, Hall County, or Hall County School Board, provided that a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the government or agency with jurisdiction. 
(c)  Monopole towers 100 feet or less in height located within electrical substations and antennae attached to existing transmission towers. 
Sec. 15.3. - Performance and Construction Standards. 
(a)  Structural Design. New communication towers or poles and antennae, and modifications to existing structures including, without limitation, the addition of height, antennae or providers, shall be constructed in accordance with applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
(b)  Placement Restrictions. Towers occupying a lot as a principal use shall at minimum meet the minimum lot size and setback requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Towers shall be a minimum of three-hundred (300) feet from any residential zoning district. The tower shall also be set back from side or rear property lines a distance equal to or greater than the tower height. All towers shall be located at least one-half (½) of their height in feet from any public right-of-way. When the tower is on property leased, the setbacks shall apply to the lot of record, not the lease boundaries. 
(c)  Screening. The visual impacts of a communication tower at the ground level shall be mitigated by landscaping. All towers and accessory structures shall be surrounded on the ground by a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip or buffer that forms a hardy screen dense enough to interrupt vision and shield the base and accessory structures from public view and view from the surrounding properties. The buffer shall consist of evergreens that will reach a minimum height of at least eight (8) feet within three (3) years. 
(d)  Fencing. A black vinyl-coated chain link fence or wall not less than six (6) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each communication tower or pole. Access to the tower or pole shall be through a locked gate. The tower or pole shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device, unless the Zoning Administrator waives this requirement for alternative tower structures. 
(e)  Height. Through approval of a conditional use application, when one is required, the height of the tower may exceed the maximum height limit of the zoning district in which it is located, up to a height of two hundred (200) feet, subject to the limitations of this paragraph. Towers shall be the minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower-supported antenna. No tower, pole, or antenna, whether freestanding or attached to a building or structure, shall exceed two-hundred (200) feet in height from ground level unless approval is obtained via conditional use permit. To prevail in any conditional use application to exceed established maximum height limitations of this paragraph, the applicant must successfully demonstrate why the prescribed maximum height is insufficient to provide adequate service, or that a taller tower will be in the community's interest by avoiding the construction of one or more additional towers at a new location. 
(f)  Illumination. Communication towers, poles, or antennae shall not be lighted except to assure human safety or as required by the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communications Commission, or other federal agency with jurisdiction. Lighting shall be restricted to dual lighting, medium intensity white strobe lights (daylight mode), and red obstruction lights (nighttime mode), unless the FAA or state aeronautics division requires another type of lighting. 
(g)  Color and Material. Towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design. Communication towers not required to be painted or marked by the Federal Aviation Administration shall have either galvanized steel finish or be painted a non-contrasting color approved by the Governing Body to minimize the equipment's visibility. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical or closely compatible with the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. During the review process, the Governing Body may require the camouflaging of towers where appropriate and feasible. 
(h)  Signs and advertising. No advertising is permitted on a tower or antenna. However, towers shall have mounted in a conspicuous place a sign of not more than one (1) square foot in area, identifying the facility's owner and providing a means of contact in the event of an emergency. 
(i)  Co-location. Proposed communication antennas may and are encouraged to co-locate onto existing communication towers. New or additional conditional use approval is not required for the addition of an antenna to an existing approved tower or pole. All towers over one-hundred (100) feet in height shall have structural capacity and ground or interior space to accommodate multiple users. Towers up to one-hundred sixty (160) feet shall accommodate at least three users, and towers over one-hundred sixty (160) feet shall accommodate at least five users. 
(j)  Noninterference. No communication tower or antenna shall interfere with public safety communication. Frequency coordination is required to ensure noninterference with public safety system and/or public safety entities. 
Sec. 15.4. - Application Requirements. 
Each application shall include the following, which are in addition to the information required for conditional use applications generally, if required: 
(a)  A recorded plat or boundary survey. 
(b)  A site plan, based on with topographical information. 
(c)  An elevation view, perspective drawing, or simulated photograph of how the proposed telecommunication tower will look from public rights-of-way and surrounding residential streets from which it will be visible once constructed. 
(d)  Supporting engineering calculations and information which provide evidence of need and document radio frequency range, coverage area, and tower height requirements. The application must specifically address whether there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower or other location within the search area (i.e., the grid for the placement of the antenna), and such information shall specifically include the location of all existing towers within a one-mile radius of the site proposed. 
Sec. 15.5. - Application Processing. 
Decisions on applications for wireless service facilities shall be made within a reasonable period of time, which shall mean generally that such decisions shall be processed in roughly the same amount of time required for other special use applications; provided, however, that the Governing Body shall table an application for conditional use for a wireless service facility no more than once before making a decision, unless the applicant does not object to additional continuances. 
Sec. 15.6. - Criteria to Consider in Acting Upon Applications. 
In addition to the criteria for determining whether to approve or deny conditional uses, as specified in this Zoning Ordinance, when an application for wireless telecommunication facilities or equipment is considered, the Governing Body in the case of a conditional use permit shall consider the following without limitation: 
(a)  Impacts on surrounding properties with regard to aesthetics and fit with the context of its surroundings, considering the location, height, type of facility, color and materials proposed. 
(b)  Whether impacts on surrounding properties on aesthetics can be mitigated by a monopole tower, or by a camouflaged tower (e.g., disguised as a pine tree), or by using stealth technology (i.e., making the tower resemble common features such as church steeples, bell towers, clock towers, grain silos, gateway elements, and monuments), or by requiring greater setback from impacted properties. 
(c)  Whether the tower or wireless facility would pose an unreasonable risk to adjoining properties, including consideration of a fall area where ice or other debris may fall off the tower without harm. 
(d)  The appropriateness of the location of existing towers, poles, and buildings, including electric transmission towers, that might serve as alternative locations to construction of a new tower or pole or placement on a building in a new location. It is the intent that new antennae where possible shall be co-located on existing towers and poles, placed on existing buildings, or be within a concealed support structure (e.g., camouflaged as an artificial pine tree, church steeple, clock tower, grain silo, flagpole, etc.), prior to authorizing the installation of a new non-camouflaged pole or tower. The failure to consider or unwillingness to accept viable options as described in this paragraph may be grounds for denial of a conditional use application for a new tower or pole. 
(e)  Whether the application demonstrates compliance with the regulations established in this Article. 
(f)  Whether the tower would be engineered and constructed to accommodate additional communication service providers (i.e., whether the application provides for co-location as required by this Article). 
(g)  Whether a denial of the application would have the effect of prohibiting wireless services in the jurisdiction or area or would unduly restrict competition among wireless providers. 
In addition, the Governing Body shall make a decision on the application based on substantial evidence to allow a reviewing court to understand the reasoning behind the decision and whether that reason comports with the evidence presented. To this end, for each application for wireless service facilities, the Governing Body shall rely on findings of fact in making a decision on said application. Such findings may be part of the recommendation and report of the Zoning Administrator, the application and supporting materials submitted by the applicant, testimony from interested individuals, professionals, and the applicant, and any additional findings of fact the Governing Body may itself determine. Generalized community concerns, unaccompanied by supporting documentation, do not constitute substantial evidence under Section 704 of the Telecommunication Act of 1996 or this Chapter. 
ARTICLE 16. - ADULT BUSINESSES 

Sec. 16.1. - Adult Businesses are Principal Uses. 
Adult businesses are hereby defined as principal uses. No such uses shall be considered an accessory use for purposes of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 16.2. - Location and Separation Restrictions. 
No adult business, adult entertainment establishment, business or use, as defined in the City of Flowery Branch Code of Ordinances shall be located: 
(a)  Within 1,000 feet of a residence on any parcel of land which is zoned for a conventional residential zoning district established in Article 6 of this zoning ordinance; 
(b)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, educational institution, religious institution, governmental building simultaneously owned and occupied by such government, library, civic center, hospital, public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
(c)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult business regulated or defined in the City of Flowery Branch Code of Ordinances is located; 
(d)  Within any zoning category other than (M-1 & M-2) as established in Article 9 of this zoning ordinance and shown on the official zoning map. 
For the purposes of this Section, distance shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible straight-line distance, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e. "as the crow flies." The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary. 
( Ord. No. 348-13, § 8, 8-18-2011 ) 
ARTICLE 18. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 18.1. - Development on Nonconforming Lots. 
(a)  Development. A nonconforming lot, as defined, may be used as a building site, or a lawful use may be established thereupon, provided that the access, height, buffer, setback, and other dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the nonconforming lot is located are complied with or a variance is obtained, and, provided further, that the lot meets all the current standards and requirements of the Hall County Environmental Health Department unless connected to sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Example. For example, a lot that does not the minimum lot size or minimum lot width for the zoning district in which it is located can still be built upon but the minimum required zoning setbacks still apply. The variance process is a possible remedy, if this creates hardship. 
Sec. 18.2. - Expansion of Nonconforming Building or Structure. 
(a)  Expansion. A nonconforming building or structure, as defined, may be expanded, enlarged, or extended if such expansion, enlargement, or extension is for a use that conforms to the use requirements for the zoning district in which the building or structure is located. Any such expansion, enlargement, or extension of a nonconforming building or structure shall meet the minimum yard, setback, buffer, height, bulk, and other dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which said non-conforming building or structure is located, and all other requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Examples. To illustrate with examples, a building that has a front building setback of fifteen (15) feet, when a thirty (30) foot front building setback is required, is a nonconforming building. It may still be expanded, but the building addition must meet the required front building setback of thirty (30) feet. A building with a height of forty (40) feet may be expanded, but if the height limit for the zoning district in which it is located is thirty-five (35) feet, it is a nonconforming building, and any building addition must observe that regulatory height limit. A building that exceeds the permitted maximum building coverage for the zoning district in which it is located is a nonconforming building that cannot be expanded, since any addition would increase the nonconformity. 
(c)  Replacement or Repair After Damage. Any portion of a building that meets the definition of a nonconforming building may be rebuilt, altered, or repaired after destruction or damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage as determined by the Zoning Administrator, but only in conformity with the dimensional requirements for the zoning district in which it is located and all other applicable regulations of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Signs. Regulations for nonconforming signs are provided in Article 24 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 18.3. - Nonconforming Uses. 
(a)  Owner Responsibilities. When questions arise as to whether a use constitutes a nonconforming use, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of a nonconforming use to prove to the Zoning Administrator that such use was lawfully established and existed on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Continuation. A nonconforming use may be continued except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. For example, a convenience store in an R-1 zoning district is a nonconforming use, because it is not listed as a permitted use in that zoning district, and may be continued subject to the limitations of this Section. 
(c)  Discontinuance. A nonconforming use shall not be re-established after discontinuance, as defined, unless the property owner proves to the Zoning Administrator that a diligent effort has been made to sell, rent, or use the property for the nonconforming use. If the Zoning Administrator determines that such diligent effort has been made, the owner may re-establish said nonconforming use or seek to re-establish said nonconforming use until the expiration of twelve (12) months following initial discontinuance. If the nonconforming use is re-established under the provisions of this Section after discontinuance but prior to expiration of twelve (12) months following initial discontinuance, said re-established nonconforming use may be lawfully continued. For example, an auto body shop in a residential zoning district is a nonconforming use. It loses its privileges as a nonconforming use under the terms of this Section, if it is discontinued, but an applicant who can show he or she diligently tried to sell, rent, or use the property for the nonconforming use during that time period can petition the Zoning Administrator for relief (i.e., to retain privileges afforded said nonconforming use). 
(d)  Abandonment. A nonconforming use shall not be re-established after abandonment, as defined. This means that, after a twelve (12) month period of no activity, the property owner loses the privileges to reestablish a nonconforming use. 
(e)  Change of Use. A nonconforming use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. A change in tenancy or ownership shall not be considered a change to another nonconforming use, provided that the use itself remains unchanged. For example, an auto body shop cannot be changed to an auto sales lot in an R-1 zoning district because that would be a change from one nonconforming use to another. The auto body shop could, however, be sold to another individual or company and retain privileges as a nonconforming use, so long as the use was the same (auto body shop) and not expanded or changed. 
(f)  Expansion. A nonconforming use shall not be expanded, enlarged or extended, in land area or in floor space or volume of space in a building or structure. For instance, if an office building is located in an R-1 zoning district, it is a nonconforming use since it is not permitted outright in that zoning district. The building cannot be expanded under the terms of this Section. As another example, a for-profit mini-storage building in an R-1 zoning district is a nonconforming use. The storage operation cannot be increased in volume beyond what lawfully existed when the storage building became a nonconforming use. No additional building or building addition can be used for such use. 
(g)  Damage and Repair or Reestablishment. A nonconforming use shall not be re-established or repaired if the activity is destroyed or sustains damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its assessed value as determined by the Zoning Administrator. A building containing a nonconforming use shall not be rebuilt, altered, or repaired after destruction or damage exceeding sixty (60) percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage as determined by the Zoning Administrator, except for a use which conforms with the zoning district in which said use is located, and provided such rebuilding, alteration or repair is completed within one (1) year of such destruction or damage. 
Sec. 18.4. - Determination and Correction of Nonconforming Situations. 
(a)  Intent. It is the intent of this Section to require the complete correction of nonconforming situations at the time of any building addition or significant modification of a use or development on a given parcel of land, if such nonconforming situation can physically be made to comply with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. It is the intent of this Section to require the reduction in the extent of nonconforming situations at the time of any building addition or significant modification of a use or development on a given parcel of land, if such nonconforming situation cannot be physically be made to comply entirely with the requirements of this Zoning Ordinance. It is the intent of this Section to provide authority to the Zoning Administrator to administer the provisions of this Section in a manner that meets these intentions, and that the Zoning Administrator shall exercise that authority, subject to more specific guidance as provided in this Section. 
(b)  Definition. For purposes of this Section, "nonconforming situation" shall mean any development, land improvement, or activity, not otherwise included within the definition of nonconforming lot, nonconforming building or structure, or nonconforming use, which does not meet the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance at the time of its adoption or amendment. Examples of nonconforming situations include but are not limited to, noncompliance with off-street parking regulations, access requirements, failure to adhere to landscape strip requirements, tree protection, signs not meeting height or area restrictions, and insufficient landscaping requirements. 
(c)  Determination of Nonconforming Situations. For any proposed building or development, or modification of a building or development, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to identify the extent to which the improvements on land on which the building or development is proposed constitutes a nonconforming situation, as defined in this Section. The Zoning Administrator shall conduct a review and identify such nonconforming situation(s) at the time plans for such proposed building or development are submitted for review, and at any earlier opportunity, if presented. In the event that one or more nonconforming situations are found to exist by the Zoning Administrator, they shall be documented and notice of the need to correct or reduce said nonconforming situations shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator to the building or development applicant. 
Sec. 18.5. - Correction of Nonconforming Situations. 
In determining the need to completely correct or reduce the noncompliance of nonconforming situations, the Director of Planning and Development shall be guided by the following standards: 
(a)  Strict Compliance. A standard of "strict compliance" (complete correction of all nonconforming situations) shall be applied by the Zoning Administrator where physical standards can clearly be made in the subject development proposal without significant alteration of the development as proposed. 
(b)  Reasonable Progress Toward Compliance. In lieu of strict compliance, a standard of "reasonable progress toward compliance" shall be applied by the Zoning Administrator in cases where complete correction or compliance with the nonconforming situation would require undue hardship, practical difficulty, or might unreasonably reduce the size, scale, or other significant aspect of the development proposal to a point where strict compliance would jeopardize the building or development proposal. In applying a standard of reasonable progress toward compliance, the Zoning Administrator shall have authority to approve the building, development, or improvement even though it does not meet a standard of strict compliance, if the relief granted is the minimum necessary to effectuate the building, development, or improvement. 
(c)  Proportionality. Whenever something less than strict compliance is authorized by the Zoning Administrator, in determining the amount or extent of compliance required, he shall apply a standard of "proportionality," meaning that the scope, scale, extent and cost of requirements to correct nonconforming situations are more or less the same as the scope, scale, extent and cost of the improvement or development proposed. 
ARTICLE 19. - BUFFERS, TREE PROTECTION AND LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 19.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
Trees improve air and water quality, reduce soil erosion, reduce noise and glare, provide habitat for desirable wildlife, moderate the climate, and enhance community image and property values. Therefore, it is the intent of these regulations to encourage the protection and provision of trees through sound, responsible land development practices. Landscaping enhances a community's environmental and visual character and improves the overall quality of life. Vegetation can also improve air and water quality, reduce soil erosion, reduce noise and glare, provide habitat for wildlife, moderate the climate, and enhance property values, thus protecting the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
It is the purpose of this Article to provide environmentally sound landscape amenities and buffers which promote a positive community image by promoting quality development, enhancing property values, providing for landscape improvements in the city, and promoting orderly growth and aesthetic quality in the city. It is also the intent to promote a healthy, natural environment whenever possible by protecting and enhancing existing vegetation. 
This Article also establishes standards for buffers and landscape strips. Buffers between two incompatible uses minimize harmful impacts such as transmission of noise, dust, and glare. Buffers can also lessen visual pollution, establish a greater sense of privacy from visual or physical intrusion, and thus protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
Sec. 19.2. - Buffer Required. 
Buffers, as defined and illustrated in Article 2, shall be required as specified in this Zoning Ordinance (see Table 9.2). Buffers shall also be required for particular uses when specified in any other article of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 19.3. - Buffers to Be Shown on Plans and Plats. 
All buffers required by this Zoning Ordinance or provided by a development shall be delineated on plans as buffers and tree save areas, unless the applicant clearly demonstrates the need for disturbance. 
Sec. 19.4. - Screening Required and Screening Specifications. 
All buffers shall provide screening as defined. Where another provision of this Zoning Ordinance requires screening, such screening shall require compliance with this Section. 
Minimum required screening shall consist of a natural buffer utilizing existing vegetation or a structural buffer, whichever provides an opaque visual screen to a height of six (6) feet, or any combination of existing and replanted vegetation which can reasonably be expected by the Zoning Administrator to create an opaque visual screen six (6) feet high within two (2) growing seasons. Where another provision of this Zoning Ordinance has different specifications for screening, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
To achieve maximum opacity within buffers, the following alternatives, or combination thereof, shall be considered by the applicant and applied, subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator: 
(a)  Six-foot-high evergreen screening shrubs planted four (4) feet on center. 
(b)  Tall evergreen trees stagger planted with branches touching ground. 
(c)  Combination of small shrubs planted thirty inches (30") on center, small trees planted thirty (30) feet on center, and large trees planted forty (40) feet on center. 
(d)  Six-foot (6') high masonry wall (i.e., structural buffer). 
Sec. 19.5. - Buffer Materials. 
It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance that, when a buffer is required, the buffer shall consist of natural, undisturbed vegetation. However, replanting of a buffer shall be required where sparsely vegetated or where screening as required by this Article cannot be provided with existing natural vegetation. This is the intent whether or not the term "natural" buffer or "natural, undisturbed" buffer is used. 
Where disturbance of a required buffer is permitted by this Article, it must be replanted to a standard acceptable to provide screening as defined, and as determined appropriate by the Zoning Administrator. Natural buffers may contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, but they shall contain evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that will provide a six (6) foot high opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year. 
Sec. 19.6. - Buffer Encroachments. 
(a)  Uses Limited. Buffers shall contain no driveways, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other structures or accessory uses except in the case of structural buffers, within which a fence, wall or earthen berm is constructed to provide the visual screening required to meet the standards of this Article. 
(b)  Utilities. Underground utilities may be permitted to cross a buffer if the screening standards of this Article will be subsequently achieved to the satisfaction of the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Access. Required vehicular and pedestrian access will be allowed through a buffer. 
Sec. 19.7. - Waiver of Required Buffer. 
The Governing Body may, at the time of application for rezoning or conditional use, waive a buffer requirement of this Zoning Ordinance if the Comprehensive Plan anticipates future development on the adjoining property in a land use category (shown on the future land use plan map) such that a buffer would not be required by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 19.8. - Reduction of Natural Buffer by Installing Structural Buffer. 
If a structural buffer is provided that creates an opaque screen to a height of no less than six (6) feet, the minimum required buffer width may be reduced by up to fifty (50) percent. 
Sec. 19.9. - Specifications for Structural Buffers. 
Structural buffers, when installed as an alternative to a natural buffer, shall meet the following criteria, which shall be shown and compliance demonstrated on plans submitted for a land development permit as required by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance. 
(a)  Planting. Structural buffers shall be vegetated throughout the minimum area required for the buffer on both sides of any fences or walls and upon any earthen berms, which may include grass, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. 
(b)  Slope and Location of Berms. All earthen berms shall have a maximum side slope of 2 horizontal to 1 vertical. Earthen berms shall not be constructed within the drip line of any existing trees that will remain on the property. 
(c)  Tree Planting Specifications. Trees shall be located or planted within any structural buffer at a density of no less than one tree for each twenty (20) feet of buffer length or portion thereof. New trees shall have a caliper of no less than two (2) inches upon planting and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(d)  Fence Material. Fences and freestanding walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property and shall be located no closer to the property line than three (3) feet. Shrubs, ground covers, or other vegetation shall be provided between the fence or wall and the property line so as to provide a decorative effect, as proposed by a registered landscaped architect or as approved by the Zoning Administrator. Fences used in buffers must be made of rot-resistant material or protected from deterioration with water-proofing material. 
Sec. 19.10. - Maintenance of Buffers and Structural Buffers. 
Every buffer and structural buffer required by this Zoning Ordinance shall be maintained by the owner of the property where the buffer is located, so as to provide an opaque visual screen to a height of six (6) feet on a continuous, year-round basis. 
Sec. 19.11. - Stream Protection Buffers. 
In addition to the buffers specified in Table 9.2 or elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, properties shall comply as applicable with the stream protection buffer requirements specified in the city's Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance and any other city regulations that specify stream buffers. 
Sec. 19.12. - Protection of Trees During Development. 
(a)  Tree Protection Required. Developers shall make all reasonable efforts to protect retained trees during the construction process, including but not limited to placing protective barriers around trees and marking such areas with "tree save area" signs; and not grading, excavating, or locating utilities near the critical root zones of trees. 
(b)  Protection Devices. Tree protection devices shall be installed prior to the issuance of a land disturbance or development permit for any clearing and/or grading. Tree protection shall consist of chain link fencing, orange laminated plastic fencing supported by posts, rail fencing, or other equivalent restraining material. 
_____ 
_____
(c)  Maintenance. Tree protection devices shall remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development and shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Administrator. 
(d)  Encroachment and Compaction Prohibited. All building materials, paving, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris, ditches, trenches, or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or above-ground damage shall be kept outside the critical root zone of trees within tree save areas or other trees to be protected. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the Zoning Administrator, the critical root zone shall first be mulched with a 4" layer of processed pine bark or wood chips or a 6-inch layer of pine straw. 
Sec. 19.13. - Tree Retention Guidelines. 
The retention of trees is the highest priority and shall take precedence over the removal of trees and replacement with smaller trees. Landscaping plans shall be reviewed for compliance with the following provisions, and noncompliance with this Section may be grounds for disapproval of landscaping plans required by this Article: 
(a)  Existing trees in required landscape strips shall be retained to the maximum extent possible. 
(b)  Existing trees between the building line and the street shall be retained to the maximum extent possible. 
(c)  Where existing trees exist where parking lots are proposed, such trees shall be integrated into the design of the parking lot so that they may be retained in tree planting islands, to the maximum extent possible. 
(d)  Any other existing trees in parking areas to the rear of the building line or elsewhere on the site shall be retained to the maximum extent possible. 
Sec. 19.14. - Landscape Strips Required. 
Landscape strips, as defined, shall be required along rights-of-way for non-single-family uses and along side lot lines according to the zoning district in which it is located as specified in Tables 6.2, 7.2, and 9.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. Landscape strips shall also be provided if required for particular uses specified in Article 11 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 19.15. - Minimum Landscaped Open Space Required. 
Landscaped open space shall be provided as required by the zoning district in which the lot is located, as specified in Tables 6.2, 7.2, and 9.2 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 19.16. - Landscaping Encroachments. 
Landscape strips and areas devoted to meeting minimum landscaped open space requirements shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other accessory uses except for retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design, pedestrian-oriented facilities, underground utilities, driveways required to access the property, and signs otherwise permitted by this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 19.17. - Landscape Strip Planting Specifications. 
(a)  One tree shall be provided within the landscape strip for every 40 feet of length of street or property line frontage, or portion thereof. Such trees may be deciduous or evergreen, but they must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions and that will normally reach at least twelve (12) inches at diameter breast height upon maturity. 
(b)  All portions of required landscape strips shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched. 
(c)  Upon planting, new trees shall have a caliper of no less than two (2) inches, and they may be planted at regular intervals or clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design and shown on a landscaping plan approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 19.18. - Parking Lot Landscaping. 
See Section 10.13. 
Sec. 19.19. - General Landscaping Provisions. 
(a)  Visibility. Landscaping shall not restrict visibility of motorists or pedestrians (e.g., tall shrubs or low-lying branches of trees). 
(b)  Clearance. Trees must have a clear trunk at least six (6) feet above finished grade to allow a safe clearance beneath the tree. 
(c)  Curb stops. A curb or wheelstop shall be provided along interior parking lot landscape islands, perimeter landscape strips, and landscapes adjacent to street rights-of-way, to prevent cars from encroaching on trees, shrubs, and landscapes, as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 19.20. - Landscape Plan Required. 
A landscaping plan approved by the Zoning Administrator shall be required prior to the issuance of a land disturbance, development, or building permit to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of this Article. 
Sec. 19.21. - Contents of Required Landscaping Plan. 
The landscape plan shall be based on an accurate boundary survey of the site or reasonable property description and shall include the following: 
(a)  Location and general type of existing vegetation; 
(b)  Existing vegetation to be saved, including tree save areas; 
(c)  Methods and details for protecting existing vegetation during construction; 
(d)  Locations and labels for all proposed plants and a plant list or schedule showing the proposed and minimum required quantities; and 
(e)  Location and description of other landscape improvements, such as earth berms, walls, fences, screens, sculptures, fountains, street furniture, lights, and courts or paved areas. 
Sec. 19.22. - Guidelines for Preparing Landscaping Plans. 
The following general guidance is provided. 
(a)  The use of native plants as landscaping materials is encouraged wherever possible. Invasive or potentially invasive plants are not permitted. However, well-mannered non-native plants are acceptable if they are not considered invasive. 
(b)  Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or replaced with suitable vegetation. 
(c)  Ground cover(s) should be used to supplement landscaping in appropriate areas to reduce the need for extensive grass lawns, which would require regular watering in drought conditions. 
(d)  Grass areas shall be sodded. However, if grass seed must be used, it shall be a variety suitable to the area that produces complete coverage. 
(e)  No artificial plants, trees, or other vegetation shall be installed. 
Sec. 19.23. - Landscape Maintenance Bond. 
The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping required to be installed pursuant to this Article. Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer or owner may be required to post a maintenance bond or cash escrow guaranteeing all landscaping materials and work for a period of two (2) years after approval or acceptance thereof by the city in a sum established by the Zoning Administrator. The bond if required will be in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of replacing all of the landscaping required by these specifications, unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Administrator. At the end of two years, the Zoning Administrator shall make an inspection and notify the owner or developer and the bond company of any corrections to be made. If no maintenance is required, or if maintenance is provided by said responsible party, the Zoning Administrator shall release the bond. 
Sec. 19.24. - List of Approved Trees. 
Table 19.1 provides a list of trees generally appropriate for planting within the City. Selection is subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator. 


Source: "Treescape: A Citizen's Guide for Urban Tree Planting." (A resource published by the Cooperative Extension Service, University of Georgia College of Agriculture). 
ARTICLE 20. - ACCESS AND DRIVEWAYS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-16 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted July 19, 2018, repealed former Art. 20, §§ 20.1—20.13, and enacted a new Art. 20 as set out herein. Former Art. 20 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 20.1. - Reference to Other Regulations. 
For street frontage requirements, see Sec. 5.12 of this Zoning Ordinance. For requirements and guidelines pertaining to parking lot paving and design, access management, interparcel access, on-site circulation, and traffic impacts, see Article 10 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.2. - Visibility at Intersections. 
No fence, wall, sign, hedge or planting which obstructs the sight lines at elevations between thirty (30) inches and twelve (12) feet above any roadway shall be placed or permitted to remain on any corner lot within a sight visibility triangle as defined by this zoning ordinance. Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Administrator, the area regulated shall be two triangular areas formed by the street right-of-way lines, or such lines extended, and lines connecting such right-of-way lines at points twenty-five (25) feet from the intersections of the right-of-way lines. In such cases as right-of-way lines do not exist or cannot be determined, said measurements shall be made from points fifteen (15) feet from the centerline of the existing road or ten (10) feet from the existing pavement or roadbed, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.3. - General Access Provisions. 
(a)  Parking and Loading Areas . All off-street parking shall be provided with vehicular access to a street, and loading areas shall be provided with access to a street or alley; such parking or loading area shall not thereafter be encroached upon or altered. Except for single-family and duplex dwellings, off-street parking and loading spaces shall have access so that their use will not require backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way. Access to off-street parking areas for single-family and duplex dwellings shall be subject to approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Land Use Compatibility . Service drives that serve commercial, office-professional, or industrial zoning districts shall not be allowed to pass through residential zoning districts, except when approved as part of a site plan for development in a mixed-use or planned unit development, except as may otherwise be approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Sidewalk Obstructions . There shall be no obstruction of a public sidewalk, including that portion of the sidewalk within a driveway apron, due to parking, loading, or other activity. The City Engineer may require that construction contractors make special provisions for maintaining safe passage along public sidewalks during construction. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.4. - Pedestrian Access Internal to Site Required. 
(a)  Required . Internal to any development site other than single-family residential dwellings, developments shall provide safe routes of pedestrian access between points of departure and destinations. 
(b)  Minimum Width . All walkways internal to the site shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide, except as otherwise specified by the city. In the case of pedestrian-oriented development, wider sidewalks will be required. 
(c)  Right-of-way . Pedestrians shall have the right-of-way over automobile travel. 
(d)  Public System Connection . The internal sidewalk system shall connect to the public sidewalk system along streets and highways. Where a transit stop exists, the internal sidewalk system shall provide as direct a link as possible from the buildings on site to the transit stop. 
(e)  Interparcel Connection . The internal sidewalk system shall also connect to any sidewalk systems on abutting private properties or provide for such connections in their absence through interparcel access easements specified in this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.5. - Interparcel Access Easements Required. 
(a)  Required . For any office or retail sales or services use, the property owner shall grant an access easement to each adjoining property that is zoned or used for an office or retail sales or services use. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of customers and their vehicles from establishment to establishment (lot to lot) without generating additional turning movements on a public street. 
(b)  Recording . When required by this Section, interparcel access easements shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court, Hall County, and reference to deed book and copy of such recorded easement provided to the Zoning Administrator and shown on plans and plats. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.6. - Access Easement Provisions. 
(a)  The interparcel access easement shall permit automobile access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for customer or tenant use; but parking spaces may be restricted to use by the owner's customers and tenants only. 
(b)  The granting of such easement shall be effective upon the granting of a reciprocal easement by the adjoining property owner. 
(c)  Upon the availability of access to driveways and parking areas of the adjoining lot, the pavement or other surfacing of the owner's driveways and parking areas shall be extended to the point of access on the property line. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.7. - Location of Interparcel Connections. 
The location of vehicular connections across a property line should be mutually determined and constructed by both property owners. In the case of coordination problems or any factors preventing construction of an interparcel connection, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the location of connection to be constructed by property owners. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.8. - Relief. 
Where the proposed land use is such that adverse impact of the required easement on the use of the property would outweigh the reduced impact on the public street provided by the reciprocal easements, or in cases where property owners cannot agree on interparcel access provisions approved by the Zoning Administrator, the Zoning Administrator may waive or modify the requirement for access easements, in whole or in part, administratively. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.9. - Driveway Approval Required. 
No curbs or medians on public streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered for access, and no driveway connection to a public or private street shall be made or altered, without a permit issued by the City Engineer and/or other applicable jurisdictions (e.g., Georgia Department of Transportation, Hall County). For driveways accessing U.S. or State highways, the requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation shall apply whenever more restrictive than the standards in this Article. However, the city may impose requirements on access to state and federal routes that are more restrictive than state or federal requirements. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.10. - Driveway Width Requirements. 
Vehicular access from properties to streets shall comply with the following dimensional requirements, measured at the right-of-way line. Driveways shall be paved with asphalt or concrete unless the Zoning Administrator waives the requirement due to environmental impacts or because of inconsistency with the character area in which the improvement is located, as described in the comprehensive plan. _____ 
Table 20.1 
Driveway Width Requirements 

 
_____ 
When a property containing a single-family residence is converted to a use that requires a wider driveway, the City Engineer may reduce the driveway width required by this Section if access via a narrower driveway will not be impeded. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.11. - Driveway Location, Maximum Width, length, and Spacing. 
Curb cuts, driveways, and access points on public streets must meet the following requirements: 
(a)  Location . In developments other than detached, single-family residences, they shall not be located within thirty (30) feet of any intersection or within forty (40) feet of another curb cut. 
(b)  Maximum Width . A curb cut serving a nonresidential use shall be no greater than forty (40) feet in width. For single-family and duplex uses, the width of an individual driveway shall not exceed the width of the garage, unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Residential Driveway Length . All front loaded single family homes are required to have a minimum driveway length of twenty-three (23) feet as measured from the back of sidewalk. 
(d)  Spacing . Curb cuts, driveways and access points shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet to any property line, unless approved by the Zoning Administrator; provided, however that this provision shall not prevent shared driveways and common access easements located along common property lines. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.12. - Number of Driveways Limited. 
(a)  Federal and State Routes . Along State and/or U.S. highways, no more than one (1) point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof. Further restrictions on the number of driveways may be considered and imposed during site plan or design review. 
(b)  Other Major Streets . Along major (e.g., arterial and collector) streets other than State or U.S. highways, lots with less than 200 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. Two (2) points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted only if the lot has 400 feet or more of lot frontage. The City Engineer shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. 
(c)  Site Specific Considerations . More restrictive limitations on driveways may be imposed during the site plan review and design review and approval, if justified given the particular conditions of the site and the proposed access. 
(d)  Single Family Residential . Shall be allowed one curb cut per lot. 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
Sec. 20.13. - Minimum Driveway Construction Specifications. 
Driveway connections shall be provided between the edge of pavement or back of curb to the right-of-way line. No property may be afforded access from a public street unless it meets the following specifications or as otherwise approved by the City Engineer: 
(a)  Curb and gutter streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3000 psi concrete at least six (6) inches thick. Sidewalks, where provided, shall be warped to the driveway apron and are to be identified across the driveway apron by construction joints or control joints. 
(b)  Swale ditch section streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3000 psi concrete at least six (6) inches thick, or asphaltic concrete of the same thickness and type as the paving course(s) for the street. 
(c)  For streets that have been overlaid, driveway aprons shall tie into the existing curb and gutter. Asphalt may be added to the apron for smoother access. 
(d)  All driveway aprons shall have a radius connecting the driveway to the curb line or pavement edge as follows: 
Table 20.2 
Driveway Apron Radii 


 
( Ord. No. 348-16, § 1 (Exh. A), 7-19-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 21. - PARKING 

Sec. 21.1. - Findings. 
(a)  Generally. Poor design of parking lots can lead to damage to the environment and may require the community to subsidize the interests of a commercial enterprise at the expense of the community's environment. It is reasonable to require that development prevent environmental damage through good design of parking lots. Possible negative effects of parking and loading areas include creation of heat islands and changes to microclimate, isolation of pedestrians, increased stormwater runoff, and reduced stormwater infiltration into the ground. 
(b)  Heat islands. Large parking lots can create heat islands where pavement absorbs solar radiation during the day and remains warm well into the night. When heat islands exist, cooling costs are higher than normal. Strategies can be used to reduce heat islands and their effects. 
(c)  Lack of safe pedestrian mobility. Large areas of paving are necessary to accommodate automobiles, but they can be unfriendly to pedestrians without specific regulations requiring that designers accommodate pedestrians. Large, open parking areas are conducive to high speeds and random maneuvers which can endanger pedestrians. Wide driveway aisles and access roads also increase speeds and discourage pedestrian travel. Street and parking lot design is moving away from automobile-centered standards toward a more balanced approach that includes pedestrians. 
(d)  Stormwater management. Parking lots can be seas of asphalt contributing to the degradation of local water quality. Parking lots can be more compatible environmentally if environmental protection measures are incorporated into design standards and regulations. Porous pavement and grass pavers reduce runoff by allowing it to pass through the paved surface and infiltrate back into the soil and groundwater. Utilizing porous pavements and grass pavers also reduces or eliminates land dedicated to surface storm water management facilities. Porous pavement designs and grass pavers are appropriate in some instances. Other types of stormwater management facilities are also more environmentally compatible, such as vegetative swales and bioretention. 
(e)  Overbuilding of parking lots. Past off-street parking requirements have called for huge, expanses of parking around shopping centers and malls, some or much of which remains unused for most of the year. The risk of lost retail sales because of insufficient customer parking, as well as parking requirements for commercial loans, have led in part to the overbuilding of parking lots. This has worked to the benefit of retailers but has been shown to have undesirable environmental impacts, and those costs have been borne by communities. Certain parking areas are used only a few days of the year, yet the impacts of excess pavement continue every day, regardless of whether the parking is used or not. Studies have shown that at least one-half of the parking spaces in shopping centers are vacant at least 40 percent of the time (Urban Land Institute 1982, as cited in "An Opportunity to Reduce Minimum Parking Requirements," by Donald Shoup, Journal of the American Planning Association , Winter 1995, 14-28). Parking lot construction is a considerable factor in the cost of development. Reducing parking areas reduces development costs. Therefore, reductions in the size of paved parking and flexibility in the types of pavement and parking designs are beneficial to all concerned. 
Sec. 21.2. - Purposes. 
The multiple purposes of this Article are summarized as follows: 
(a)  Establish requirements for multi-modal access to development sites, including vehicular, truck service, and pedestrian, as appropriate; 
(b)  Establish on-site circulation patterns conducive to safe pedestrian as well as vehicular and truck access; 
(c)  Establish minimum off-street parking and loading areas in proportion to the need created by each use, but considering reductions for the provision of alternative modes of travel; 
(d)  Reduce congestion in the streets and ensure that uses and functions of public rights-of-way are not interrupted; 
(e)  Establish certain maximum as well as minimum requirements for parking spaces to reduce development costs and ensure that excess impervious surfaces are not constructed, while providing for exceeding maximums when a demonstrated need exists. Parking requirements should be based on actual average parking demands, rather than to accommodate the highest hourly parking at a site as in conventional parking requirements; 
(f)  Provide for alternative pavement materials, such as porous asphalt, turf block, gravel, wood mulch, and cobbles which have higher degrees of water quality effectiveness than conventional asphalt and pervious concrete; 
(g)  Promote flexible approaches to the provision of off-street parking, including in some cases, as appropriate, use of on-street parking, shared parking arrangements, smaller spaces for compact cars, and unimproved or pervious pavement overflow or spillover parking areas; and 
(h)  Establish design and improvement specifications for the development of parking lots. 
Sec. 21.3. - Applicability. 
This Article shall apply to any new building constructed; for new uses or conversions of existing, conforming buildings; and for enlargements of existing structures. This Article shall not be construed so as to require additional parking spaces to be furnished for an existing building which is repaired, altered, maintained, or modernized, where the size of the building is not increased; provided, however, that when the occupancy of any building is changed to another use, parking shall be provided to meet the requirements of this Article for the new use. 
Sec. 21.4. - Parking Plan Required. 
Before any building permit is issued, the parking lot layout and area must be found by the Zoning Administrator to be in compliance with all requirements of this Article. The Building Inspector shall not allow occupancy or use of a building until advised by the Zoning Administrator that parking facilities meet the requirements of this Article. 
No permit shall be issued for any parking area, except those for detached, single-family residences, until the plans and specifications have been submitted for review by the Zoning Administrator. Such plans and specifications shall include the number of spaces provided and required, the location of entrances, exits, aisles, curbing where required, landscaping, screening, surface materials, and provisions for drainage. 
Sec. 21.5. - Parking Requirements in the CBD Zoning District. 
It is the intent of this Section to give the Zoning Administrator maximum flexibility in administering the off-street parking requirements of this Article within the CBD zoning district, in order to promote redevelopment while ensuring that parking problems do not occur. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Article, off-street parking requirements of this Article may be administratively varied by the Zoning Administrator after considering the specific uses involved and the availability of on-street and other (nearby) off-street parking. 
Sec. 21.6. - Uses of Parking Lots. 
(a)  Restriction to Parking Use. Areas provided to meet the minimum requirements of this Article for handicapped and other parking spaces, along with the aisles and driveways necessary to provide access to those spaces, shall not be used for any purpose other than the temporary parking of vehicles for the present on-site use or uses, except as specifically provided in this Section or authorized by the Zoning Administrator. Specifically, no such parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. 
(b)  Temporary Uses. Upon application, the Zoning Administrator may approve temporary structures and uses such as tent sales within required parking spaces that are not used on a continuous basis, provided that such uses are moveable from the site upon order by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 21.7. - Interpretations. 
(a)  Fractions. Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be rounded upward to the next whole number. 
(b)  Parking Space Requirement Not Specified. Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in this Article, and where no similar use is listed, the Zoning Administrator shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, total square footage, potential customer use, and other expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. At the discretion of a development applicant, a parking generation study prepared by a qualified professional may be submitted to aid the Zoning Administrator in making such a determination; if submitted, it shall be considered by the Zoning Administrator prior to making a determination. 
(c)  Computations for Multiple Uses within a Building. In cases where a building contains some combination of office space, retail or wholesale sales area, and/or bulk storage area, the Zoning Administrator may authorize that combinations of the parking requirements established in this Article which are proportional to the use of floor areas (e.g., warehousing, retail, and/or office) be used in determining the minimum required off-street parking space requirements of this Article. 
(d)  Reduction for Undesignated Parking Areas. The Zoning Administrator may authorize a reduction of a number of required parking spaces when it can be demonstrated to his satisfaction that the use provides other areas on the site that are not marked as parking spaces but which serve some of the demand for on-site parking. Such areas may include but are not limited to drive-through stacking lanes, drive-through bays, and gas pump canopy areas. 
Sec. 21.8. - Off-Street Parking Spaces on Same Site as Use They Serve. 
All parking spaces required by this Article for all uses shall be located on the same lot as the use for which such parking is intended, except as specifically provided otherwise by this Article. 
Sec. 21.9. - Off-Site Parking Spaces Permitted. 
In lieu of parking on the same lot as the use for which such parking is intended, parking spaces required by this Article for all uses may be provided off-site, provided the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Proximity. The spaces are within a walking distance of four-hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to the building or use they are intended to serve, provided, however, that no required parking spaces may be located across any State or U.S. highway from the use they are intended to serve. In townhouse subdivision developments, each parking space shall be within one-hundred (100) feet of the entrance to the dwelling unit that it serves, as measured along the most direct pedestrian route. 
(b)  Ownership or Lease Required. The property containing the parking spaces not serving a use onsite must be either under the same ownership as the property containing the use to which the parking will serve, or a valid lease agreement must exist between the two property owners for use of the parking area. Lease agreements, as applicable, must be of sufficient duration to serve the use or uses proposed to be partially served by the off-site leased parking, as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Maximum Reductions. Off-site parking shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the required parking for a building or buildings, except in the CBD zoning district, where 100 percent is permitted. 
(d)  Pedestrian Access Required. Safe and convenient pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk or path, must exist or be provided at the expense of the property owner from the structure or use to the off-site parking lot. 
(e)  Reduction for On-street Parking. The Zoning Administrator may in individual cases administratively authorize a reduction, not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the minimum required number of parking spaces for projects that are directly served by on-street parking approved by the City Engineer. 
(f)  Combinations of Uses. The number of parking spaces required by this Article for any number of separate uses may be combined and provided in one lot (i.e., off the site of one or more uses), provided that the spaces are within a walking distance of four-hundred (400) feet of the main entrance to the building or use they are intended to serve; provided further that the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
1.  One-half of the parking spaces required for a church, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be on weekends and nights that services or activities are held may be assigned to a use that will be closed during those time periods. 
2.  Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the Zoning Administrator that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. 
Sec. 21.10. - General Requirements for Design of Parking Lots. 
(a)  Location of Spaces in Relation to Rights-of-way. No parking space shall be provided along an access driveway within the first the first twenty-five (25) feet of the driveway from any local street. 
(b)  Drainage. Parking and loading areas shall be properly graded if necessary but in all cases drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. Water quality effectiveness and character of the zoning district shall be considerations in determining curbing requirements. 
(c)  Surfacing. Unless specifically provided otherwise in this Article, at the time of the establishment of any use, or erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking spaces improved in accordance with this Article. 

Source: Parker, Dave, et al. 2002. "Design of Stormwater Management Facilities." In The Dewberry Companies, Land Development Handbook (2 nd ed.). Figure 22.37, p. 525. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
(d)  Variations of Surfacing. Parking shall be improved with an asphalt or concrete surface and curb and gutter; provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator may grant relief from the paving and/or curb and gutter requirements if negative impacts to the environment would occur, or, if the provision of gravel parking or alternative curbing or access control would be more compatible with the character or historic district regulations and/or guidelines. Specifically, within environmentally sensitive areas, alternative surfacing may be considered, including but not limited to, porous asphalt, turf block, gravel, wood mulch, and cobbles, all of which have higher degrees of water quality effectiveness than conventional asphalt and pervious concrete. 
(e)  Curbs or stops. Curbing shall be installed as required by the City Engineer when considered necessary for drainage, although water quality effectiveness and character of the zoning district shall be considerations in determining curbing requirements. 
_____ 

Source: Tanner, J. Thomas. 2002. "Suburban Street Design." In The Dewberry Companies, Land Development Handbook (2 nd ed.). Figure 20.10, p. 370. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
(f)  Striping. All parking and loading spaces must be striped with paint lines, lined with curbstones, or otherwise permanently marked to designate the space, except in cases where the materials used are not conducive to striping or lining with permanently marked materials. 
(g)  Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided if the facilities are to be used at night or if necessary for security purposes. All lighting facilities shall be so arranged to prevent the direct illumination of adjacent properties or public streets. 
(h)  Signs. Signs essential to the proper functioning of the parking lot and loading areas shall be installed. Such signs shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed four feet in area, or nine feet in height. 
(i)  Maintenance. All parking lots must be maintained in an acceptable condition with regards to pavement surface, signage, striping, and landscaping. 
( Ord. No. 348-11, § 17, 11-18-2010 ) 
Sec. 21.11. - Stormwater Requirements for Large Parking Lots. 
All off-street parking lots with ten or more spaces and/or establishments dispensing petroleum based products shall be required to have an oil/water separator device designed and constructed and shown in the stormwater management plan. Such device shall be approved by the City Engineer and shall be the responsibility of the property owner for maintenance and operation. 
Sec. 21.12. - Parking Space and Aisle Design Specifications. 

(a)  Angled Parking. Designers are permitted flexibility with regard to parking lot designs, subject to the requirements of this Article. 


 
_____
(b)  Parking Space Width. When fewer than 75 parking spaces are proposed or provided, off-street parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet in width and twenty (20) feet in length, with wider (10 foot) spaces encouraged in high-turnover areas. When 75 or more parking spaces are proposed or provided, off-street parking spaces shall meet the widths specified in Table 12.1. 
Table 12.1 
Required Parking Stall Widths 

 
(c)  Parking space length. Parking space length shall be twenty (20) feet, except where compact parking is authorized by the Zoning Administrator, in which case parking space lengths can be reduced to sixteen (16) feet. 
(d)  Interlocking design. An interlocking or "herringbone" parking design is not permitted, as it exposes the side of one vehicle to the front of another, which can result in substantial damage if the vehicle rolls forward (see figure). 

Source: Stover, Vergil G., and Frank J. Koepke. 2002. Transportation and Land Development (2 nd Ed.). Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers. Figure 9-6, p. 9-15. 
(e)  Aisle widths. Parking driveway maneuvering aisle width requirements vary according to the width and length of parking spaces and the angle of parking. For a single row of ninety (90) degree head-in parking, the minimum depth for a parking space plus the width of the aisle shall be forty-two (42) feet. For two (2) rows of ninety (90) degree head-in parking using the same aisle, the minimum depth for parking spaces plus the width of the aisle shall be sixty-two (62) feet (i.e., curb to curb) for nine (9) foot-wide spaces and sixty (60) feet (i.e., curb to curb) for ten (10) foot-wide spaces. 
Sec. 21.13. - Minimum Number of Handicapped Parking Spaces. 
Handicapped spaces shall be provided in each parking lot according to the requirements of Table 21.2. Such spaces shall be counted in meeting the off-street parking requirements of this Article, as specified in Table 21.3 of this Article. 
Table 21.2 
Minimum Number of Handicapped Spaces Required 

 
Sec. 21.14. - Specifications for Handicapped Parking Spaces. 
Handicapped parking spaces shall have an adjacent aisle five (5) feet wide, and one in every eight (8) handicapped spaces (but not less than one) shall be adjacent to an aisle eight (8) feet wide and the space shall be signed "van accessible." Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated. 

All handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the Georgia Accessibility Code. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved by a sign showing the symbol of accessibility, per applicable state law requirements. Such signs shall be located so that they cannot be obscured by a vehicle parked in that space. 

Source: De Chiara, Joseph, and Lee E. Koppelman. 1984. Time-Saver Standards for Site Planning. Figure 6.222, p. 679. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Sec. 21.15. - Off-Street Parking Requirements by Use. 
(a)  Required. Unless specifically provided otherwise in this Article, on each lot where a building, structure, or use exists, each site shall be designed to provide and shall provide for off-street parking in the minimum amounts and not to exceed the maximum amounts specified in Table 21.3 (including handicapped parking spaces). Requirements refer to one space per unit of measurement unless otherwise specifically provided. Square footages are measured on the basis of gross square footage unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(b)  Reduction or Alteration Prohibited. No existing or future off-street parking area shall be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum required number of spaces, or increased to more than the maximum permitted number of spaces, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards, unless specifically provided for in this Article. 
(c)  Applicability. This Section shall not be construed as requiring compliance of parking lots which lawfully existed on the effective date of this Article; provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator shall ensure parking lots that do not comply with this Article meet the requirements of this Article or substantially comply when a new development permit is required or a building permit is required to add additional building space on the site. If substantial redesign of the parking lot is required to comply with this Article in such cases of new development or building additions, the Zoning Administrator may accept substantial rather than complete compliance when the strict application of a requirement of this Article would pose substantial practical difficulty. 
_____ 
Table 21.3 
Minimum and Maximum Number of Off-Street Parking Spaces Required 

 
_____
( Ord. No. 348-13, § 9, 8-18-2011 ) 
Sec. 21.16. - Stacking Space Requirements for Drive-Through Facilities. 
Stacking spaces shall be provided for any use having a drive-through facility or areas having drop-off and pick-up areas in accordance with this Section. Stacking spaces shall begin at the window or communication/mechanical device (e.g., order board) first encountered by the vehicle user. 
(a)  Specific Commercial Facilities. Financial institutions with drive-through windows, car washes (automated or staffed facilities), drive-through photo finishing booths, drive-through coffee sales facilities, and any other uses with drive-through facilities except restaurants shall provide three (3) stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility. 
(b)  Restaurants. Restaurants with drive-through facilities shall at least provide five (5) stacking spaces for each window or drive-through service facility, free and clear of access easements if any and drives required for on-site circulation. 
Sec. 21.17. - Stacking Lane Specifications. 
The following general standards shall apply to all stacking spaces and drive-through facilities: 
(a)  Stacking spaces and lanes for drive-through stations shall not impede on and off site traffic movements, shall not cross or pass through off-street parking areas, and shall not create a potentially unsafe condition where crossed by pedestrian access to a public entrance of a building. 
(b)  Drive-through lanes shall be separated by striping or curbing from off-street parking areas. Individual lanes shall be striped, marked, or otherwise distinctly delineated. 
(c)  All drive-through facilities shall be provided with a bypass lane with a minimum width of ten (10) feet. 
Sec. 21.18. - Administrative Variances. 
The Zoning Administrator may allow parking above the maximum or twenty percent (20%) below the minimum required as specified in Table 21.3, on a case-by-case basis based upon the scale and impacts of the request, for good cause shown. The applicant shall make said request in writing which shall include documentation from an acceptable industry publication (e.g., Institute of Transportation Engineers, Urban Land Institute, American Planning Association, etc.) or by a study prepared by a qualified professional that documents parking requirements. In approving administrative variances that reduce the minimum parking requirements established in this Article, the Zoning Administrator may as a condition of approval, if applicable, require an area to be reserved or set-aside for additional parking area for future use if needed. 
Sec. 21.19. - Electric Vehicle Charging Stations. 
(a)  Electric vehicle charging stations may be counted toward satisfying minimum off street parking space requirements for non-single family uses. 
(b)  Electric vehicle charging stations must be reserved for charging electric vehicles. For purposes of this provision "charging" means that an electric vehicle is parked at an electric vehicle charging station and is connected to the battery charging station equipment. 
(c)  Vehicle charging equipment must be designed and located so as not to impede pedestrian, bicycle or wheelchair movement or create safety hazards on sidewalks. 
(d)  Information must be posted identifying voltage and amperage levels and any type of use, fees, or safety information related to the electric vehicle charging station. The information shall be posted on a sign not to exceed four square feet in total sign face area. 
(e)  Electric vehicle charging stations must be maintained in all respects, including the functioning of the equipment. A valid phone number, e-mail address, or other contact information must be provided on the equipment for reporting when it is not functioning properly or other problems are encountered. 
(f)  If proposed within the Historic Preservation District the electric vehicle charging station must receive a Certificate of Appropriateness form the Historic Preservation Commission. 
( Ord. No. 348-15, § 1, 3-16-2017 ) 
ARTICLE 22. - LOADING 

Sec. 22.1. - Off-Street Loading Required. 
On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, department store, wholesale store, grocery supermarket, hotel, hospital, mortuary, dry cleaning plant, retail business, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for the standing, loading, and unloading of such materials to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys, and private or public parking areas. 

Source: Stover, Vergil G., and Frank J. Koepke. 2002. Transportation and Land Development (2 nd Ed.). Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers. Figure 10-5, p. 10-9. 
_____
Sec. 22.2. - Loading Area Specifications. 
Unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator, loading spaces shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet wide, forty (40) feet long, with fourteen (14) feet of height clearance. When the development requires loading and unloading by full-size tractor-trailers, loading spaces shall be sixty (60) feet long with a sixty-three (63) foot apron, for a total approach zone of 155 feet. 
Source: De Chiara, Joseph, and Lee E. Koppelman. 1984. Time-Saver Standards for Site Planning. Figure 6.188, p. 652. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Sec. 22.3. - Loading Area Locations. 
Loading areas shall be located to the rear of the building unless site design precludes a rear location, in which case loading shall be to the side of a building. Loading areas shall not be permitted within front yards. 


Sec. 22.4. - Minimum Number of Off-Street Loading Spaces Required. 
Off-street loading space shall be provided according to the following table: 

 
Source: National Parking Association, 1992. Recommended Zoning Ordinance Provisions for Parking and Off-Street Loading Space. In Transportation and Land Development, 2nd Ed. 2002 (Washington, DC, Institute of Transportation Engineers, 2002, p. 10-8, Table 10-3). 
_____
ARTICLE 23. - OUTDOOR LIGHTING 

Sec. 23.1. - Findings. 
Sufficient lighting increases security and decreases opportunities for criminal activity. The overall perception of safety is greatly affected by lighting. Both sufficient lighting levels and proper glare control are critical to preserving visibility and helping pedestrians and drivers see potentially dangerous situations. Insufficient or uneven lighting can cast shadows where an assailant might hide. Security lighting does not prevent or stop crime, but it can help owners protect people and property. Too much light can also be a problem, creating an unattractive image or a nuisance to residents and unnecessarily light the night-time sky. Light with no useful purpose is considered light pollution, and certain types of light fixtures cause energy waste. 
Sec. 23.2. - Purpose and Intent. 
This Article is intended to reduce the problems created by improperly designed and installed outdoor lighting. The regulations are intended to eliminate problems of glare and minimize light trespass, with regulations that avoid unnecessary direct light from shining onto abutting properties or streets. 
Sec. 23.3. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Article, the following terms are defined: 
Candlepower: The unit of intensity of a light source in a specific direction. One candela directed perpendicularly to a surface one foot away generates one footcandle of light. 
Cobrahead light: A standard roadway light, usually mounted to a mast arm and suspended over a roadway at a height of 25 to 40 feet, and usually mounted on aluminum poles, and which do not always control glare. 
Direct light: Light emitted directly from the lamp, off of the reflector or reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens, of a luminaire. 
Fixturev The assembly that houses the lamp or lamps and can include all or some of the following parts: a housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and/or a refractor or lens. 
Footcandle: A unit of illuminance on a surface that is everywhere one foot from a uniform point source of light of one candle and equal to one lumen or candela per square foot (1 fc = 1 lumen/sq. ft.) or (candelas/distance sq.). One footcandle (FC) is the equivalent of 10.76 Lux (1 Lux = 0.0929 FC). 
Full cutoff luminaire: Outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that no direct light rays are emitted by the installed fixture at angles above the horizontal plane. 
Glare: Light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability to see, and in extreme cases causing momentary blindness, or that causes annoyance or discomfort. 
High-mast lights: Outdoor lighting with average heights of 60 to 100 feet, used for highway interchanges and sports fields. 
Illuminance: The area density of the luminous flux incident at a point on the surface. It is a measure of light incident on a surface, expressed in lux or footcandles. 
Isofootcandle plan: A site plan of a proposed development showing proposed outdoor illuminance with a series of isofootcandle lines that join points on a surface where the illuminance is the same. 
Light trespass: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
Luminaire: A complete lighting system, including a lamp or lamps and a fixture. This term shall be interpreted broadly as applying to all outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination. 
Outdoor lighting: The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by any man-made device located outdoors that produces light by any means; electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor lighting or reflective surfaces, lamps and similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Outdoor lighting includes but shall not be limited to outdoor lighting fixtures for the following, except as may be otherwise specifically exempted from the requirements of this Article: 
(a)  Buildings and structures, whether principal or accessory; 
(b)  Building overhangs and freestanding or attached canopies; 
(c)  Recreational areas; 
(d)  Parking lots; 
(e)  Landscaping; 
(f)  Signs; 
(g)  Private driveways and streets; and 
(h)  Exterior product display area, or interior product display when viewed from more than two feet outside the display area. 
Safety lighting: Exterior lighting that involves ensuring proper levels of illumination to provide safe working conditions, safe passage, and the identification of outdoor hazards. 
Security lighting: Exterior lighting installed solely to enhance the security of people and property. 
Sec. 23.4. - Exemptions. 
The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this Article: 
(a)  All temporary emergency lighting needed by police or fire departments or other emergency services. 
(b)  All hazard warning luminaires required by federal regulatory agencies. 
(c)  All vehicular luminaires. 
(d)  Safety lighting, as defined in this Article. 
(e)  Security lighting, as defined in this Article, including lighting activated by motion sensor devices. 
(f)  All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of natural gas or other fossil fuels. 
(g)  All outdoor light fixtures associated with airports, railroads, and public roads. 
(h)  Outdoor lighting fixtures temporarily installed for short events such as circuses, fairs, carnivals, or other civic, religious or educational temporary uses, and which is s discontinued immediately upon completion of the event or activity. 
Sec. 23.5. - Cut-off Fixtures. 
All luminaries not exempted from this Article hereafter installed for outdoor lighting shall be full cutoff luminaires, as defined by this Article, or another luminaire which does not emit any direct light above a horizontal plane through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the luminaire. Cut-off fixtures are not required for incandescent lighting with an intensity of 160 watts or less. 
Sec. 23.6. - Glare. 
Any luminaire that is aimed, directed, focused, or produces output such as to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential buildings on adjacent or nearby land, or to create glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways, shall be redirected or its light output controlled as necessary to eliminate such conditions. _____ 
Sec. 23.7. - Intensity Specifications. 
Illuminance levels for outdoor lighting fixtures shall comply with the standards in Table 23.1, measured at three feet above the ground or finished grade. 
Table 23.1 
Outdoor Lighting Intensity Regulations 

 

 
_____
( Ord. No. 348-13, § 10, 8-18-2011 ) 
Sec. 23.8. - Lighting Plan Required. 
A lighting plan, approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall be required for all non-single family residential developments of two (2) acres or more in size, and for community recreation, as defined, when lighting is proposed. Small sites with a limited number of fixtures are exempted from preparing and submitting a professional lighting plan, and it is the intent of this Section that the Zoning Administrator will exercise discretion to provide such relief where appropriate with regard to this lighting plan requirement. Where it has jurisdiction via a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission's approval of the lighting plan shall be required. 
Sec. 23.9. - Specifications for Lighting Plans. 
When required, lighting plans shall meet the specifications of this Section: 
(a)  Location. The location on the premises, of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other lighting devices. 
(b)  Type. Description or graphic depiction of the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors, and other lighting devices; such description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and drawings (including cross-sections where appropriate or required for compliance review). Light fixtures may be broadly categorized into four main types: low-level landscape lights; intermediate-height pedestrian lights; parking lot and roadway lights; and high-mast lights. 
(c)  Emissions or Intensity Measures. Areas on the premises of night illumination and the amount of light at various places, measured in footcandles. When required, the lighting plan shall consist of either isofootcandles (connecting points of equal light illumination levels, similar to a topographic contour) or a photometric grid with individual spot readings. 
(d)  Certification. A statement be the designing engineer, indicating that no direct light that exceeds the requirements or is otherwise inconsistent with this Article. 
(e)  Modification of Lighting Plan Requirements. The Zoning Administrator may modify the strict requirements for lighting plans when in his opinion an isofootcandle plan or photometric grid or other requirement of this Section is not necessary to secure and uphold the purposes of this Article. 
Sec. 23.10. - Description of Lamp Types. 
This Section provides descriptions of types of lamps that may be useful in preparing, reviewing and approving proposed outdoor lighting plans: 
(a)  Fluorescent lamps: Most fluorescent lamps are long and linear, making optical control difficult. Disadvantages include a tendency to produce glare. They have good color rendition, whitish appearance and superior life. Light output may be severely diminished by very cold weather. Fluorescent lamps are an excellent choice for low-level pedestrian lighting. 
(b)  Incandescent lamps: Incandescent lamps have superior color rendition and a warm, white appearance. Disadvantages include short lamp life and high energy cost. An advantage is they are inexpensive. Not recommended for intermediate-level pedestrian lights. 
(c)  Mercury vapor lamps: These lamps have excellent life but are not very energy efficient. They are strong in the blue-green end of the color spectrum but other than for foliage lighting they are not acceptable for color rendering properties. Not recommended for low-level landscape or intermediate-level pedestrian lights. May be appropriate for parking lot and roadway lights. 
(d)  Metal halide lamps: These lamps offer superior optical control and color rendition and a white light source. May be appropriate for parking lot and roadway lights; appropriate for high-mast lights. 
(e)  High-pressure sodium lamps. Efficiency drops when peripheral detection is important. They are low maintenance. The orange-yellow appearance and mediocre color rendition are disadvantages. Not recommended for low-level landscape lights or intermediate height pedestrian lights. Appropriate and preferred for parking lot and roadway lights and high-mast lights. 
(f)  Low-pressure sodium lamps. These lamps have poor optical control but a superior life. Color rendering properties are very poor. 
Sec. 23.11. - Specific Lighting Practices Prohibited. 
The following outdoor lighting practices are prohibited: 
(a)  Glass tubes filled with neon, argon, or other gas and used for outdoor lighting, or window or door outlining of a building. 
(b)  The internal illumination of canopies, constructed of transparent or translucent plastic and attached to a principal buildings. 
(c)  Metal halide, and/or quartz lighting, except when the designing engineer deems that color rendering is critical, as may be specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator as a part of an approved lighting plan for development within a commercial or industrial zoning district. 
(d)  The outdoor use of laser source light, search lights or any similar high intensity light, when used for purposes of advertising, attraction, or entertainment. 
(e)  Lighting underneath the ceiling of a freestanding canopy or accessory structure (e.g., gasoline pump island) that are not recessed into the ceiling of the canopy. 
Sec. 23.12. - Compliance with Codes. 
In addition to compliance with this Article, all outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with applicable state and/or local building code, electrical code, sign codes. Lighting activities that require a permit under such code or codes shall not take place until said permit, if required, is applied for and issued. 
Sec. 23.13. - Reference to Professional Standards. 
In administering the requirements of this Article, the Zoning Administrator may consult and may rely on professional standards for outdoor lighting, including but not limited to those that are or may in the future be published by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America, or similar reputable professional association. 
ARTICLE 24. - SIGNS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 24, §§ 24.1—24.33, and enacted a new Art. 24 as set out herein. Former Art. 24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 348-12, § 1, 5-19-2011. 

Sec. 24.1. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this Article include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  Provide a reasonable balance between the right of an individual to identify his or her business or express their thoughts and the right of the public to be protected against the visual discord resulting from the unrestricted proliferation of signs and advertising devices. 
(b)  Guard against an excess of large, aesthetically unappealing, and/or intense signs which cause visual blight on the appearance of the community. Visual blight adversely affects the aesthetic quality of life and traffic safety in the community for residents, businesses, pedestrians, and persons in vehicles. 
(c)  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare while protecting the rights of sign owners to expression and identification. 
(d)  Provide regulations that vary the sign area based on the zoning district. 
(e)  Provide regulations that are content neutral. It is not the intent to regulate the content of messages in any way. To accomplish this, these regulations do not distinguish between on-site or off-site sign content, nor do they distinguish between commercial and non-commercial content. Any sign permitted pursuant to this Article may contain commercial or non-commercial content. Sign allowances in this Article take into account the needs for off-premise signs and signs carrying messages of a non-commercial character. 
(f)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs. 
(g)  Insure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community. 
(h)  Eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays. 
(i)  Preserve and improve the appearance of the community as a place in which to live and to work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.2. - Authority and Scope. 
Findings Regarding Changeable Multiple Message Signs, Electronic. Changeable electronic multi message signs, which allow operators to change content from remote locations in a matter of seconds, have been shown to create possible threats to public safety. Such signs are erected for the purpose of trying to hold the attention of motorists by changing messages and pictures for short durations using a series of bright, colorful images produced mainly via LED (light emitting diode) technologies. Brightly lit signs that change messages every few seconds compel motorists to notice them, and they lure the attention of motorists away from what is happening on the road and onto the sign. Such signs pose public safety threats because if they attract a motorist's attention, the motorist will look at the sign and not at the road. Changeable electronic multiple message signs are also a threat to public safety because of their brightness, making them visible from great distances. Due to their nature of brightness and changing displays, changeable electronic multiple message signs are more distracting than signs which do not vary the message. Some such signs could, if unregulated, have the appearance of large, plasma-screen televisions. An electronic LED display contains brightly-lit text and graphics which can be seen from hundreds of feet away, drawing the attention of everyone within view. Unless otherwise regulated, such displays can be extremely bright since they are designed to be visible in bright sunlight and at night. Furthermore, the human eye is drawn to them far more strongly than to traditional illuminated signs. Such electronic LED displays can be seen from as far away as six-tenths of a mile, making them a distraction.. It takes a minimum of six seconds to comprehend the message on an electronic sign, which is three times the safe period for driver distraction. For these reasons, it is the intent of the City Council to allow changeable electronic multiple message signs subject to acceptable criteria. The City Council relies on the following studies and findings, among others, as empirical and professional justification for imposing these regulations: 
1.  Federal Highway Administration (FHWA). September 11, 2001. Research Review of Potential Safety Effects of Electronic Billboards on Driver Attention and Distraction . 
2.  University of North Carolina Highway Safety Research Center. May 2001. The Role of Driver Distraction in Traffic Crashes . 
3.  University of North Carolina Highway Safety Research Center. May 2003. Distractions in Everyday Driving . 
4.  Pettitt, M., Burnett, G., Stevens, A. 2005. "Defining Driver Distraction." Paper presented at World Congress on Intelligent Transport Systems, San Francisco, November 2005. 
5.  Wallace, B. 2003. "Driver Distraction by Advertising: Genuine Risk or Urban Myth?" Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers Municipal Engineer 156 September 2003 Issue ME3, Pages 185-190. 
6.  Scenic America. "Billboards in the Digital Age: Unsafe (and Unsightly) at any Speed." Scenic America Issue Alert 2 Electronic Signs. 
A Wisconsin Department of Transportation study examined crash rates on I-94 East and West adjacent to the Milwaukee County stadium, after a variable message sign that showed sports scores and ads had been installed and concluded that "it is obvious that the variable message sign has had an effect on traffic, most notably in the increase of the side swipe crash rate." An analysis of the 100-Car Naturalistic Driving Study, conducted by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, released in 2006, showed that taking one's eyes off the road for more than two seconds for any reason not directly related to driving (such as checking the rearview mirror) "significantly increased individual nearcrash/crash risk." A 1998 FHWA memo noted that digital signs raise "significant highway safety questions because of the potential to be extremely bright, rapidly changing, and distracting to motorists." A 2001 FHWA review of billboard safety studies found that "the safety consequences of distraction from the driving task can be profound." 
7.  Tantala Associates, LLC, 2010 "A Study of the Relationship Between Digital Billboards and Traffic Safety in Albuquerque, New Mexico", March 2010. 
8.  Tantala Associates, LLC, 2009 "An Update of the Study of the Relationship Between Digital Billboards and Traffic Safety in Cuyahoga, Ohio", November 2009. 
9.  Tantala Associates, LLC, 2010 "A Study of Relationship Between Digital Billboards and Traffic Safety in Henrico County and Richmond, Virginia", November 2010. 
10.  Outdoor Advertising Associates of America, Inc. "Digital Billboards Today", March 2011. 
This Article is adopted to serve substantial governmental interests of correcting and avoiding multiple problems that would occur without the regulation of signs. The regulations contained herein are no more extensive than necessary to serve the substantial governmental interests identified in this Article. It is not the intent of this Article to regulate the content of signs, but only their composition, type, location, distance from right-of-way, height, size, illumination, and in some cases the duration they may be displayed, or other non-content-based restrictions implied in this Article. It is not the intent of this Article to foreclose important and distinct mediums of expression for political, religious, or personal messages, on any sign permitted to be erected by this Article. These regulations shall not be construed as limiting the message content of any sign. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.3. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this Article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. As used in this Article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 
Abandoned sign: A permanent principal use sign on property containing a building or activity that has ceased operations. Permanent principal use signs on property shall be considered abandoned when there is clear evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds. 
Advertising device: Any structure or device erected or intended for the purpose of displaying advertising or for which is designed to or attracts attention to the premises, situated upon or attached to real property. For purposes of this Article, an advertising device is a "sign." 
Animated sign: A sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors which accomplishes such action, motion, sound, or changing colors with or without electrical energy. This includes signs with lights or other illuminating devices that blink, flash, fluctuate, or have a changing light intensity, brightness, or color. This definition does not include a "swinging sign" or "multiple message sign" as defined by this Article. For purposes of this Article, the transition of a message on an electronic multiple message sign shall not be considered "animation." Area of sign: The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character from the background against which it is placed. 
_____ 
_____
For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area, or only one face shall be measured in computing sign area if the display faces are the same size. The display of street address on a ground sign, wall, or window shall not be computed in determining the maximum allowable area of a ground, wall, or window sign. 
Awning: An architectural projection or shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building and composed of a covering of rigid or non-rigid materials and/or fabric on a supporting framework that may be either permanent or retractable. 
Awning sign: An awning that contains letters, numbers, symbols, pictures, logos, or visual display, or other communication, attached, painted on, or made an integral part of an awning. For purposes of this Article, "awning signs" shall be considered "wall signs." 
Banner: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this Article, a "banner" is a "sign." 
Building marker: Any sign cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material. 
Canopy, attached: A multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported by attachment to a building on one or more sides and also supported by columns at additional points. Signs placed on attached canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this Article. 
Canopy, freestanding: A multi-sided structure or architectural projection supported by columns. Signs placed on freestanding canopies are considered "wall signs" for the purposes of this Article. 
Canopy sign: A sign on a canopy. For purposes of this Article, a sign on a canopy is a "wall sign" (see figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 

Derelict sign: A sign that is dilapidated or in such condition as to create a hazard or nuisance, or to be unsafe or fail to comply with the Building or Electrical Codes applicable in the jurisdiction. 
Directory sign for multi-tenant development: A sign, distinguished from a project entrance sign, which is allowed on a premise with more than one tenant or occupants of a building. It may be freestanding or a building (wall) sign. Such signs are not usually visible from the public street right-of-way of a development which provides initial access to the property, but rather are located within the development, along a driveway, access way, or parking aisle. 

Dissolve: A mode of message transition on an electronic multiple message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity or pattern, where the first message gradually appears to dissipate and lose legibility simultaneously with the gradual appearance and legibility of the subsequent message. 
Double-faced sign: A sign which has two (2) display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is sixty (60) degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. Only one face shall be used in computing allowable sign area. 
Erect: To construct, build, raise, assemble, place, affix, attach, create, paint, draw, or in any other way bring into being or establish, but it shall not include any of the foregoing activities when performed as an incident to the change of advertising message or the normal maintenance or repair of a sign structure. 
Fade: A mode of message transition on an electronic multiple message sign accomplished by varying the light intensity, where the first message gradually reduces intensity to the point of not being legible and the subsequent message gradually increases intensity to the point of legibility. 
Flag: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, plastic, or natural or synthetic fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this Article, except as otherwise provided herein, a "flag" is a "sign." 
Frontage, building: The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular building in which an establishment is located. 
Frontage, road: The distance in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Ground sign: A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support (i.e., freestanding). A ground sign may consist of more than one sign panel, provided all such sign panels are attached to or integrated into one sign structure. All ground signs shall be designed in accordance with requirements of "Monument Signs" (see graphic below). 
Height of sign: The distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign, whether that highest point is the frame of the sign face or panel or the support of the sign. 

Highway sign: A sign within 60 feet of Interstate 985 right-of-way, oriented to and intended to be viewed by travelers on Interstate 985. Highway signs may be designed with a singular pole support. 
Holiday decorations: Displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance of religious, national, or state holidays, which are not intended to be permanent. 
Inflatable sign: Any sign that is or can be filled with air or gas. 
Internally illuminated sign: A sign illuminated by an internal light source which is viewed through a translucent panel. 
Marquee sign: A sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a marquee. For purposes of this Article, marquee signs shall be considered "wall signs." 
Master sign plan: A plan establishing parameters for the size, location, design, and color of signs on a property which contains multiple uses, buildings, or tenants but which is constructed or managed as a single development; or such a plan established as an alternative means of compliance to the provisions of this Article. 
Monument sign: A sign attached to a permanent foundation or decorative base that is self-supported. 
Multiple message sign: A sign, display, or device which changes the message or copy on the sign. Such a change of message or copy can be accomplished electronically, or by movement or rotation of panels or slats, or by changing the copy by manual means. 
Multiple message sign, electronic: Any "sign," as defined in this Article, which results in the illuminated display of messages or information by the use of a matrix of electric lamps (e.g., digital, LED (light emitting diode) or similar or refined display technology), or other electric methods, which allows the message change to be actuated by an electronic control mechanism. It is characteristic of such signs that the sequence of messages and the rate of change can be electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. Electronic multiple message signs are also "internally illuminated signs. 
Nit: A standard unit of luminance; a measurement of direct light (i.e., looking directly at the light source), used to describe displays. A "nit" is an amount of emanating light equal to one candela per square meter (cd/m2). 
Nonconforming sign: Any sign which lawfully existed on the effective date of this article but which does not conform to the provisions of this Article, or which does not comply with this Article due to amendments to this Article since the date of erection of the sign. 
Pennant: A small, triangular or rectangular flag or multiples thereof, made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, individually supported or attached to each other by means of a string, rope, or other material and meant to be stretched across or fastened to buildings, or between poles and/or structures, and which is designed to move in the wind. For purposes of this Article, pennants are "signs." 
Portable sign: Any sign whether on its own trailer, wheels, or otherwise, which is designed to be transported from one place to another. It is characteristic of a portable sign that the space provided for advertising messages may be changed at will by the replacement of lettering or symbols (i.e., a changeable copy sign). Even if the wheels or supports of such sign are removed and the sign converted and attached, temporarily or permanently, to the ground or other structure, said sign shall remain a portable sign. In addition, the following shall be deemed a portable sign: 
1.  An umbrella used for advertising. 
2.  A sign mounted or painted on a junk vehicle as defined by the Zoning Ordinance of Flowery Branch 
3.  A sidewalk sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
Portico: A porch or walkway, open to the outside air, that is covered by a roof supported by columns or pillars, typically leading to the entrance of a building. Signs attached to porticos are considered "wall signs" for purposes of this Article. 
Project entrance sign: A sign located at a discernible entrance into a particular subdivision, multi-family residential development, or office or industrial park. 
Projecting sign: A sign projecting more than fourteen (14) inches from the outside wall or walls of any building, or canopy, portico, or awning, upon which it is located (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Roof sign: A sign projecting higher than the front building wall or any sign supported by or attached to said roof. 
_____ 
Source: United States Sign Council. 2001. Guideline Code for Regulation of On-Premises Signs. 
_____
Sign: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, illuminated, or colored visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bring to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way, a driveway or parking lot with access to a public right-of-way, or from an adjacent property, except as specifically noted otherwise in this Article. For purposes of this Article, the term "sign" includes but is not limited to "banners," "balloons," "flags," "pennants," "streamers," "windblown devices," and "advertising devices." Furthermore, the term "sign" includes the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments, or other features used to draw the attention of the observers. 
Signable area: In the case of a wall sign, signable area shall be the building face on which the sign is proposed, excluding windows and doors. In the case of marquees or canopies, signable area shall be the area of the marquee or canopy wall on which the sign is proposed. For window signs, signable area shall be measured and calculated on the basis of the proportion of area within each individual window frame, not the total window area of all building windows visible from a street. 
Sign face: That part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Streamers: See "Pennants." 
Swinging sign: A sign other than an animated sign as defined by this Article, where the sign copy area is attached to a sign structure in a way that can be set in motion with pressure, and where the sign structure is attached to a building at a height above normal eye level. This term does not include any freestanding signs. A swinging sign may be considered in lieu of permitted wall signage. 
Temporary sign: A sign of a nonpermanent nature and erected for a limited duration. 
Transition: A visual effect used on an electronic multiple message sign to change one message to another. 
Visible: Capable of being seen (whether or not legible) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity. 
Wall sign: A single-sided sign with one visible face applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which if attached to a wall or portico and does not project more than fourteen (14) inches from the outside wall of such building or structure, or if on an awning or canopy, is flush with the material of said awning or canopy (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
Windblown or air-blown device: Any device not otherwise specifically defined in this Article, that is designed to inform or attract, whether or not such device carries a message, and which all or part of the device is set in motion by wind or mechanically compressed air. For purposes of this Article, windblown devices are "signs." 
Window sign: A sign installed on or within two (2) feet of an exterior window or door and intended to be visible from the exterior of the building. Displays which show products or depict services sold on the premises and which are more than two (2) feet from an exterior window or door shall not be classified as window signs (see also figure, "Types of Attached Signs"). 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.4. - Applicability. 
No sign shall be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained, except in conformance with this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.5. - Nonconforming Signs. 
A sign that lawfully existed on the effective date of this zoning ordinance may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
(a)  Shall not be repaired, rebuilt, replaced or altered after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage. 
(b)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity or value, including additional lighting. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign that is a multiple message sign but the messages are changeable only by manual means may continue to have its copy changed, and change copy, by any manual means. A nonconforming sign that is a multiple message sign but the messages are changeable by means of the movement or rotation of panels or slats may continue to have its copy changed, and change copy, by any such same means. A non-conforming sign that does not meet the definition of a "multiple message sign, electronic" as defined in this Article at the time it was nonconforming shall not be changed, modified, or retrofitted in any way so as to become a "multiple message sign, electronic." 
(d)  This Section shall not apply to any sign which according to the application of state or federal law or rule is allowed to remain or to be rebuilt or reconstructed, unless just compensation is paid. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.6. - Sign Limitations When Nonconforming Sign Exists. 
No sign or advertising device shall be erected for the same establishment on the same lot with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or made to conform to the provisions of this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.7. - Exempt Signs. 
The following types of signs are specifically exempted from compliance with this Article. 
(a)  Flags, as many as four per lot, when designed and displayed in a way that allows for routine, daily raising and lowering of the flags, not exceeding forty (40) square feet. Poles for such flags shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height. This provision does not permit or allow for the placement of small flags attached to vehicles, light poles, or other means other than that specifically described in this paragraph. 
(b)  Street address identifiers and building identification numbers on multi-tenant buildings which are essential to the location of such buildings. 
(c)  Signs not oriented or intended to be legible from a public right-of-way, private road or driveway, or other private property. Signs or stickers which are designed to be read only from close range (i.e., five feet), attached to a device or structure more than twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way of a road, not to exceed one (1) square feet each sign or sticker. Examples include but are not limited to the following: lettering, credit card stickers, and inspection certificates on gasoline pumps; "flammable" signs on enclosures for fuel canisters, and similar information. 
(d)  Display boards located next to drive-through lanes, not exceeding six (6) feet in height or thirty-six (36) square feet in area. 
(e)  Signs erected more than two (2) feet inside a building. 
(f)  Building markers and integral decorative or architectural features. 
(g)  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs, installed within the right-of-way of a public street under the authority of the government with jurisdiction. 
(h)  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs (including direction of travel, speed limits, etc.) along private streets and driveways, and in off-street parking lots that are installed per the requirements of this ordinance and/or the Zoning Administrator and which do not exceed four (4) square feet each. 
(i)  Directory signs for multi-tenant developments, as defined by this Article, which do not exceed four (4) square feet each nor six (6) feet in height. 
(j)  Public notice signs and signs of a public interest, erected by or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his duty. 
(k)  Holiday lights and decorations. 
(l)  Handicapped parking signs, when required per local, state or federal law. 
In any case where a sign of a certain size is exempted by this Section, and an applicant desires to erect a larger size sign than the area of sign exempted but said sign is not allowed, said sign shall only be permitted only upon approval of a variance in accordance with the provisions of this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.8. - Prohibited Signs. 
The following signs and devices shall be prohibited: 
(a)  Animated signs, but not including multiple-message signs and multiple-message signs, electronic, as defined. 
(b)  Derelict signs. 
(c)  Inflatable signs, except as may be permitted in association with a temporary event approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(d)  Pennants, streamers, and wind-blown or air-blown devices. 
(e)  Portable signs. 
(f)  Roof signs. 
(g)  Signs painted on or attached to a utility pole, or painted on or attached to tree, rock or other natural feature. 
(h)  Signs lit with neon, including neon lighting outlining of windows, doors, or other parts of a building or structure, but excluding incidental signs internal to an establishment and not visible at a distance of more than two feet outside the establishment. 
(i)  Signs attached to freestanding walls (including retaining walls) or fences or poles. 
(j)  Any flag for which there is no symbol, emblem, text, number, or copy whatsoever on the flag (i.e., colored flags with no message). 
(k)  Any sign erected or maintained where, by reason of its position, wording, illumination, size, shape or color, it may obstruct the view of oncoming vehicles or impair, obscure, interfere with the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device. No sign shall contain or be an imitation of an official governmental traffic control sign, signal, or emergency vehicle device. 
(l)  Any sign erected, located, or maintained in such a manner as to interfere with safe and free ingress and egress of any door, emergency exit, driveway, street, or roadway. 
(m)  Any sign that interferes with utilities such as water mains and hydrants, sanitary sewerage, gas, electricity, and communications equipment or lines, or that interfere with natural or manmade storm water drainage facilities. 
(n)  Strings of lighted bulbs, except as part of holiday decorations. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.9. - Uniform Sign Plans Required. 
A uniform sign plan is required for any multi-tenant nonresidential development containing three or more buildings before any building signs or freestanding signs for the development or the development's tenants may be erected on the property. The purpose of a uniform sign plan is to ensure that individual establishments within a multi-tenant nonresidential development are coordinated with regard to design features, such as color, font, design of sign face, sign face module, sign structure, etc. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.10. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24.11. - Specifications for Uniform Sign Plans. 
Uniform sign plans, when required or when proposed for purposes of modifying the requirements of this Article, shall at minimum consist of the following: 
(a)  Drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all signs to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(b)  Design standards such that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
Following approval by the City, the requirements of the uniform sign plan shall be referenced in documents involving the sale, lease, or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development. Upon such approval, said uniform sign plan shall be binding on the owner, and any lessees, subtenants, purchasers, or other occupants, until or unless the uniform sign plan is replaced with another approved uniform sign plan. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.12. - Permits and Conformance to Codes. 
(a)  Any freestanding or building sign that requires a building permit according to the Building Code applicable in the jurisdiction shall be obtained prior to installation or placement of any such freestanding or building sign. 
(b)  All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with all applicable Building Code requirements. All electrical service to a sign shall be in compliance with the applicable Electrical Code. 
(c)  If plans are required for issuance of a building permit for a sign, the plans shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the applicable Building Code by a structural engineer registered in the State of Georgia, or be prepared using standard drawings prepared by a structural engineer or other qualified professional meeting or exceeding all requirements of the applicable Building Code. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.13. - Certificate of Appropriateness. 
Signs are external environmental features that can detract from historic character if not considered in the proper context. Signs located in a designated historic district or otherwise subject to the jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission shall require a Certificate of Appropriateness to be issued by the Historic Preservation Commission. In approving signs, the Historic Preservation Commission may rely on design guidelines approved by City Council or the Historic Preservation Commission. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.15. - Sign Maintenance. 
All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and condition. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.16. - Situations Where Maintenance is Required. 
Upon discovery of a sign in need of maintenance, the City shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the property on which the sign is located if the owner of the sign itself cannot be determined. Said notice shall state the item or items requiring repair or maintenance. The owner shall have thirty (30) days in which to repair or maintain the sign before a citation is issued. If the owner has failed to make repairs or the necessary maintenance within that time, the City initiate enforcement proceedings as required to cure violation of this Article. Situations constituting the need for maintenance include but are not limited to the following (other similar conditions of disrepair or lack of maintenance may be determined): 
(a)  Lettering or other elements of the sign have become detached or have fallen off the sign or become misaligned. 
(b)  Painted surfaces on the sign or sign structure have begun to peel, flake over a significant portion of the sign, or have faded or oxidized to an extent that the sign no longer displays the message as originally intended. 
(c)  A significant number of the bricks, stones, or other materials on the structural base of a sign have become detached or have fallen off or have become misaligned. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.17. - Removal of Certain Signs. 
(a)  Unlawful signs. If any sign is installed, erected, or constructed in violation of this Article, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon notice either written or verbal notification from the City shall remove prohibited signs immediately. If the sign will require additional time to remove, because of its structure or size, then a reasonable time frame will be given by the City in which the signage is to be removed. Any such sign not removed or properly altered within the time period allotted from the notice, may then be removed by the City and all costs charged to the owner, agent, or person having beneficial interest of the building or premises upon which such sign was located, or in the sign itself. 
(b)  Derelict signs. Should any sign become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe in the opinion of the City, the owner or person or firm maintaining the sign shall, upon written notice from said enforcement officer, forthwith in the case of immediate danger and in any case within ten (10) days, remove such sign or secure it in a manner approved by the City. Any such sign not removed or secured within ten (10) days from the written notice may be removed by the City and all costs charged to the owner, agent, or person having beneficial interest of the building or premises upon which such sign was located, or in the sign itself. 
(c)  Signs of a temporary or quasi-temporary nature. Pennants, streamers, banners, wind-blown devices, and temporary signs that do not conform to the provisions of this Article upon its adoption or amendment shall be removed immediately. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.18. - Height of Ground Signs. 
The maximum height of any ground (freestanding) sign regulated by this Article, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Ordinance, as measured from road grade, shall be as follows: 
(a)  One Hundred (100) feet, within 660 feet of the right-of-way of Interstate 985, for highway signs only, on properties zoned HB (Highway Business), M-1 (Light Industrial), and M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing and Industrial) only. 
(b)  Fifteen (15) feet for signs on properties in HB (Highway Business), M-1 (Light Industrial), and M-2 (Heavy Manufacturing and Industrial) zoning districts; provided, however, that for properties with a land area of 35 acres or more and fronting on an interchange of Interstate 985 shall be permitted to have up to two ground signs (where permitted) not to exceed Thirty (30) feet in height. 
(c)  Ten (10) feet in NS (Neighborhood Shopping) and CBD (Central Business District) zoning districts. 
(d)  Ten (10) feet for signs in the O-P (Office-Professional), INST (Institutional), TND (Traditional Neighborhood Development), and R-3 (Residential Multi-Family) zoning districts. 
(e)  Six (6) feet maximum height for signs on properties in A (Agricultural), R-1 (Residential Low-Density), and R-2 (Residential Moderate-Density) zoning districts. This provision shall not apply to subdivision identification monuments, which shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.19. - Height of Wall Signs. 
No wall sign shall exceed the height of the building or structure on which it is placed. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.20. - Sign Setback. 
There shall be minimum required setback for ground signs of two (2) feet. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.21. - Types of Signs Permitted. 
In addition to the general provisions regulating signs established in this Article, sign permissions shall be based on the types of sign permitted, and the zoning district according to Table 24.1 and 24.2 of this Article. When the land use is mixed or not clearly evident. the Zoning Administrator shall make the final determination. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.22. - Number of Signs Limited. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise in Tables 24.1 and 24.2 of this Article, a property shall be limited to only one (1) sign of the type permitted. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected to exceed the maximum number of signs as specified in Tables 24.1 and 24.2, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.23. - Area of Signs Limited. 
No sign shall exceed the maximum area of the sign as specified for the type of sign in Tables 24.1 and 24.2 of this Article. 
Table 24.1 
Sign Area Permitted By Sign Type by Residential Zoning District 
(Numbers are Square Feet) 

 
Table 24.2 
Sign Area Permitted By Sign Type by Nonresidential Zoning District 
(Numbers are Square Feet) 

 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
_____
Sec. 24.24. - Illumination. 
(a)  Signs in single-family residential zoning districts shall not be illuminated. 
(b)  Externally illuminated signs shall be lighted by a white, steady stationary light of reasonable intensity shielded and directed solely at the sign, so as not to cause glare or spill light into the road right-of-way or up into the sky. 
(c)  Neon tubing shall not be permitted. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.25. - Temporary Special Event Signage. 
Temporary signs and advertising devices may be permitted on commercial, industrial and institutional properties subject to the issuance of a special event sign permit by the Zoning Administrator. Such temporary signs and advertising devices shall conform to the following: 
(a)  Only four temporary special event sign permits shall be issued to any one business or institution in any calendar year. 
(b)  Permit shall be valid for a maximum of thirty (30) days. 
(c)  One banner shall be permitted per business, which shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size or fifteen (15) feet in height. Such banner may be temporarily placed on the subject property or attached to a building wall. In addition to a banner, two temporary ground signs for each roadway frontage not exceeding four square feet each shall be permitted per lot. For lots with buildings containing multi tenants and where businesses have applied for simultaneous special event signs, no more than three temporary ground signs may be permitted per roadway frontage at any one time. 
(d)  Pennants, streamers, and other wind-blown devices shall not be permitted as part of a temporary special event sign permit. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.26. - Signs on Corner and Double-Frontage Lots. 
(a)  Wall signs. With regard to wall sign allowances, if a building, structure, or freestanding canopy faces more than one road frontage, each wall facing a road frontage shall be permitted to have the sign area specified for such building, structure, or freestanding canopy in this Article. 
(b)  Ground signs . With regard to ground sign allowances, if a property faces more than one road frontage, each road frontage shall be permitted to have the number of signs and sign area specified for such property in this Article. 
(c)  Transfer of allowances between road frontages . The sign area allotted to one road frontage or building frontage shall not be transferred to another road frontage or building frontage. 
(d)  More than two frontages . If a property has more than two road frontages and/or building faces, it shall be permitted ground and wall signage on only two of the property frontages or building faces, respectively. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.27. - Signs in PUD Zoning District. 
For signs in the PUD zoning district, each development shall conform to the sign regulations established as part of the zoning approval for the development. If no such regulations exist, each portion of a development existing on the effective date of this zoning ordinance shall not exceed the sign permissions of this Article for the zoning district most comparable to that portion of the development, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Any sign which has not been previously approved as part of the zoning approval for the development or subsequently permitted and erected shall require submission and approval of a uniform sign plan as specified in this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.28. - Variances. 
(a)  Application . A request for a variance to the provisions of this Article may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Application Requirements . The application shall be accompanied by an elevation drawing and/or plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed sign. The Zoning Administrator may require other information about the variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. Variance applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the City Council by resolution from time to time. 
(c)  Procedure . Upon the filing of any complete application for a variance, a public hearing shall be scheduled and held by the City Council on the proposed variance. Public notice of the variance application shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the local jurisdiction at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing of City Council Such notice shall state the purpose, location, time and date of the public hearing, and the nature of said application. 
(d)  Authority . City Council shall have authority to grant variances to this Article, upon application by a property owner and after receiving comment and recommendations by the Zoning Administrator and after holding a public hearing. 
(e)  Notification Following Decision. City Council shall render a decision within thirty-two (32) days after the initial public hearing on the proposed variance. The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant,, of the Council's decision within five (5) days after it has rendered its decision. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.29. - Criteria for Acting Upon Sign Variances. 
In acting upon variances, the Zoning Administrator shall submit written findings and the City Council shall consider the following criteria and the extent to which they support or fail to support the sign variance application: 
(a)  Whether there are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner's or occupant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
(b)  As a result of such unusual circumstance or conditions, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty that renders it difficult to carry out the provisions of this Article. 
(c)  The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(d)  The variance approved is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the sign. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.30. - Regulations for Signs in Historic Districts. 
Notwithstanding regulations of this Article to the contrary, signs within the Historic District shall require conformance to the City of Flowery Branch Historic District Sign Ordinance (Ordinance No. 441), as may be amended from time to time. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.31. - State Regulation of Signs. 
Where state sign law (see O.C.G.A. 32-6) and/or regulations apply, and there is conflict or overlap with this ordinance, the more restrictive requirements shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.32. - Changeable Electronic Multiple Message Signs. 
(a)  Definition . For purposes of this Section, "electronic multiple message sign" shall mean any sign, as defined in Sec. 24.2 of this Article other than a public variable message sign, which is erected by a city, county, or state government for traffic communications purposes which results in the illuminated display of messages or information by the use of a matrix of electric lamps (e.g., digital, LED (light emitting diode) or similar or refined display technology), movable discs, movable panels, light apertures, or other methods, which allows the message change to be actuated by a control mechanism rather than manually changing the message; and which changes the message more often than twice daily. It is characteristic of such signs that the sequence of messages and the rate of change can be electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. 
(b)  Purposes . This Section establishes requirements associated with the changeable electronic multiple message signs, including but not limited to the duration of message, transition time, light intensity, malfunction, and permitting, to ensure reasonable and safe standards are met to protect the motoring public. 
(c)  Zoning Districts Permitted . Such signs shall only be permitted in HB (Highway Business), M-1 (Light Manufacturing and Industrial), and M-2 (Heavy) Manufacturing and Industrial) zoning districts. 
(d)  Area and Height . No such sign shall exceed the area or height specified for the type of sign for which it is defined and permitted under the terms of this Article. 
(e)  Separation . For Highway Signs and any other sign regulated by the Georgia Department of Transportation, no such sign shall be located within 5,000 feet of another changeable electronic multiple message sign on the same side of the highway and no such sign shall be within a 2,600 foot radius of another changeable electronic multiple message sign. For all other signs, no such sign shall be located within a 1,000 foot radius of another changeable electronic multiple message sign. 
(f)  Nature of the Display . Nothing in this Section shall be construed to permit or authorize the flashing or variation of light intensity of an individual message; such flashing or variation constitutes an "animated sign" as defined in Sec. 24.2 and prohibited by Sec. 24.8 of this Article. 
(g)  Duration of Message . Each multiple message shall remain fixed for at least 10 seconds. 
(h)  Transition Time . When a message is changed, it shall be accomplished in less than one-tenth (1/10) of a second and shall not use fading, swiping, or other animated transition methods. 
(i)  Illumination and Brightness . No electronic multiple message signs may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle. No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it interferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal. The maximum illumination, intensity, or brightness of electronic signs shall not exceed 5,000 nits (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours, or 500 nits (candelas per square meter) between dusk to dawn. The sign must have an automatic phased proportional dimmer control, photocell or other light sensing device, or a scheduled dimming timer, or another approved device, which produces a distinct illumination change that reduces nighttime brightness levels (compared to daytime brightness levels). The applicant shall provide written certification from the sign manufacturer that the light intensity has been factory pre-set or can be programmed not to exceed the levels specified in this subsection; end-user manipulation of pre-set levels or to exceed those specifications herein shall not be permitted. Unless another industry standard is accepted, the measurement for purposes of this paragraph shall be at any point ten (10) feet from the surface of the electronic multiple message sign. 
(j)  Freeze of Display When Malfunction Occurs . Such signs shall include a default designed to freeze a display in one still position if a malfunction occurs. 
(k)  Sequencing of Messages Prohibited . Using two or more successive screens to convey a message that will fit on one (1) screen shall be prohibited. 
(l)  Permit Requirements . In addition to those permit requirements established in Section 24.12 of this Article relative to permits for signs generally, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to impose additional permit requirements specific to changeable electronic multiple message signs and applications therefor, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  Description or graphic depiction of the type of internal illumination technology; and 
2.  A drawing or schematic prepared by an illumination engineer showing the amount of light designed to emanate from the proposed sign at the highway or public road to which the sign is directed, and at any highway or public road to which the proposed sign is visible. Said drawing or schematic shall show either is of foot-candles, (i.e., connecting points of equal light illumination levels, similar to a topographic contour), nits or a photometric grid with individual spot readings; and 
3.  A statement certified by an engineer, acceptable to the Building Inspector, demonstrating that the weight of the sign upon installation has sufficient footing and other characteristics sufficient to ensure the sign will be safely secured and able to withstand wind resistance as may be customary for similar structures according to the applicable Building Code; and 
4.  Other information as may be reasonably required by the Zoning Administrator to ensure compliance with the purpose and regulations of this Section, Article 24 of this Zoning Ordinance, and the purposes and intentions of this Zoning Ordinance generally. 
These permit requirements shall be submitted on application forms prepared by the Zoning Administrator. These permit requirements are applicable to both the construction of a new changeable electronic multiple message sign and the re-facing of an existing sign with a changeable electronic multiple message sign. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 24.33. - Historic District Sign Ordinance. 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
This ordinance shall be and is known and may be cited as the "Flowery Branch Historic District Sign Ordinance." 
Sec. 1.2. - Purpose and intent. 
Signs play an important role in the attractiveness and appearance of Flowery Branch's Historic District. The design, size, number, and placement of signs contribute to the overall environment of the building, street, and district. Because signs strongly influence the perception of the establishment, building, street view, and the historic district, there is a public interest in ensuring that signs are well designed and carefully placed and properly maintained in accordance with the overall desired character of the Flowery Branch Historic District. 
This ordinance supplements existing sign regulations of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance (Ordinance No. 348 Article 24) with sign regulations specifically designed to ensure compatibility and pedestrian scale of all signage in the Flowery Branch Historic District. 
Sec. 1.3. - Applicability. 
This ordinance shall apply within the Historic District in the City of Flowery Branch, as designated by ordinance (Ordinance No. 376) and as may be amended from time to time. 
If a particular property is added to the City of Flowery Branch Historic District, as established in Ordinance No. 376, said property shall automatically be subjected to the requirements of this ordinance. If a particular property is lawfully removed City of Flowery Branch Historic District, as established in Ordinance No. 376, said property shall no longer be required to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
If the City of Flowery Branch designates a historic property by ordinance after the effective date of this ordinance, development within said property designated a historic landmark or historic property shall require compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 1.4. - General provisions. 
No sign shall be permitted, erected, established, or allowed to be erected or established, within the area governed by this ordinance, unless it is in conformity with this ordinance. It shall be unlawful to erect any sign in the area governed by this ordinance unless a certificate of appropriateness is granted by the Historic Preservation Commission, except as may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to authority of this Ordinance or the city's Historic Preservation Ordinance (Ordinance No. 375) to issue certain sign permits, exemptions, and temporary sign permits without the approval of the Historic Preservation Commission. 
Sec. 1.5. - Definitions, interpretations, and conflicts. 
(a)  Definitions . Definitions of the types of signs and sign-related definitions shall be as defined in Article 24, Sec. 24.3, of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. Definitions of terms related to historic preservation shall be as defined in the Flowery Branch Historic Preservation Ordinance (Ordinance No. 375). Definitions of terms related to historic preservation provided in the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22 shall also apply in the administration of this ordinance and shall control in the event of a conflict in the interpretation of definitions applicable in the administration of this Ordinance. 
(b)  Interpretations of Terms Not Defined. If a particular word, term, or phrase is not defined in the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance or other ordinance or state law referenced in this ordinance, and such term is not explicitly defined herein or implicit in the provisions of this Ordinance, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to interpret the meaning of the term in question using customary dictionary definitions or other appropriate means. 
(c)  Additional Interpretations . Where this ordinance uses the term "shall," it shall be considered mandatory to comply with a provision using that term. Where this ordinance uses the term "should," it shall be considered a guideline (strongly recommended but discretionary as to whether the provision using that term is complied with). In cases where an applicant wants to establish a sign in a manner that is inconsistent with a guideline or other statement using the word "should," it shall be the responsibility of an applicant to demonstrate why the guideline cannot be complied with. In this sense, guidelines can form the basis for decision-making under the terms of this ordinance and may be used to disapprove sign permit applications. Similarly, when the term "should" is used, the Historic Preservation and Zoning Administrator (whichever has jurisdiction over the determination) are authorized to waive the applicability of one or more guidelines or statements using the word "should." 
(d)  Relationship to State Law . This ordinance shall not be construed as providing authority for actions which are not specifically authorized by the Georgia Historic Preservation Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.). 
(e)  Remedy for Conflicts. In the event that this Ordinance conflicts with the provisions of the City's Historic Preservation Ordinance (Ordinance No. 375), the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. In the event of any other conflicts between this Ordinance and other municipal ordinances, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. 
Sec. 1.6. - Relationship to Zoning Ordinance Provisions for Signs. 
(a)  Exempted Signs. Signs that are exempted by Sec. 24.7 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall be similarly exempt from the requirements of this Ordinance, and no Certificate of Appropriateness shall be required for any such exempted signs. 
(b)  Prohibited Signs. Signs that are prohibited by Sec. 24.8 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall be prohibited in the area subject to this Ordinance. 
(c)  Maintenance and Removal of Signs. Provisions regarding the maintenance and removal of signs as specified in Article 24 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall continue to apply to all signs that are regulated by this Ordinance. 
(d)  Nonconforming Signs . Sec. 24.5 and Sec. 24.6 of the City of Flowery Branch zoning ordinance, regarding nonconforming signs, shall apply to signs that do not conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(e)  Permitted Signs. The regulations specifying the types and numbers of signs, as provided in Article 24 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, shall be inapplicable and superseded by the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(f)  Dimensional Requirements. Height, setback, and area requirements for signs by zoning district, as provided in Article 24 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, shall be inapplicable and superseded by the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(g)  Special Event and Temporary Signage. Sec. 24.26 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall continue to apply, and property owners in the Flowery Branch historic district may apply for permits for temporary signs and special events.. 
(h)  Permits and Codes. Provisions that require a permit for signs, and the process of considering sign permits, as provided in Sec. 24.12 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, shall continue to apply. 
Sec. 1.7. - Content of Signs Not Regulated. 
The content of signs is not regulated by this ordinance, and the content of the message to be conveyed shall not be considered in making decisions pursuant to this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 2. - DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 2.1. - Proportionality. 
Signs shall be sized in proportion to the building. Notwithstanding the maximum areas allowed under the terms of this ordinance, an individual sign may be disapproved if it is found to be excessive or non-proportional in relation to the building on which it is placed or which it serves. 
Sec. 2.2. - Sign Materials. 
(a)  Exposed surfaces of signs must be constructed of or appear to be constructed of metal, glass, stone, concrete, brick, or wood, or similar approved material. If synthetic materials are authorized, they shall have the same finished appearance as the materials specified here. 
(b)  Plastic substrate, plywood or unfinished wood are not appropriate materials for signs and shall not be permitted. 
Sec. 2.3. - Professional Fabrication. 
Unprofessionally fabricated signs shall not be approved. Hand painted or hand made signs may be submitted for approval but if they are deemed unprofessional in appearance they shall be rejected. 
Sec. 2.4. - Shape. 
Signs should typically be square or rectangular; provided, however, this shall not prevent the Historic Preservation Commission from approving individual signs that may be circular or some other shape, or shaped like a particular object (e.g., a sign in the shape of a shoe for a shoe store). 
Sec. 2.5. - Illumination of Signs. 
(a)  Internally illuminated signs, and internally illuminated awnings are not appropriate in the historic district and shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Neon lighting is not permitted in the area subject to this ordinance. 
(c)  No animated, flashing or electronically changeable copy signs shall be permitted. 
(d)  No colored lights shall be used. 
(e)  If signs are illuminated, they shall be externally lit. Lighting directed toward a sign shall be shielded or recessed so that it illuminates only the face of the sign and does not shine directly into a public right-of-way or sidewalk (see figure). 

ARTICLE 3. - TYPES OF SIGNS PERMITTED; REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 3.1. - Generally. 
Signs not specifically described in this Section shall be prohibited. For a summary of the requirements of this Article, see Table 3.1. 
Sec. 3.2. - Wall Signs. 
(a)  Wall signs shall be mounted flush against the facade of the building adjacent to the front entryway of the unit (see figure). 
(b)  Appropriate locations for wall signage on buildings with more than one story shall be in the lintel space which separates the storefront from the upper floor, and the space above the transom in the storefront, where one exists (see figure). Wall signs should be located on flat, unadorned parts of the building facade, somewhere above storefront display windows (where they exist) and below second-story windows (where they exist). If the building facade or storefront has a lintel strip or signboard, the wall sign should be placed directly on it. Wall signs should be located centrally on the facade. Sign boards should not exceed two and one half (2.5) feet in height. 
(c)  Wall signs should be attached through joints in the masonry rather than the brick itself. 
(d)  No sign shall be permitted that, when mounted flush against the facade of the building, protrudes more than six (6) inches from the facade, without the specific approval of the Historic Preservation Commission. 


Table 3.1  Summary of Specific Sign Requirements  (Refer to specific sections for requirements) 

 
(e)  There is a maximum of two (2) wall signs per building facade of the leasable space. 
(f)  Wall signs, individually or in total allowed, shall not exceed more than thirty (30) percent of the wall area on which they are displayed. 
Sec. 3.3. - Canopy and Awning Signs. 
(a)  Storefront awnings (see figure) should be positioned either above the display window and below the transom window(s), or above both the display and transom windows but below the sign board area, cornice, or spandrel, where these architectural features exist. Signs should be silk-screened or sewn onto the awning fabric, and they should be placed on the valance of the awning. Signs on canopies should be located on the primary face or top edge (or front-angled or sloped part) of canopies. 
(b)  Canopy signs shall have a ground clearance of no less than eight feet above the lowest ground elevation (see figure). 
(c)  Canopy signs shall cover no more than sixty-five (65) percent of the area of the side faces (awning flaps) of the canopy and no more than forty (40) percent of the front (or front-angled or sloped) face of the canopy. 
Sec. 3.4. - Window Signs. 
(a)  Window signs (see figure) may be displayed on or in display windows on the ground floor. 
(b)  When window signage is provided, painting is required. Applied vinyl letters are not allowed. 
(c)  In no case shall any window sign be installed above the level of second floor windows. 
(d)  Window signs shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area of the business or establishment. 
(e)  The number of window signs for any individual business or establishment is not limited by this ordinance but limitations may be imposed via the certificate of appropriateness. 

(f)  Window signs should be placed approximately three and one-half (3.5) feet above the sidewalk. 
(g)  Window signs should not extend within eighteen (18) inches from the top or bottom of the display window glass. 
Sec. 3.5. - Projecting Signs. 
(a)  Projecting signs are permissible (see figure), but the Historic Preservation Commission may restrict them if other alternatives (wall, window, door, and awning) signs are also present or proposed. If a projected sign is authorized, it shall meet the specifications of this section. 
(b)  Projecting signs are typically placed near the entry door. 
(c)  Projecting signs shall project perpendicularly from the building. 
(d)  Projecting signs shall be secured in place with a frame mount assembly. 
(e)  Projecting signs do not necessarily have to be entirely stationary; they may suspended from an awning or similar type structure or affixed to a bracket-mount to the building or structure in a manner where the sign face sways; such motion shall not make a swinging sign a prohibited animated sign. 
(f)  Any sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy (including awnings), shall be located perpendicular to the wall surface of a building. 
(g)  All projecting signs shall have a ground clearance of no less than eight (8) feet above the lowest ground elevation. 
(h)  Such signs shall project no more than thirty-six (36) inches from the building face. 
(i)  Projecting signs shall be limited to one (1) per business or establishment. 
(j)  No projecting sign shall exceed an area of nine (9) square feet per sign face. 
(k)  Projecting signs shall not be illuminated. 
(l)  If applicable, projecting signs shall obtain an encroachment permit from the City Council. 
Sec. 3.6. - Door Signs. 
(a)  Signs on doors should be located on or in the glazing of the doors. Letters must be painted - vinyl letters are not allowed. 
(b)  There shall be no more than two (2) door signs for any individual business or establishment. 
(c)  The maximum area for any individual door sign shall be one and one-half (1½) square feet. 
(d)  There shall be a maximum of three (3) square feet total area of door signs allowed for any single business or establishment. 
Sec. 3.7. - Display Boards. 
(a)  One display board shall be permitted per establishment, subject to compliance with the provisions of this Section. 
(b)  Moveable display boards, when displayed within a window on the ground floor display boards shall not count as window signs in terms of maximum allowable window sign area. 
(c)  Display boards that are permanently placed on a wall (e.g., a wall mounted display box) shall count as wall signs in terms of maximum allowable wall sign area, but they shall not be counted in terms of the maximum number of wall signs allowed. 
(d)  Display boards shall not exceed an area of four (4) square feet per sign face. 

Sec. 3.8. - Permanent Principal Use Ground Signs. 
(a)  Ground signs shall only be permitted in the front yard of properties containing a detached, single-family residence that has been converted to office, institutional, retail, service, or commercial use, and/or a commercially designed building with an appropriate landscaped front yard area. 
(b)  The maximum height of any ground sign which may be permitted pursuant to this ordinance shall be eight (8) feet. 
(c)  Except for temporary signs permitted by the Zoning Administrator, any permanent ground sign permitted pursuant to this ordinance shall be supported by at least two (2) wooden posts, no less than four inches by four inches. However, the Historic Preservation Commission may allow single post signs and metal posts, if deemed more compatible with the building, property, and/or surroundings. 
(d)  No more than two (2) ground signs shall be permitted per property frontage. 
(e)  No ground sign shall exceed an area of thirty-two (32) square feet per sign face. 
(f)  If two ground signs are erected, the second sign shall be no larger than eight (8) square feet in area. 
Sec. 3.9. - A-Frame Signs. 
(a)  Movable sandwich signs, also called A-frame signs, may be used in the historic district, limited to one per business or establishment. 
(b)  Such sign(s) which shall be temporarily placed on the ground in front of the business, may only be used during hours the business is open, and shall be removed from the ground when the business or establishment is not open to the public. 
(c)  No such sign shall exceed a height of four (4) feet about the ground. 
(d)  No such sign shall exceed an area of eight (8) square feet per sign face. 
(e)  Signs shall not restrict pedestrian access. 
Sec. 3.10. - Historic Markers. 
(a)  Historic markers do not count for purposes of maximum wall signage limitations of this ordinance. 
(b)  Historic markers should be made of cast metal or other durable materials. 
(c)  They should be securely attached to the building and should lay flat against the building wall. 
(d)  They should be located at eye level and should be positioned near a building entrance or another area of high visibility. 
Sec. 3.11. - Temporary Signs. 
One temporary ground sign or wall sign per lot or per property frontage, unlighted, is permitted during the time when a space, unit, building, or land is for sale, rent, or lease, not exceeding eight square feet of area, nor a height of eight feet if placed on the ground. 
One additional temporary ground sign or wall sign per lot or per property frontage, unlighted, not exceeding four square feet of area, nor a height of four feet if placed on the ground, is permitted. 
Sec. 3.12. - Special Event Signage. 
Property owners in the historic district may apply for permits for special events and associated signage, as provided in Sec. 24.26 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance, except that gas or air-filled advertising device shall not be allowed. 
ARTICLE 4. - REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES 

Sec. 4.1. - Applications Involving Buildings with Multiple Tenants or Uses. 
No permits shall be issued for buildings involving more than one use or tenant unless and until a uniform sign plan for the multi-use or multi-tenant building has been submitted and approved by the Historic Preservation Commission and the Zoning Administrator. The uniform sign plan shall indicate how all signage will be consistent or well coordinate in terms of lighting, colors, fonts, composition of materials, location in relation to the building, and proportions. Upon approval of a uniform sign plan, the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to issue sign permits (upon application) for individual signs upon being deemed consistent with the approved master signage plan, without the need to obtain a certificate of appropriateness. 
Sec. 4.2. - Buildings with More than One Building Frontage or Facade. 
Buildings with more than one frontage or facade should generally have lesser amounts of signage on the secondary building frontage than on the primary (or most frequently used) building frontage. 
Sec. 4.3. - Criteria for Certificates of Appropriateness Generally. 
In determining the appropriateness or location of new signs proposed to be placed within the boundaries of the historic district, the Historic Preservation Commission may apply the criteria specified for certificates of appropriateness as provided by the City's Historic Preservation Ordinance (see Section 5.7 of Ordinance No. 375). 
Sec. 4.4. - Specific Criteria for Signs. 
In addition to criteria specified generally for certificates of appropriateness by the City of Flowery Branch's Historic Preservation ordinance (see Section 5.7 of Ordinance No. 375), the Historic Preservation Commission may consider the following criteria which are specifically applicable to signs: 
(a)  The size, scale and design of the sign shall be compatible with the size, scale and design of the property, building or site upon which it is to be located. 
(b)  The sign's materials shall be compatible with the period and style of the property, building or site. 
(c)  The sign's location shall not obscure any significant architectural features of the building or site. 
(d)  The sign's installation shall not irreparably damage any cornice, ornament or similar architectural detail and shall be the least damaging method feasible for the property, building or site. 
The Historic Preservation Commission is authorized to apply additional guidelines for the composition, design and placement of signs, including but not limited to a listing of typeset fonts or lettering standards, and colors, if such guidelines are adopted by resolution of the Flowery Branch City Council. 
For any sign within the area governed by this ordinance which is authorized to be administratively approved by the Zoning Administrator, the criteria established in this section and as referenced in this section may be used as a basis for making administrative decisions to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove sign permits. 
Sec. 4.5. - Signs Consistent with Uniform Sign Plans. 
Any sign permit application if consistent with an approved uniform sign plan, is exempt from individual approval by the Historic Preservation Commission, and the Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue sign permits after application, provided they are consistent with the uniform sign plan. 
ARTICLE 5. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 5.1. - Administration. 
This Ordinance shall be administered by the Zoning Administrator, and the provisions of Article 42 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall apply. 
Sec. 5.2. - Appeals. 
Any decision by the Zoning Administrator or Historic Preservation Commission with regard to this Ordinance may be appealed pursuant to Article 39 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 5.3. - Variances. 
Variances shall be permitted to be granted upon application, in accordance with the same procedures as those specified in Sec. 24.29 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. The City Council in considering whether or not to grant variances to the terms of this Ordinance shall consider the criteria for granting sign variances as specified in Sec. 24.29 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 5.4. - Enforcement and Penalties. 
The provisions of Article 43 of the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance shall be applicable to violations, enforcement procedures, and the assessment of penalties to violations, enforcement, and penalties regarding this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 25. - DEVELOPMENT ON STEEP SLOPES 

Sec. 25.1. - Findings. 
Hillsides are inherently unstable. Changes to slopes — through undermining by humans, flowing rivers, heavy rains, or the focusing of stormwater runoff by human-built channels or storm drain outlets — can cause erosion or landsliding. Soil slips, which cause avalanche-type failures, and slower-moving earthflows can occur on slopes of 30-33 percent and more. Serious erosion can occur on much shallower slopes. Steeper slopes are less forgiving of construction errors than are shallower slopes. When steeper slopes fail, such failures can have disastrous consequences. 
Disturbed surfaces create loose materials which tend to move downhill. The steeper the natural slope, the greater the area is that must be disturbed. Development can result in alteration of land surfaces that can contribute to slope destabilization. Alterations that have the potential for creating unstable slopes include placing fills on top of marginally stable slopes, cutting slopes at too steep an angle or undermining the toe of a slope, redirecting storm runoff in a way that artificially concentrates flows onto portions of the landscape not prepared to receive such flows, removing woody vegetation, and adding water by means of hillside septic systems. These factors work together and can cumulatively decrease the stability of slopes and eventually lead to disaster. Landslides and slope failures pose a variety of hazards to persons and property. 
Hillside development if unregulated can take place at the expense of environmental concerns. Stormwater runoff from slopes is greater in both quantity and velocity than it would be from level ground. Preserving existing vegetation reduces erosion by maintaining roots which increase infiltration and bind soils. Vegetation also reduces the velocity of raindrops and slows the velocity of surface water flow by increasing the roughness of the ground. Constructing hillside roads involves cuts in the upslope side and fills on the down slope side. Such cuts and fills are often much wider than the normal county road right-of-way and can be more susceptible to failure. 
Hillsides are unique vegetation communities and wildlife habitats. Hillsides in developing areas are often the last remaining natural areas and are the final refuges for many animal species. Development needs to be sensitive to the hillside's function of providing biodiversity. 
Sec. 25.2. - Applicability. 
(a)  This Article shall apply to any subdivision plat, land-disturbing activity, building permit, or any other development proposal on property with a natural slope of twenty-five percent (25%) or more as determined by the Zoning Administrator, and including the crests, summits, and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher than any such areas. 
(b)  This Article shall apply, and the Zoning Administrator shall apply and enforce the provisions of this Article, to the earliest application for development or building approval required of the applicant, whether that is an application for rezoning, conditional use, application for land-disturbance or development permit approval, subdivision plat, or application for building permit. 
Sec. 25.3. - Calculation of Slope. 
For purposes of determining whether the natural slope is 25 percent or more, and hence whether this Article applies, the natural slope of a given property shall be calculated perpendicular to topographic contours from property line to property line, prior to grading, using quandrangle maps of the United States Geological Survey, other reputable topographic maps of the subject area, or any map within the city's comprehensive plan showing slopes of 25% or more, or if available a topographic survey of the subject property. 
Sec. 25.4. - Dispute of Slope Calculation. 
Whenever an applicant disputes a determination by the Zoning Administrator as to the slope of the property, the applicant shall be entitled to submit a determination of the slope prepared by a registered land surveyor using standard surveying practices. Submission of the slope determination by a registered land surveyor shall be determinative and binding on the Zoning Administrator and applicant. 
Sec. 25.5. - Exemptions. 
The following land uses or activities are exempt from the requirements of this Article: 
(a)  Agriculture and forestry. Agriculture and forestry, provided that they are consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, consistent with all state and federal laws, and all applicable regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(b)  Landscape maintenance. Landscape maintenance activities, including the removal of diseased, dead or damaged trees; provided, however, that such activities shall be carried out in conformance with applicable regulations of this Article. 
(c)  Prior development plan approval. Any land, or part of any land, which was contained in or subject to any development plan or permit, and which was filed with and approved by the City prior to the effective date of this Article. 
(d)  Additions to single-family residences. On legal lots of record with existing residences that were approved prior to the effective date of this Article, said existing residences may be expanded without demonstrating compliance with this Article, provided that the height of the building addition does not exceed the existing height of the building, no land disturbance is required to accomplish the building addition, and the building addition is in conformity with the purposes and intent and consistent with regulations and guidelines of this Article as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 25.6. - Permit and Plan Required. 
No preliminary subdivision plat, development plan, land-disturbing activity permit, or building permit shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator or other administrative official of the city for any land-disturbing activity, land use, building, or structure on property subject to the jurisdiction of this Article, unless the activity, land use, building, or structure conforms to the requirements of this Article. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan as approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 25.7. - Topographic Information Required for All Land-Disturbing Activity. 
(a)  As part of the first application requirement encountered by an applicant, whether that is for approval of a preliminary subdivision plat, permit for land-disturbing activity, development plan approval, or permit for a building, road, or driveway, in addition to other requirements specified for such application, as the case may be, the applicant shall be required to submit a topographical survey of the project site. 
(b)  Notes and details of existing terrain shall be shown over the required topographic information. Said topographic survey may exclude areas not proposed for development, in order to reduce the costs to applicants. 
(c)  Where existing available information on topography is deemed sufficient, the Zoning Administrator may waive the requirement for a topographic survey. A topographic survey shall be required by the Zoning Administrator for any application for land-disturbing activity where reliable data on existing topography, including quadrangle map of the U.S. Geological Survey or other topographic maps which may be available, do not provide sufficient detail to administer the requirements of this Article. 
(d)  Said topographic survey, if required by the Zoning Administrator pursuant to this Section, shall provide contour intervals of no more than five (5) feet unless otherwise approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 25.8. - General Regulations for All Land-Disturbing Activity. 
The following minimum standards shall apply to earth moving and land-disturbing activity: 
(a)  Minimum Alterations. Earth moving shall be limited to the minimum required for building foundations, driveways, drainage control structures and immediate areas surrounding the building, structure, road driveway, or drainage structure required by this Article. With the exception of approved stockpiling or restoration efforts, substantial earth moving beyond that required for the installation or construction of approved buildings, structures, driveways, roads, or drainage structures shall not be permitted. 
(b)  Cut and Fill. Unless otherwise specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator, cut and fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical and fill slopes shall not be located on natural slopes steeper than 2:1. 

(c)  Compaction of Fill. All fill shall be stabilized in conformance with generally accepted engineering standards, including a compacted density of a least ninety-five percent (95%). 
(d)  Timing of Disturbance and Prompt Completion. All earth moving and land disturbance shall be accomplished in the shortest practical period of time. 
(e)  Natural Drainage Channels. Natural drainage ways shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
(f)  Control of stormwater run-off. Run-off from concentrated impervious surfaces shall be collected and transported in a pipe or other approved manner to a storm sewer system if available, or if unavailable, to the bottom of the drainage way or other location specified by the Zoning Administrator and in a safe, adequate, and non-erosive manner. When required by the city's regulations, storm water retention facilities shall be installed. When required, interceptor ditches shall be established above steep slopes in such a way as not to avoid saturation or erosion of soil, and the intercepted water shall be conveyed in a pipe or other manner to the bottom of the drainage way or other location specified by the Zoning Administrator. The overall drainage system shall be completed and made operational at the earliest possible time during construction. 
(g)  Impact on Adjacent Property. Realignment of a natural drainage channel shall not be permitted unless specifically approved by the Zoning Administrator. Natural or typical flow of surface or subsurface water shall not be altered or obstructed in any way by grade changes if such alteration may adversely affect the property of another property by either contributing to pooling or collection of waters, or to the concentration or intensification of surface water discharge. 
Sec. 25.9. - Application Requirements for Other-Than-Single-Family Dwellings. 
Any application for land-disturbing activity, development, or building involving construction of a building for non-single-family dwelling use and which has a gross floor area of 2,000 square feet or more, shall contain the following information: 
(a)  Soils report. This report shall include conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of soil conditions on the proposed development. This report shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer, soil scientist, engineering geologist, or other qualified professional approved by the Zoning Administrator. The report may use the soil survey prepared and published by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly Soil Conservation Service) for the area, as its basis, although site-specific soil tests may be required at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator. 
(b)  Hydrology report and plan. This report shall include a complete description of the hydrology of the site, conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of hydrologic conditions on the proposed development, and the capability of the site to be developed. Hydrology reports shall be completed by a professional engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of hydrology, or other qualified professional approved by the director. A hydrological control plan, prepared by a professional engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the practice of hydrology, or other qualified professional approved by the Zoning Administrator, shall also be required. At minimum said plan shall show and take into account the direction of flow within the local drainage basin; all natural drainage channels directed toward and away from the site within fifty feet of the perimeter of the site, and other natural drainage ways which may affect or be affected by the development proposal. Alterations of natural drainage ways shall be prohibited except for approved road crossings and drainage structures. Natural drainage ways shall be riprapped or otherwise stabilized below drainage and culvert discharge points for a distance sufficient to convey the discharge without channel erosion. Special notations which highlight details of the terrain, existing natural surface drainage, and areas subject to seepage or spring flow, shall be included on the plan. 
(c)  Tree survey and tree replacement plan. A survey shall be identified which identifies all trees which are proposed to be removed that exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on the tree four and one-half feet above the surface of the ground. The survey is not required to show trees in undisturbed areas, provided the undisturbed areas are marked as such on the plan submitted with the application. Any application for development approval subject to the requirements of this Section shall contain a plan for replacement of any such trees that are removed. Vegetation used to revegetate disturbed areas shall be native species or species similar in resource value as the vegetation removed. Vegetation shall be chosen after consideration of its ability to survive the conditions of soils, climate, temperature, elevation, and other natural conditions. When revegetation is required, all required revegetation shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the tree replacement plan shall conform to the specifications of said plan. 
_____
Sec. 25.10. - Clearing and Improvement Limits. 
Development on lands that are subject to this Article shall meet the requirements shown in Table 25.1. 
Table 25.1 
Clearing and Improvement Limits on Steep Slopes 

 
_____
Sec. 25.11. - Design Review. 
All development subject to the requirements of this Article shall require design plan review and approval. See Article 40 of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 25.12. - Design and Development Guidelines. 
Design plan review shall consider the extent to which the application meets the following design and development guidelines. The guidelines provided in this section and identified by use of the term "should." Compliance with the guidelines established in this section is not mandatory but is strongly recommended. Substantial inconsistencies with one or more guidelines in a manner that is clearly counter to the purposes of this Article in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator shall be sufficient grounds for the denial of said application. 
(a)  Accepted Professional Practices. All development proposals subject to the requirements of this Article should be designed to meet generally accepted principles of land use planning, soil mechanics, engineering geology, civil engineering, environmental management, civic design, architecture, landscape architecture, landscape ecology, and related disciplines. 
(b)  Planning. Planning of the development should take into account the topography, soils, geology, hydrology, vegetation, and other features of the proposed site. Areas not well suited for development due to soil characteristics, geology, vegetation, existing plant and animal life, or hydrology limitations, should not be developed. 
(c)  Innovation. Site designers are encouraged to propose and apply innovative concepts for slope and soil stabilization, grading, landscaping, and building placement and design to meet the purposes and intentions of this Article. For instance, wooden deck areas either on the roof of a garage, or roof of the house, or extending from the house or garage, may be used to reduce the amount of grading and need for yard areas and provide private outdoor spaces. Wooden decks that allow infiltration of stormwater into the ground may be used instead of concrete slabs for patios and, in some cases if structurally sufficient, parking, in order to reduce the amount of impervious surface. 
(d)  Land Disturbance and Grading. When grading is necessary, rigid contouring should be avoided; counters should be rounded to appear undulating and natural (see figure). 

Projects involving more than one use or phase should be phased into workable units in a way that minimizes the amount of soil disturbance at any given point in time. When grading must occur, it should blend with the natural landform as much as possible. Grading to form level pads and building sites is strongly discouraged and when required such grading should be minimized. 

Earth berms, rock forms, or stone retaining walls should be used to minimize visual impacts of cuts. Hedges and fences may also be appropriate in some locations. Large, continuous surfaces of smooth concrete and related structures are considered inappropriate. The height of any retaining wall should not exceed four feet unless required to be higher for engineering reasons. In areas where cuts are steeper, a stepped or terraced wall should be used. 
(e)  Vegetation, Landscaping, and Habitat. Plans for development should consider any characteristics of the area that make it unique or significant in the conservation of flora and fauna including threatened, rare, and endangered species. Existing deep-rooted vegetation, including trees, bushes and ground covers, should be removed only in cases where necessary for buildings, roads, driveways, parking, and minimal yards. Use plant materials that blend with the hillside. Landscape schemes that are rough, natural and/or subdued in character are encouraged. Extensive areas of exotic plants and sod are discouraged where they would be visible from the public right-of-way. 

(f)  Sensitive Natural Areas. Plans for development should be sensitive toward and mitigate any negative effects of development activities on immediately adjacent sensitive natural areas. 
(g)  Building Pads. For subdivisions and developments with multiple buildings, building pads (i.e., clearing and grading for buildings and structures) should be varied in elevation above or below road level to avoid the appearance of monotonous, flat, level pads. 

(h)  Step-Down Design. Single-family dwellings and other structures should "step down" the hillside to limit the amount of grading required. Large building pads and footings should be split into more than one (i.e., split-level homes that step down the hillside) where possible to allow the building pad and structure to more closely follow the existing slope of the land. Building footprint coverage should be minimized where possible by using multiple-level (two or more story) buildings. The visible mass of larger buildings and structures should be reduced by utilizing below-grade rooms cut into the natural slope. 

(i)  Rooflines. Roof forms and roof lines for new structures should be broken into a series of smaller building components to reflect the irregular forms of the surrounding hillside. Long, linear, unbroken roof lines are discouraged. Flat roofs are discouraged. The slope angle of roof pitch should be at or below the angle of the natural hillside slope. The slope of the roof should be oriented in the same direction as the natural slope of the lot. 

_____ 
(j)  Building Colors. Exterior colors for new buildings and structures should be coordinated with the predominant colors of the surrounding landscape to minimize contrast between the structure and the natural environment. Exterior colors should be selected from among a color palette approved by the director. Dark or earthtone colors should be used to make the home or building less conspicuous as seen from off site. White and other light colors should be avoided. 
(k)  Clustering of Buildings and Building Locations. Buildings and structures should be clustered where possible to reduce disturbance and removal of vegetation. Buildings should be sited with different floor elevations to achieve height variation. For multi-family projects, if permitted, stagger alignments of buildings both horizontally and vertically to create unit identity, privacy at entry and private outdoor space, and to share common open space. 
(l)  Building Setbacks. Where appropriate, buildings and structures should be located as close to the road as possible to preserve the natural terrain and to minimize disturbance and the length of driveways. The Zoning Administrator may administratively vary (reduce) minimum building setbacks by up to 50 percent to encourage compliance with this provision. 
(m)  Screening and View Corridors. The thinning of limbs of individual trees is preferred over tree removal as a means to provide a view corridor. Dwellings or buildings that are proposed to be sited to maximize views from the lot or that require removal of vegetation to produce a view corridor are strongly discouraged and will be denied. 
(n)  Road and Driveways Should Follow the Natural Terrain. Road and driveway alignments should follow the natural terrain unless the project engineer can justify additional cuts or fills. Roads, walkways, and parking areas should be designed to parallel the natural contours of the site. 
(o)  Shared Driveways and Parking. Combinations of collective private driveways, shared parking areas and on-street parallel parking bays should be used where possible to minimize land and soil disturbance, minimize impervious surface coverage, and achieve excellence of design and aesthetic sensitivity. 
(p)  Lighting. Outside lighting should be muted and directed so that it does not spill over on to neighboring properties. Reduce the amount of light emanating from a development on a hillside, since lighting from buildings located on hillsides can be highly visible at night and may affect the night character of the community. 
Sec. 25.13. - Variances. 
(a)  Remedy. If an applicant asserts in writing to the Zoning Administrator that application of this Article would deny the reasonable use of property, or prevent innovation as encouraged by this Article, the applicant may apply for a variance in accordance with variance procedures of this zoning ordinance (see Article 37). A variance to the provisions of this Article may upon application and after due notice thereof be granted by the Governing Body. 
(b)  Intent. A variance is intended to provide a remedy to address those cases in which the application of this Article unreasonably restricts all economic use of a parcel of land and the restriction cannot be remedied by other authorized techniques or conditions; and to remedy situations where innovation is prevented by the strict application of the terms of this Article. 
(c)  Review and Recommendation. Prior to granting a variance to the provisions of this Article, the Governing Body shall seek the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, and when engineering considerations are involved, the City Engineer, prior to acting upon a an application for variance to the terms of this Article. 
Sec. 25.14. - Appeals. 
An applicant or other party aggrieved by a decision of the Zoning Administrator in the administration, interpretation, or enforcement of this Article may appeal said decision to the planning commission by filing a written appeal application in accordance with procedures for administrative appeals provided in this zoning ordinance (See Article 39). 
ARTICLE 26. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 26.1. - Findings. 
The Governing Body finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(a)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; and 
(b)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; and 
(c)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; and 
(d)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; and 
(e)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; and 
(f)  Maintaining base flow of streams; and 
(g)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; and 
(h)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; and 
(i)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; and 
(j)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(k)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
Sec. 26.2. - Purposes. 
It is the purpose of this Article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the City of Flowery Branch for the protection of water resources; and, 
(b)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities; 
(c)  Require the proper installation and maintenance of on-site sewage management systems, or septic tanks to minimize their negative effects on water quality. 
Sec. 26.3. - Definitions. 
Buffer: With respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by this Article), lying adjacent to the stream. 
Impervious cover: Any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
Land development: Any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land development activity: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
Land disturbance: Any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land-disturbance activity: Those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) pertaining to the areas within the City of Flowery Branch. 
Parcel: Any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit: The permit issued by the City of Flowery Branch required for undertaking any land development activity. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Protection area or stream protection area: With respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Riparian: Belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Setback: With respect to a stream, the area established by this Article extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
Stream: Any stream, beginning at: the location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or a point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more. Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of less than 25 acres, the City of Flowery Branch may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
Streams are further defined as intermittent and perennial. 
Stream, intermittent: A stream that flows in a well-defined channel during wet seasons of the year but not for the entire year. They generally exhibit signs of water velocity sufficient to move soil material, litter, and fine debris. They are usually identified as blue lines separated by three dots on the United States Geological Survey (USGS) topographical map and as black lines separated by two or more dots on a Department of Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soil map. Aquatic organisms such as some fish often are difficult to find or not present at all in these streams. 
Stream, perennial: A stream which flows in a well-defined channel throughout most of the year under normal climactic conditions. Some may dry up during drought periods or due to excessive upstream uses. They are usually identified as solid blue lines on the United States Geological Survey (USGS) topographical map and as solid black lines separated by one dot on a Department of Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) soil map. Aquatic organisms such as some fish are normally present and easily found in these streams. 
Stream bank: The sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Stream channel: The portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Watershed: The land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Sec. 26.4. - Applicability. 
This Article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a Protection Area or Stream Protection Area as defined in this Article. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law. Approval or exemption from requirements established in this Article do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
Sec. 26.5. - Grandfather Provisions. 
This Article shall not apply to the following activities, when such activities were lawfully established prior to the effective date of this Article or its predecessor ordinance: 
(a)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that was zoned and approved for such use. 
(b)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(c)  Any land development activity that was under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or had been submitted for approval. 
(d)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a Planned Unit Development (PUD) that has been conceptually approved. 
Sec. 26.6. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this Article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
(a)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
1.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
2.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
3.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
4.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
5.  Unpaved foot trails and/or impervious paths; 
6.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(b)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the stream, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 50 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths (unless impervious) or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in this Section. 
(c)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this ordinance was first effective, or which are permitted under the terms of this Article. 
(d)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this Article first took effect or approved under the terms of this Article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(e)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this subsection, the person performing it shall report such work to the Zoning Administrator on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within 10 days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the City to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(f)  Forestry and silviculture activities not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
Sec. 26.7. - Buffer and Setback Requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this ordinance shall meet the following requirements. Any land development activity within a buffer established in this Article or any impervious cover within a setback established in this Article is prohibited unless exempted, grandfather, or a variance is granted pursuant to this zoning ordinance. 
(a)  Buffer. An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(b)  Additional setback. An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
Sec. 26.8. - Septic Tanks. 
No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
Sec. 26.9. - Buffers and Setbacks Shown on Plats. 
All buffer and setback areas required by this Article shall be designated on any recorded final plat of the property approved after the date this Article first applied. 
Sec. 26.10. - Responsibility and Liability. 
Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this Article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the City of Flowery Branch, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
Sec. 26.11. - Inspection. 
(a)  Authorized. The City of Flowery Branch may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The City of Flowery Branch shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this zoning ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  Cooperation of Permittee. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out official duties. The permittee shall assist the City in making such inspections. 
Sec. 26.12. - Enforcement. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit pursuant to this Article may be subject to the enforcement actions provided in this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 26.13. - Variances. 
Variances to the provisions of this Article may be filed and shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of Article 37 of this zoning ordinance. All variance applications must include information identified by the "Stream Buffer Variance" application form as provided by the Zoning Administrator. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
(a)  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
(b)  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the ordinance would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a stream buffer variance: 
(a)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(b)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
(c)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(d)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(e)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
(f)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
Sec. 26.14. - Compatibility with Other Stream Buffer Regulations and Requirements. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
ARTICLE 27. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 27.1. - Purpose and Intent. 
This Article is adopted with the following purposes and intentions: 
(a)  To provide for the preservation of greenspace as a nonstructural stormwater runoff and watershed protection measure. 
(b)  To provide residential zoning districts that permit flexibility of design in order to promote environmentally sensitive and efficient uses of the land. 
(c)  To preserve in perpetuity unique or sensitive natural resources such as groundwater recharge areas, floodplains, wetlands, streams, steep slopes, woodlands and wildlife habitat. 
(d)  To permit clustering of houses and structures on less environmentally sensitive soils which will reduce the amount of infrastructure, including paved surfaces and utility easements, necessary for residential development. 
(e)  To reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance and removal of vegetation in residential development. 
(f)  To promote interconnected greenways and corridors throughout the community. 
(g)  To promote contiguous greenspace with adjacent jurisdictions. 
(h)  To encourage interaction in the community by clustering houses and orienting them closer to the street, providing public gathering places and encouraging use of parks and community facilities as focal points in the neighborhood. 
(i)  To encourage street designs that reduce traffic speeds and reliance on main arteries. 
(j)  To promote construction of convenient landscaped walking trails and bike paths both within the subdivision and connected to neighboring communities, businesses, and facilities to reduce reliance on automobiles. 
(k)  To conserve scenic views and reduce perceived density by maximizing the number of houses with direct access to and views of open space. 
(l)  To preserve important historic and archaeological sites. 
Sec. 27.2. - Applicability of Regulations. 
This Article on Conservation Subdivisions is an option available in the Conventional Residential Zoning Districts established in Article 6 of this zoning ordinance. The applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning ordinance and all other applicable laws, except those provisions specifically allowed otherwise in this Article. 
Sec. 27.3. - Definitions. 
Active recreation: Equipment and areas prepared for active use for recreational and leisure purposes, including but not limited to: playground equipment (swing sets and climbing structures); courts for basketball, volleyball, and tennis; leveled, striped fields for football, soccer, or multiple purposes; community picnic pavilions (including covered facilities with grills and/or fire rings); community buildings for recreational events, and golf courses, including clubhouses, developed areas and accessory uses. Trails and bikeways through open spaces shall not be considered active recreational facilities. 
Conservation easement: A nonpossessory interest of a holder in real property imposing limitations or affirmative obligations, the purposes of which include retaining or protecting natural, scenic, or open-space values of real property; assuring its availability for agricultural, forest, recreational, or open-space use; protecting natural resources; maintaining or enhancing air or water quality; or preserving the historical, architectural, archeological, or cultural aspects of real property (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1); A legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, in a form acceptable to the Governing Body and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Hall County. A conservation easement restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other specifically permitted use and prohibits further subdivision or development. 
Conservation subdivision: A subdivision for detached, single-family, fee simple residences where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision. A conservation subdivision is not a use per se, but rather, a land planning technique that allows the clustering of uses in order to protect open spaces. 
_____ 

 
Source: Arendt, Randall G. 1996. Conservation Design for Subdivisions: A Practical Guide to Creating Open Space Networks. Washington, DC: Island Press. p. 128. 
_____
Land trust: A private, nonprofit conservation organization formed to protect natural resources, such as productive farm or forest land, natural areas, historic structures, and recreational areas. Land trusts purchase and accept donations of conservation easements. They educate the public about the need to conserve land and some provide land-use and estate planning services to local governments and individual citizens. 
Open space: The portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
Passive recreation: Recreational activities and places that generally do not require a developed site. This generally includes such activities as hiking, horseback riding, and picnicking, provided that such activities occur in a manner that is consistent with existing natural conditions. 
Primary conservation areas: Areas within a conservation subdivision set aside for permanent protection, including the following: 
(a)  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
(b)  The 100-year floodplain; 
(c)  Buffer zones of at least 75 feet in width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
(d)  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
(e)  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and, 
(f)  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 

Source: Arendt, Randall G. 1996. Conservation Design for Subdivisions: A Practical Guide to Creating Open Space Networks. Washington, DC: Island Press. pp. 72. 
Secondary conservation areas: Areas within a conservation subdivision that should be included within the Open Space to the maximum extent feasible, including the following: 
(a)  Important historic sites; 
(b)  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
(c)  Individual existing healthy trees greater than 8 inches caliper, as measured from their outermost drip line; 
(d)  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
(e)  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and, 
(f)  Existing trails that connect the conservation subdivision to neighboring areas. 

Source: Arendt, Randall G. 1996. Conservation Design for Subdivisions: A Practical Guide to Creating Open Space Networks. Washington, DC: Island Press. pp. 72. 
Sec. 27.4. - Ownership of Development Site. 
The tract of land to be subdivided pursuant to this Article may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
Sec. 27.5. - Housing Density Determination. 
The maximum number of lots in a Conservation Subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of applicant: 
(a)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
2.  The 100-year floodplain; 
3.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or, 
5.  Road rights-of-way and overhead utility easements. 
(b)  Yield Plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a preliminary plat as required by the city's subdivision and land development regulations, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
Sec. 27.6. - Application Requirements. 
Developers and subdividers proposing a conservation subdivision shall make application to the Zoning Administrator which shall include at minimum the specifications of this Section. 
(a)  Site Analysis Map. The applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the subdivision, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this Article. The site analysis map shall include the following features: 
1.  Property boundaries; 
2.  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
3.  Topographic contours of no less than 10-foot intervals; 
4.  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as defined in this Zoning Ordinance; 
5.  General vegetation characteristics; 
6.  General soil types; 
7.  The planned location of protected open space; 
8.  Existing roads and structures; and, 
9.  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open Space Management Plan. As a part of the application, or no later than prior to the issuance of a development permit, an open space management plan shall be submitted and reviewed and approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  Instrument of Permanent Protection. As a part of the application, or no later than prior to the issuance of a development permit, the applicant shall ensure that open space proposed in the conservation subdivision will be permanently protected, through an instrument such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant defined in this Zoning Ordinance. 
(d)  Other Requirements. The Applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the city's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance, unless specifically permitted otherwise by this Article. 
Sec. 27.7. - Processing and Acting on Applications. 
An application for approval of a conservation subdivision shall be submitted prior to or concurrent with a required preliminary plat in accordance with the city's subdivision and land development ordinance. The Zoning Administrator shall have up to fifteen (15) working days to review and approve or deny the application, if submitted separately from a preliminary plat application. If submitted concurrent with the preliminary plat, the application will be processed within the schedule specified for preliminary plat applications in the city's subdivision and land development ordinance. 
Sec. 27.8. - Criteria for Considering Conservation Subdivisions. 
Approval or denial of a conservation subdivision application shall be based on the extent to which the plat meets the following criteria: 
(a)  All primary conservation areas are protected as permanent open space. 
(b)  A sufficient amount of secondary conservation areas are protected as permanent open space, as opposed to being devoted to lots and other uses. 
(c)  The configuration of the open space tract is contiguous and undivided, or open space is provided in relatively undivided tracts that cannot reasonably be reconfigured into one contiguous, undivided tract. 
(d)  The conservation subdivision meets the regulations specified in this Article. 
Sec. 27.9. - Grounds for Denial. 
Reasons for the denial of a conservation subdivision application include but are not limited to the following: 
(a)  The application fails to fully identify primary and secondary conservation areas. 
(b)  One or more of the lots within the open space conservation subdivision are too small to meet the minimum lot size established by this Article. 
(c)  One or more of the lots are significantly large or wide, such that their design contributes to an unnecessary decrease in the amount of open space retained on site. 
(d)  The proposed open space network is divided, not functional, inconsistent with open space plans of the city with jurisdiction, or does not provide for the protection of the most valuable secondary conservation areas on the site given the natural and scenic properties inherent on the site. 
(e)  The proposed open space network fails to maximize the length of the common boundary between conservation areas on site and conservation areas or parkland abutting the conservation subdivision site. 
(f)  The preliminary plat appears to be submitted for the major purpose of circumventing minimum lot size or minimum lot width requirements or improvement requirements that would otherwise be required for conventional subdivisions pursuant this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 27.10. - Open Space Requirements. 
(a)  Minimum Open Space. Each conservation subdivision shall provide at least 40 percent of the gross land area of the subdivision as restricted open space. 
(b)  Primary Conservation Areas. Primary conservation areas, as defined in this Article, are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this Article. 
(c)  Secondary Conservation Areas. Secondary Conservation Areas as defined in this Article, should be included within the open space, to the maximum extent feasible. 
(d)  Contiguity. At least 75 percent of the open space in the conservation subdivision shall be in a contiguous tract. 
(e)  Other Provisions. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
Sec. 27.11. - Permitted Uses of Open Space. 
Open space within conservation subdivisions may be used for any of the following: 
(a)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(b)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(c)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(d)  Passive recreation areas; 
(e)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(f)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(g)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(h)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(i)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this Article. 
Sec. 27.12. - Prohibited Uses of Open Space. 
Open space within conservation subdivisions shall not be used for any of the following: 
(a)  Golf courses; 
(b)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in this Article; 
(c)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted Best Management Practices; and, 
(d)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
Sec. 27.13. - Ownership and Management of Open Space. 
(a)  Ownership of Open Space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a Homeowners Association is the owner, the Homeowners' Association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(b)  Open Space Management Plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that meets the requirements of this Article and that: 
1.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for long-term capital improvements; 
2.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
3.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the Governing Body; and, 
4.  Provides for enforcement of the Plan. 
(c)  Maintenance. In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the City of Flowery Branch may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, Homeowner's Association, or to the individual property owners located within the conservation subdivision, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. 
Sec. 27.14. - Legal Instrument for Permanent Protection. 
The open space within a conservation subdivision shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded prior to any vesting deed for property or lots within said subdivision. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
(a)  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: (1) a land trust or similar conservation-oriented non-profit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or (2) a governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this Article. If the entity accepting the easement is not the City of Flowery Branch, then a third right of enforcement favoring the City of Flowery Branch shall be included in the easement; or 
(b)  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this Article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
Sec. 27.15. - Relationship to Dimensional Requirements of Zoning Districts. 
(a)  Density and Lot Size. Conservation subdivisions approved pursuant to this Article shall not exceed the number of dwelling units per acre for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located. Lots within conservation subdivisions shall not be bound by the minimum lot size requirements established in Table 6.2 of this Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located; provided, however, that no lot within a conservation subdivision shall be reduced to less than 50 percent of the required minimum lot size for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Lot Width. Lots within conservation subdivisions shall not be bound by the minimum lot width requirements established in Table 6.2 of this Zoning Ordinance for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located; provided, however, that no lot within a conservation subdivision shall be reduced to less than 75 percent of the required minimum lot width for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(c)  Other Dimensional Requirements. The maximum lot coverage and front, side, and rear yard/building setback requirements for the zoning district in which the conservation subdivision is located shall continue to apply to development within the conservation subdivision; provided, however, that an applicant may propose and the Zoning Administrator may administratively authorize a reduction of the dimensional requirements specified in this paragraph, if the applicant demonstrates there is practical difficulty meeting said zoning district dimensional requirements due to the platting of smaller than conventional lots pursuant to this Article. In no case shall the Zoning Administrator reduce a dimensional requirement specified in this paragraph by more than 50 percent of that required by the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
ARTICLE 32. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 32.1. - Findings. 
The flood hazard areas of the City of Flowery Branch are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can (1) Protect human life and health; (2) Minimize damage to private property; (3) Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and (4) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
Sec. 32.2. - Authority. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
Sec. 32.3. - Purpose and Intent. 
The purpose of this Article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(b)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(c)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(d)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(e)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and, 
(f)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
Sec. 32.4. - Applicability. 
This Article shall be applicable to all Areas of Special Flood Hazard within the City of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 32.5. - Definitions. 
Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered New Construction. 
Appeal: A request for a review of the Zoning Administrator's interpretation of any provision of this Article. 
Area of shallow flooding: A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard: The land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map or the Flood Insurance Rate Map), all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the future-conditions flood elevation, and all other flood prone areas as referenced or defined in this Article. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
Base flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
Base flood elevation: The highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building: Any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Development: Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Elevated building: A non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before November 13, 1975, the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the City of Flowery Branch as a basis for the city's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before November 13, 1975, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the City of Flowery Branch as a basis for the city's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (a) the overflow of inland or tidal waters; or (b) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map: An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map: An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study: The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway or Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which are necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
Functionally dependent use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
Future conditions flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation: The flood standard equal to or higher than the Base Flood Elevation. The future-conditions Flood Elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology: The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
Highest adjacent grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure: In the context of this Article only, a historic structure is any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; (b) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; (c) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or (d) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this ordinance. 
Manufactured home: For purposes of this Article only, manufactured home is a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this Article the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929, it is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New Construction: Any structure (see definition) and any subsequent improvements for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after November 13, 1975, the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the National Flood Insurance Program. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after November 13, 1975, the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the community. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988: A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Owner: The legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit: The permit issued by the City of Flowery Branch to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Recreational vehicle: For purposes of this Article only, it is a vehicle which is: (a) built on a single chassis; (b) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; (c) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, (d) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Site: The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
Start of construction: The date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure: For purposes of this Article only, it is a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision: For purposes of this Article only, it is the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a 10-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the Zoning Administrator, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision: Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this Article which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this Article. 
Violation: In the context of this Article only, it is the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this Article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required by this Article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Sec. 32.6. - Designation of Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this Article. 
Sec. 32.7. - Duties and Responsibilities of Administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this Article have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(b)  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
(c)  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the Zoning Administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of this Article; 
(d)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(e)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed; 
(f)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the Zoning Administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
(g)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(h)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Zoning Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this zoning ordinance. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
(i)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this Article shall be maintained in the office of the Zoning Administrator and shall be open for public inspection; 
(j)  The Zoning Administrator shall maintain the records of all variance and appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
Sec. 32.8. - Flood Insurance Studies Adopted by Reference. 
For the purposes of this Article, the Flood Insurance Study, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas annexed into the city, the current effective Flood Insurance Study and data for unincorporated Hall County, dated September 29, 2006, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Sec. 32.9. - Other Studies that May be Relied Upon for 100-year Floodplains. 
Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and flood-prone areas include the following: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of Flowery Branch; or 
(b)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's approved methodology and approved by the City of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 32.10. - Other Studies that May be Relied Upon for Future-Conditions Floodplains. 
Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas include: 
(a)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, State or Federal agency applicable to the City of Flowery Branch; or 
(b)  Any future-conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency's approved methodology approved by the City of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 32.11. - Repository of Studies. 
The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance study, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the office of the Zoning Administrator of the City of Flowery Branch. 
Sec. 32.12. - Relationship to Other Regulations. 
This Article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this Article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of this Article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
Sec. 32.13. - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this Article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This Article does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Article shall not create liability on the part of the City of Flowery Branch or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this Article or any administrative decision lawfully made there under. 
Sec. 32.14. - Permit and Compliance. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an Area of Special Flood Hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this Article, including a permit where required, prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this ordinance. 
Sec. 32.15. - Permit Application Requirements Generally. 
(a)  Unless specifically excluded by this Article, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the Zoning Administrator a permit application on a form provided by the Zoning Administrator for that purpose and all application specifications of this Article (Article 32 of this zoning ordinance). 
(b)  Applications shall consist of a plan, building and foundation design details, a description of the extent watercourses will be altered, comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations, state and federal permits (where required), and certifications, as more fully described in this Article (Article 32 of this zoning ordinance). 
Sec. 32.16. - Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Plan Requirements. 
An application for a development project with any Area of Special Flood Hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall be drawn to an engineering scale and include the following items: 
(a)  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(b)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(c)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(d)  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(e)  Proposed grading plan; 
(f)  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
(g)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
(h)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(i)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
Sec. 32.17. - Building and Foundation Design Detail. 
The application for development approval shall include the following when a building or structure is to be constructed: 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
(c)  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria specified in this Article; 
(d)  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required by this Article; 
(e)  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
Sec. 32.18. - Alteration of Water Courses. 
The application for development approval shall include a description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development. 
Sec. 32.19. - Flood-Related Information Requirements. 
The application for development approval shall include the following: 
(a)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any; 
(b)  Copies of work maps; 
(c)  Comparison of pre-and post development conditions base flood elevations; 
(d)  Future-conditions flood elevations; 
(e)  Flood protection elevations; 
(f)  Special Flood Hazard Areas; 
(g)  Regulatory floodway widths; 
(h)  Flood profiles; and 
(i)  All other computations and other information similar to that presented in the Flood Insurance study. 
Sec. 32.20. - State and Federal Permits. 
Copies of all applicable State and Federal permits necessary for proposed development shall be submitted with the permit application for the proposed development. 
Sec. 32.21. - Certifications. 
In addition to the certifications required by this Article, the applicant shall provide the following signed certification: 
"All development activities will be done according to the approved floodplain management /flood damage prevention plan and any approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
____________ 
Applicant" 
Sec. 32.22. - Construction Stage Submittal Requirements. 
For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management /flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the Zoning Administrator the certifications required by this Section. 
(a)  Surveyor or Engineer Certification. A certified as-built Elevation Certificate or Floodproofing Certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. A final Elevation Certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. 
(b)  Floodproofing Certificate. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(c)  Prior Work. Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(d)  Deficiencies and Stop Work Order. The Zoning Administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
Sec. 32.23. - Definition of Floodplain Boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator. If future-conditions elevation data are not available from the Zoning Administrator or another acceptable source specified in this Article, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Zoning Administrator. 
(c)  If a proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
Sec. 32.24. - Definition of Floodway Boundaries. 
The width of a floodway shall be determined from the Flood Insurance Study or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the Zoning Administrator. If floodway data are not available from the Zoning Administrator or another acceptable source specified in this Article, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 32.25. - Limitations Regarding Future-Conditions Floodplain. 
No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(a)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(b)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(c)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
(d)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
Sec. 32.26. - Standards for Development within Future Conditions Floodplain. 
Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under Section 32.25 above, if permitted, shall meet the following conditions: 
(a)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(b)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(c)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(d)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of this Article; 
(e)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(f)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the Zoning Administrator using the Community Consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). 
Sec. 32.27. - Engineering Study Required for Floodplain Encroachments. 
(a)  An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions this Article shall otherwise apply. 
(b)  This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. 
(c)  This information shall be submitted to and approved by the Zoning Administrator prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. 
Sec. 32.28. - Engineering Study Specifications. 
An engineering study required for floodplain encroachments shall include the following: 
(a)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(b)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the Zoning Administrator. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating Flood Insurance Study results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(c)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(d)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
Sec. 32.29. - Floodway Encroachments. 
Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Prohibited. Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in this Section; 
(b)  Exception. Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; 
(c)  Revision of Floodway Boundaries. If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the Zoning Administrator until an affirmative Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 32.30. - Maintenance Requirements. 
The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The City of Flowery Branch through the Zoning Administrator may direct the property owner (at no cost to city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain, if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 32.31. - General Standards for All Areas of Special Flood Hazard. 
In all Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions apply: 
(a)  Future-Conditions Floodplain. New construction of principal buildings (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of this Article (see Sections 32.25, 32.26, 32.27, 32.28, and 32.29) have been met; 
(b)  Anchoring. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(c)  Damage-Resistant Materials. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(d)  Methods and Practices. New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(e)  Heating and Air. All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(f)  Manufactured Homes. Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(g)  Water Supply. New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(h)  Sanitary Sewage Systems. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; and 
(i)  On-site Disposal Systems. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding. 
Sec. 32.32. - Areas Below Elevated Buildings. 
(a)  Flood Resistance. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(b)  Certification or Minimum Criteria. Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: (1) Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; (2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, (3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(c)  Use Limits. So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area. The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
Sec. 32.33. - Nonconformities. 
Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this Article shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
Sec. 32.34. - Residential Buildings - New Construction. 
(a)  Prohibition. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this Article (Sections 32.25, 32.26, 32.27, 32.28 and 32.29) have been met. 
(b)  Elevation of Lowest Floor. If all of the requirements of this Article (Sections 32.25, 32.26, 32.27, 32.28 and 32.29) have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(c)  Unimpeded Movement of Floodwaters. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 32.32(a), (b), and (c) of this Article. 
Sec. 32.35. - Residential Buildings - Substantial Improvement. 
(a)  Elevation of Lowest Floor. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Openings Below Elevated Structures. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards (Section 32.32(a), (b), and (c)) of this Article. 
Sec. 32.36. - Nonresidential Buildings - New Construction. 
(a)  Prohibition. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this Article (Sections 32.25, 32.26, 32.27, 32.28 and 32.29) have been met. 
(b)  Elevation of Lowest Floor. New construction that has met all of the requirements of this Article (Sections 32.25, 32.26, 32.27, 32.28 and 32.29) may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(c)  Certification. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 32.37. - Nonresidential Buildings - Substantial Improvement. 
(a)  Floodproofing May be Authorized. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1- 30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the Zoning Administrator to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. 
(b)  Specification for Floodproofing. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(c)  Certification. A registered Professional Engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 32.38. - Accessory Structures and Facilities. 
Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with this Article (Section 32.32 (a), (b), and (c)) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
Sec. 32.39. - Recreational Vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(a)  Be Temporary. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(b)  Meet Requirements for Substantial Improvement. The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for substantial improvement of residential buildings, including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
Sec. 32.40. - Manufactured Homes. 
(a)  Prohibition. New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of this Article (Sections 32.25, 32.26, 32.27, 32.28 and 32.29) have been met. 
(b)  Elevation of Lowest Floor. Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or the manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(c)  Anchoring. All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of Section 32.31(f) of this Article. 
Sec. 32.41. - Elevation of Residential Buildings and Manufactured Homes Authorized Adjacent to the Future Conditions Floodplain. 
For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Sec. 32.42. - Elevation of Nonresidential Buildings Authorized Adjacent to the Future Conditions Floodplain. 
For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
Sec. 32.43. - Single-Lot Residential Development in A-Zones. 
For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has Areas of Special Flood Hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the Zoning Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a Federal, State, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this Article. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments. No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(b)  Elevation of Lowest Floor. In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(c)  Openings Below Elevated Structures. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with Section 32.32(a), (b), and (c) of this Article. 
Sec. 32.44. - Substantial Improvements of Residential Structures in AO Zones. 
(a)  Described. Areas of Special Flood Hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. 
(b)  Elevation of Lowest Floor. All substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. 
(c)  Openings Below Elevated Structures. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 32.32(a), (b), and (c) of this Article. 
(d)  Drainage. Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
Sec. 32.45. - Substantial Improvements of Nonresidential Structures in AO Zones. 
(a)  Floodproofing Permitted. Substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. 
(b)  Standards. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. 
(c)  Certification. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice. 
(d)  Drainage. Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
Sec. 32.46. - Subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with Sections 32.16, 32.17, 32.18, 32.19, 32.20, and 32.21 of this Article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters, and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(f)  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
Sec. 32.47. - Relief by Variance Generally. 
A request for a variance may be submitted by an applicant who has been denied a permit by the Zoning Administrator, or by an owner or developer who has not previously applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this Article (Article 32) or this ordinance. 
Sec. 32.48. - Variance Application Requirements. 
Requests for variances from the requirements of this Article shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator as specified in Article 37 of this zoning ordinance. In addition, any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the Zoning Administrator and Governing Body shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
Sec. 32.49. - Variance Procedures. 
All variance requests made under this Article shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures for variances as specified in Article 37 of this zoning ordinance, which require notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
Sec. 32.50. - Variances for Historic Structures and Functionally Dependent Uses. 
(a)  Historic Structures. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(b)  Functionally Dependent Uses. Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this Article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
Sec. 32.51. - Certain Variances Prohibited. 
(a)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(b)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
Sec. 32.52. - Criteria to Consider in Granting Variances. 
The provisions of this Article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards through the variance process must be weighed carefully. In reviewing variance requests, the Zoning Administrator and Governing Body shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this Article. A variance shall be issued only when the following requirements are met: 
(a)  There is a finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(b)  There is a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
(c)  There is a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance; 
(d)  Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building 
Sec. 32.53. - Conditional Approval of Variances. 
Upon consideration of variance criteria and the purposes of this Article, the Zoning Administrator and the Governing Body may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this Article. 
Sec. 32.54. - Notice to Applicant When Variances are Granted. 
Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
Sec. 32.55. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the Zoning Administrator shall have the right to appeal such decision to the Governing Body in accordance with procedures for the appeal of administrative decisions as specified in Article 39 of this zoning ordinance. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Governing Body may appeal such decision to the court of competent jurisdiction, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Sec. 32.56. - Violations, Enforcement and Penalties. 
(a)  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this Article or the requirements of an approved plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in Article 43 of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. 
(c)  The imposition of any penalties shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
ARTICLE 33. - TEXT AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 33.1. - Authority to Amend. 
The Governing Body may from time to time amend any regulation pertaining to any zoning district; or may amend any other Article or Section of this Zoning Ordinance. 
Sec. 33.2. - Initiation of Proposals for Text Amendments. 
An application to amend the text of this Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by: 
(a)  The Governing Body; or 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or owner's agent of the property for which an amendment is sought, and further provided that the applicant has attended a pre-application meeting with the Zoning Administrator; or 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 33.3. - Application Requirements. 
Applications to amend the text of this zoning ordinance shall require submittal of an application fee, application form, and proposed text amendment in a form approved in advance by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator shall waive the application fee required by this Section when an application is initiated by the Governing Body or the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 33.4. - Limitation on Concurrent Consideration. 
In cases where an applicant is proposing a text amendment to modify or create a new zoning district or to add a permitted or conditional use to an existing zoning district, and where the applicant also desires to rezone property to the new or modified zoning district (or establish a conditional use in accordance with the amendment), the two applications shall not be considered concurrently. 
Sec. 33.5. - Notice of Public Hearing. 
At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the Governing Body, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the City a notice of the public hearing before Mayor and City Council. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
Sec. 33.6. - Public Hearing. 
The Governing Body shall hold a public hearing on all text amendments in accordance with the public hearing procedures specified in Article 35 of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 33.7. - Decision. 
(a)  Within a period of sixty-five (65) calendar days from the date of the public hearing held by the Governing Body on any such application(s), the Governing Body shall render a decision on the application(s). 
(b)  The Governing Body may approve or disapprove the proposed text amendment as written, or it may approve modifications of the text amendment as originally proposed. 
(c)  In rendering a decision on any such application, the Governing Body shall consider all information supplied by the applicant and Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 33.8. - Withdrawal of Text Amendment. 
Any application for an amendment to the text of this zoning ordinance may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, upon written notice to the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 33.9. - Refunds When Application is Withdrawn. 
(a)  When any application for a text amendment is initiated by a party other than the Governing Body or the Zoning Administrator, and said text amendment is withdrawn within ten (10) calendar days from the date of approval for initiation by the Zoning Administrator, one half (½) of the entire application fee paid by the applicant shall be refunded to the applicant. The Administrator shall refund that portion of the application fee within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of withdrawal of the application. 
(b)  No portion of a required application fee shall be refunded on any application withdrawn by an applicant later than ten (10) calendar days from the date of approval for initiation by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 33.10. - Notice of Action. 
When a text application is filed by a property owner, the Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the action taken by the Governing Body on the application no later than five (5) working days from the date the Governing Body took action on said application. 
Sec. 33.11. - Incorporation Clause. 
This Article is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., which Act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this ordinance. Where any provision of this Article is in conflict with any provision of the Act, the Act shall control. Or where this Article is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the Act, such provision of the Act, so as to meet the mandate of the Act, shall be fully complied with. 
ARTICLE 34. - REZONING AND CONDITIONAL USE APPLICATIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 34, §§ 34.1—34.21, and enacted a new Art. 34 as set out herein. Former Art. 34 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 348-11, § 26, 11-18-2010. 

Sec. 34.1. - Authority to Amend. 
City Council may from time to time amend the boundaries of any zoning district established in this Zoning Ordinance, and it may consider upon application the approval, conditional approval, or denial of conditional use applications. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.2. - Initiation of Proposals for Rezoning. 
An application to amend the official zoning map of the City, thus changing the boundaries of a zoning district, may be initiated by: 
(a)  City Council; or 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or owner's agent of the property for which an amendment is sought. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.3. - Initiation of Conditional Use Applications. 
An application for conditional use may be initiated by any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or owner's agent of the property for which the conditional use is sought. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.4. - Application Requirements. 
Applications to amend the official zoning map of this zoning ordinance or for a conditional use shall require submittal of an application requirements specified in this Section. The Zoning Administrator may waive the application fee and certain application requirements specified in this Section when an application for amendment of the official zoning map is initiated by City Council or authorized by the City Manager. 
(a)  Application fee as specified by this ordinance or established by resolution of the City Council; 
(b)  Application form furnished by the Zoning Administrator, including signed and notarized signature of property owner; 
(c)  Legal description of the property; 
(d)  Survey plat of the property; 
(e)  Letter of intent describing the proposed use of the property or other action requested; 
(f)  Site plan of the property at an appropriate engineering scale showing the proposed use and relevant information regarding proposed improvements; 
(g)  Statistics regarding the proposed development; 
(h)  Written analysis of how the proposed action compares to decision criteria specified for deciding on the subject type of application; 
(i)  Description of any special conditions voluntarily made a part of the request; and 
(j)  Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.5. - Site Plan Requirements. 
Applications described in this Article shall include a site plan, which shall at minimum include on the site plan information specified in this Section. 
(a)  Existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
(b)  Parking and internal circulation; 
(c)  Proposed landscaping; 
(d)  Buffers, where required; and 
(e)  Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.6. - Development Statistics Required. 
Applications described in this Article shall submit development statistics and specifications shall at minimum include on the site plan or in written form the information specified in this Section. 
(a)  Maximum and proposed height of any structure; 
(b)  Maximum and proposed gross square footage of the building area (nonresidential only); 
(c)  Color renderings of any proposed structures; 
(d)  Material list (with percentages) of any proposed structures; 
(e)  Maximum and proposed number of dwelling units and minimum and proposed square footage of heated floor area for any dwelling unit (residential only); 
(f)  Maximum and proposed lot coverage of building area (square feet and percent); 
(g)  Minimum and proposed square footage of landscaped area (square feet and percent); 
(h)  Minimum, maximum and proposed number of parking spaces; and 
(i)  Other dimensional information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.7. - Analysis Requirements. 
Applications to amend the official zoning map and applications for conditional uses shall provide a written analysis comparing the proposed action with the criteria in this Section. A zoning map amendment or conditional use application may be justified only if it bears a reasonable relationship to the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare, and after consideration of the analysis requirements which may in individual cases be considered criteria relevant to Zoning Administrator in making recommendations and by the Governing Body in the decision-making process. 
(a)  Whether the proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property. 
(b)  Whether the proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
(c)  Whether the property to be affected by the proposal can be used in accordance with the existing regulations and has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned. 
(d)  Whether the proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools. 
(e)  Whether the proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the comprehensive plan including but not limited to the character area map and future land use plan map. 
(f)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposal. 
(g)  Existing use(s) and zoning of the subject property and nearby properties. 
(h)  Existing value of the property under the existing zoning district classification, the extent to which the property value of the subject property is diminished by the existing zoning district, and the value of the property under the proposed zoning district; if such information is provided by the applicant or can be discerned. This consideration may include the length of time the property has been vacant or unused as currently zoned and efforts taken by the property owner(s) to use the property or sell the property under the existing zoning district classification. 
(i)  Whether a proposed zoning map amendment or conditional use approval will be a deterrent to the value or improvement of development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations. 
(j)  The possible creation of an isolated zoning district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts. 
(k)  Possible effects of the change in zoning district map, or change in use, on the character of a zoning district. 
(l)  The possible impact on the environment, including but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality. 
(m)  The relation that the proposed map amendment or conditional use bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme and the purposes of this Zoning Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.8. - Application Compliance and Completeness. 
(a)  No application described in this Article shall be processed by the Zoning Administrator unless it complies with the procedural requirements of this Article and is found to be complete with regard to application materials, payment of fees, supportive materials, and any other application requirements specified by this Article. 
(b)  If an application described and regulated by this Article does not comply with all provisions of this Article, the Zoning Administrator shall reject the application and refuse to process it. 
(c)  In cases where more than one application (rezoning, conditional use, variance) pertaining to a particular piece of property is filed simultaneously, the applicant must prepare separate applications and meet all application requirements for each application filed; provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator may waive separate site plan, fees, and the letter of intent filing requirements when they would be unnecessarily duplicative. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.9. - Administrative Processing of Applications. 
The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications specified in this Article. Upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that an application is complete and complies with the requirements of this Article, including deadlines, the application shall be marked received and approved for initiation, and the date of such consideration shall be indicated in the file of the application. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.10. - Concurrent Consideration of Applications. 
(a)  Concurrent Conditional Use Applications. In cases where an applicant is proposing a rezoning (i.e., amendment to the official zoning map), and where the applicant files an application to obtain a conditional use at the same time of filing a rezoning application, the two applications may be processed simultaneously, but the conditional use application shall not be considered until the rezoning application is approved (which may be the same public hearing or meeting), since the conditional use would not otherwise be permitted without the rezoning. 
(b)  Concurrent Variance Applications . In cases where an applicant is proposing a rezoning (i.e., amendment to the official zoning map), and where the applicant files an application to obtain a variance at the same time of filing a rezoning application, the two applications may be processed simultaneously, but the variance application shall not be considered until the rezoning application is approved (which may be the same public hearing or meeting), since the variance would not otherwise be permitted without the rezoning. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.11. - Investigations and Recommendation. 
(a)  Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator may send the application out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate (i.e., inter-agency review). Such internal municipal agencies should include the police department and public works/utilities department. External agencies may include but are not limited to the Hall County Board of Education; Georgia Regional Transportation Authority, Georgia Department of Transportation; Georgia Mountains Regional Development Center, adjacent local governments, and various departments of Hall County Government. 
(b)  Any written comments received in a timely manner shall be submitted to City Council for consideration, and any such comments shall become an official public record. 
(c)  With respect to each rezoning or conditional use application, and any concurrent variances filed, the Zoning Administrator may investigate and make a recommendation regarding any or all of the relevant matters concerning the application. Any such investigation and recommendation shall if in writing be made available to the applicant and City Council and shall become an official public record. 
(d)  Copies of the Zoning Administrator's findings and recommendations maybe provided to the applicant prior to the public hearing and shall be available upon request to interested members of the public prior to or at public hearing on the matter. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.12. - Notice of Public Hearing. 
(a)  At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing before City Council, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the City a notice of the public hearing before Mayor and City Council, on each application that is the subject of this Article. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
(b)  If the zoning decision of a local government is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than the local government, then the notice shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(c)  Each public notice sign pertaining to a conditional use shall state the existing or proposed zoning classification and the proposed use of the property. Each public notice sign pertaining to a concurrent variance shall state the proposed zoning classification and the type of variance applied for. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.13. - Public Notice Sign. 
(a)  For all applications involving an amendment to the official zoning map, application for conditional use, or application for a concurrent variance, the Zoning Administrator shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous location on said property one (1) or more sign(s). 
(b)  The public notice sign shall be erected not less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing before the City Council pertaining to said application. Each public notice sign shall state the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing and the location of the property. 
(c)  Each public notice sign pertaining to an amendment to the official zoning map shall state the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(d)  Each public notice sign pertaining to a conditional use shall state the existing or proposed zoning classification and the proposed use of the property. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.14. - Special Notice Requirements for Halfway Houses and Related Uses. 
This section is adopted pursuant to the specific requirements of the State Zoning Procedures Law. When a proposed zoning map amendment or conditional use application relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a duly noticed public hearing shall be held by City Council on the proposed action in accordance with the procedures and requirements established in this zoning ordinance. In addition, the following requirements shall apply. 
(a)  Such public hearing before the Governing Body shall be held at least six (6) months but not more than nine (9) months prior to the date of final action on the application. 
(b)  All published or posted notices of the public hearing shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning map amendment or conditional use relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. 
(c)  The published notice shall be at least six (6) column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.15. - Public Hearing. 
City Council shall hold a public hearing on all rezoning and conditional use applications in accordance with the public hearing procedures specified in Article 35 of this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.16. - Decision. 
(a)  Within a period of sixty-five (65) calendar days from the date of the public hearing on any such application(s) described in this Article, city council render a decision on the application(s). 
(b)  City Council may approve or disapprove the proposed rezoning or conditional use as applied for, or it may approve modifications of the application as originally proposed, and it may place conditions of approval on the application. 
(c)  In rendering a decision on any such application, City Council shall consider all information supplied by the applicant and Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.17. - Withdrawal of Application. 
Any application described in this Article may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, upon written notice to the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.18. - Refunds When Application is Withdrawn. 
(a)  When any application described in this Article is initiated by a party other than City Council, and said application is withdrawn within ten (10) calendar days from the date of approval for initiation by the Zoning Administrator, one half (1/2) of the entire application fee paid by the applicant shall be refunded to the applicant. The Administrator shall refund that portion of the application fee within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of withdrawal of the application. 
(b)  No portion of a required application fee shall be refunded on any application withdrawn by an applicant later than ten (10) calendar days from the date of approval for initiation by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.19. - Limitations on the Frequency of Filing Applications. 
(a)  No application regulated by this Article and affecting the same or any portion of property which was denied by the City Council shall be accepted for filing by a property owner until twelve (12) months shall have elapsed from the date of denial. 
(b)  The same or any portion of property previously considered in a zoning map amendment or conditional use application which was denied by City Council may not again be initiated until the expiration of at least six (6) months immediately following denial. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.20. - Notice of Action. 
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the action taken by City Council within a five (5) working days from the date City Council took action on said application. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 34.21. - Incorporation Clause. 
This Article is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-66 et seq., which Act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this ordinance. Where any provision of this Article is in conflict with any provision of the Act, the Act shall control. Or where this Article is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the Act, such provision of the Act, so as to meet the mandate of the Act, shall be fully complied with. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 35. - PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES 

Sec. 35.1. - Applicability. 
Any public hearing required by this zoning ordinance for an application for rezoning (amendment to the official zoning map), conditional use, variance (whether filed individually or concurrently with another application), and administrative appeal shall be called and conducted in accordance with the procedures of this Article. Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting a presiding officer from conducting a public hearing in a fair, orderly, and decorous manner. 
Sec. 35.2. - Presiding Officer. 
The presiding officer shall preside over the public hearing. In the case of the Governing Body, the Mayor shall preside, or in the absence of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall preside. If neither is present to preside, another member of the Governing Body shall be designated to preside. 
Sec. 35.3. - Opening of Public Hearing. 
(a)  The presiding officer shall indicate that a public hearing has been called on one or more applications made, shall summarize the processes required by this zoning ordinance, and shall open the public hearing. 
(b)  Thereupon, the presiding officer shall call the first case and the hearing body shall consider each application on an individual basis in succession as printed on the published agenda or as otherwise approved by the hearing body; provided, however, that the presiding officer may at his or her discretion call and consider more than one application simultaneously when more than one application involves the same piece of property, and when proceedings would be efficiently completed by combining separately required public hearings and discussing more than one scheduled matter as a single group of applications, subject to the limitations on decisions involving simultaneous processing of applications as specified in this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 35.4. - Report of Zoning Administrator. 
Upon opening the public hearing, the presiding officer shall recognize the Zoning Administrator, who shall provide a summary of the application and present any recommendations or results of investigations. Upon recognition by the presiding officer, any member of the Governing Body may ask questions of the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 35.5. - Applicant. 
(a)  When an individual application comes up for hearing, the presiding officer may ask for a show of hands of those persons who wish to appear in support of the application. If it appears that the number of persons wishing to appear in support of the application is in excess of that which may reasonably be heard, the presiding officer may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen to make presentations. 
(b)  Following the report of the Zoning Administrator, the presiding officer shall recognize the applicant or his or her agent, spokesperson, or each of them, who shall present and explain the application. 
(c)  There shall be a minimum time period of ten (10) minutes per application at the public hearing for the proponents to present data, evidence, and opinions; however, the Governing Body shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minute period to the proponents if they elect not to use that much time. Any member of the Governing Body upon recognition by the presiding officer may ask questions of the applicant or agent of the applicant, or both. 
Sec. 35.6. - Public. 
(a)  At the conclusion of the applicant's presentation, the presiding officer shall initiate the public comment portion of the public hearing. 
(b)  When an individual application comes up for review, the presiding officer may inquire if any member of the public wishes to ask any question(s), make any comment(s), and/or otherwise appear in opposition to the application. If it appears that the number of persons wishing to ask questions, make comments, or otherwise appear exceeds that which may reasonably be heard, the presiding officer may request that a spokesperson be selected for the group. 
(c)  There shall be a minimum time period of ten (10) minutes per application at the public hearing for the opponents to present data, evidence, and opinions and ask questions; however, the Governing Body shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minutes per application to the opponents if they elect not to use that much time. 
(d)  Prior to speaking, each speaker will identify him or herself and state his or her current address. Each speaker may speak only to the proposed application under consideration and shall address his or her remarks only to the hearing body. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed application under consideration. The presiding officer may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if, after first being cautioned, the speaker continues to violate this procedure. 
(e)  Upon recognition by the presiding officer, any member of the Governing Body may ask questions of a member of the public giving testimony. 
(f)  The Governing Body may ask questions and answer questions asked during the public portion of the hearing. The Governing Body may defer questions to the applicant to be answered during rebuttal. 
Sec. 35.7. - Applicant's Rebuttal. 
At the conclusion of public testimony, or upon the expiration of time allotted for public testimony, the applicant or his or her agent, or both, shall be allowed a short opportunity to answer questions, rebut the testimony of the public, and provide final comments and remarks. The time devoted to any such rebuttal shall be counted toward the total ten (10) minutes allotted to the applicant under this Article for initial presentation, if such a time limit is set by the presiding officer. Any member of the Governing Body upon recognition by the presiding officer may ask questions of the applicant, his or her agent, or both. 
Sec. 35.8. - Close of Hearing. 
After the foregoing procedures have been completed, the presiding officer will indicate that the public hearing is closed. Upon the closing of the public hearing, the applicant or his agent and any member of the public shall no longer address the Governing Body in any way, including hand waving or motions for attention; provided, however, the presiding officer may, in his or her discretion, reopen the public hearing for a limited time and purpose. 
Sec. 35.9. - Decision. 
(a)  After the public hearing is closed, the Governing Body may either vote upon the application or may delay its vote to a subsequent meeting, subject to the limitations of this zoning ordinance, provided that notice of the time, date and location when such application will be further considered shall be announced at the meeting during which the public hearing is held. 
(b)  After hearing evidence, in making a decision, the Governing Body shall apply the evidence to the criteria specified in this zoning ordinance for the application in question and other considerations and recommendations as may be considered appropriate. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that approval of the proposed application will promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
(c)  If the hearing body determines from the evidence presented by the applicant has shown that the proposed application promotes the health, safety, morals, and general welfare under applicable criteria, then the application shall be granted, subject to those reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the Governing Body on its own initiative or as recommended by the Zoning Administrator n. Otherwise, such application shall be denied. 
(d)  In cases where one or more companion applications are submitted and the Governing Body attaches conditions to the application, such conditions shall, unless specifically stated otherwise, become conditions of approval for each companion application. 
ARTICLE 36. - DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL IMPACT 

Sec. 36.1. - Definitions. 
Initial DRI information form: A form intended to identify basic information about a proposed development of regional impact on which a local government is being requested to take action, and which provides information to the Regional Development Center (RDC). This form notifies the RDC of a potential development of regional impact in order for the RDC to meet its responsibilities within the DRI review process. 
DRI Review initiation request form: A form intended to provide additional information about the proposed project to the Regional Development Center (RDC), the submission of which serves as an official request that the DRI review process be started by the RDC. 
Regional Development Center: The Georgia Mountains Regional Development Center, or any successor or subsequent agency with jurisdiction for development of regional impact applications. 
Sec. 36.2. - Applicability. 
This Article shall apply when an applicant (industry, business, or developer) requests some type of local government action related to a project, such as, but not limited to, a request for rezoning, conditional use, variance, permit, hookup to a water or sewer system, master or site plan approval, or entering into a contract, and it appears that the proposed development (or, for multi-phased projects, the complete development) meets the threshold(s) of a development of regional impact, according to "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, Effective July 1, 2001, as may be amended from time to time. 
Sec. 36.3. - Jurisdiction. 
If a proposed development project is to be located in more than one jurisdiction and, in total, the proposed development meets or exceeds a DRI threshold, the local government in which the largest portion of the project is to be located is responsible for initiating the DRI review process. 
Sec. 36.4. - Procedures. 
The application procedures established in this zoning ordinance will be modified by this Article in cases where a rezoning request, conditional use application or variance application fits the definition of a "development of regional impact." Developments of regional impact will be processed according to procedures of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs as described in "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, Effective July 1, 2001, as may be amended from time to time. 
When an application is received for development that meets or exceeds the thresholds established for that development type and thus constitutes a "development of regional impact" according to the aforementioned Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, the City will follow the procedures identified in said administrative rules which are summarized here. 
(a)  When an application for a development of regional impact is received, the Zoning Administrator will complete an "Initial DRI Information" form and a "DRI Review Initiation Request" form. Each of these two forms may be submitted to the Regional Development Center simultaneously, provided the City has all necessary project-related information. 
(b)  The City shall not take any official legislative or administrative action to advance or further a DRI project until the review process identified under the DRI review procedure specified in "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, Effective July 1, 2001," as may be amended from time to time, is completed. The City may undertake preliminary staff administrative functions associated with a proposed DRI including, but not limited to, project evaluation/assessment, site visits, and placing consideration of the application on a future agenda for formal action, if required. The City shall not take any official action related to such a project until the DRI review process is completed and the City has had adequate time to consider the DRI review comments. 
(c)  After the DRI review process is completed, the city may proceed with whatever action it deems appropriate regarding the proposed project, although it is encouraged to take the public finding and additional comments into consideration as it makes its decision. 
(d)  If the project receives a negative public finding from the Regional Development Center and the City approves said project or takes action to advance said project, the City shall notify the Regional Development Center and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs of its action and identify all local requirements it has placed on the development that could mitigate any negative findings identified in the DRI review process. 
ARTICLE 37. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 37.1. - Authority to Grant Variances. 
The Governing Body shall have the power to authorize upon application in specific cases such variances from the terms of this zoning ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance will in an individual case result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this zoning ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
The Governing Body may upon application consider the approval, conditional approval, or denial of variances, subject to the requirements of this Article. In granting a variance, the Governing Body may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the location, construction, maintenance and operation of any use or building, in addition to those expressly set forth in this zoning ordinance, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 
Sec. 37.2. - Initiation of Variance Applications. 
An application for variance may be initiated by any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or owner's agent of the property for which the variance is sought. 
Sec. 37.3. - Application Requirements. 
Applications for variance shall require submittal of an application requirements specified in this Section. 
(a)  Application fee as specified by this ordinance or established by resolution of the Governing Body; 
(b)  Application form furnished by the Zoning Administrator, including signed and notarized signature of property owner; 
(c)  Legal description of the property; 
(d)  Survey plat of the property; 
(e)  Letter of intent describing the proposed use of the property or other action requested; 
(f)  Site plan of the property at an appropriate engineering scale showing the proposed use and relevant information regarding proposed improvements; 
(g)  Statistics regarding the proposed development; 
(h)  Written analysis of how the proposed action compares to decision criteria specified for deciding on the subject type of application; 
(i)  Description of any special conditions voluntarily made a part of the request; and 
(j)  Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 37.4. - Site Plan Requirements. 
Applications for variance shall include a site plan, which shall at minimum include on the site plan information specified in this Section. The Zoning Administrator may waive one or more of the requirements of this Section in individual cases when he/she determines that one or more elements of the required information specified in this Section are not essential to the review process. 
(a)  Existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
(b)  Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator to describe and/or graphically depict the requested variance. 
Sec. 37.5. - Criteria for Granting Variances. 
Any applicant requesting consideration of a variance to any provision of the zoning ordinance shall provide a written justification that one or more of the following condition(s) exist. The Governing Body shall not approve a variance application unless it shall have adopted findings that one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions or practical difficulties pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district; 
(b)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would effectively deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the district in which the property is located; 
(c)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; 
(d)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
(e)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(f)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the proposed use of the land, building, or structure in the use district proposed; and 
(g)  The variance shall not permit a use of land, buildings or structures, which is not permitted by right in the zoning district or overlay district involved. 
Sec. 37.6. - Application Compliance and Completeness. 
(a)  No variance application shall be processed by the Zoning Administrator unless it complies with the procedural requirements of this Article and is found to be complete with regard to application materials, payment of fees, supportive materials, and any other application requirements specified by this Article. 
(b)  If the variance application does not comply with all application submittal requirements of this Article, the Zoning Administrator shall reject the application and refuse to process it. 
(c)  In cases where more than one application (rezoning, conditional use, variance) pertaining to a particular piece of property is filed simultaneously, the applicant must prepare separate applications and meet all application requirements for each application filed; provided, however, that the Zoning Administrator may waive separate site plan or letter of intent filing requirements when they would be unnecessarily duplicative. 
Sec. 37.7. - Administrative Processing of Applications. 
The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of variance applications. Upon a finding by the Zoning Administrator that a variance application is complete and complies with the requirements of this Article, including deadlines, the application shall be marked received and approved for initiation, and the date of such consideration shall be indicated in the file of the application. 
Sec. 37.8. - Concurrent Variance Application. 
In cases where an applicant is proposing a rezoning (i.e., amendment to the official zoning map) or conditional use, and where the applicant files an application to obtain a variance at the same time of filing a rezoning or conditional use application, the two applications may be processed simultaneously, but the variance application shall not be considered until the rezoning or conditional use application is approved (which may be the same public hearing or meeting), since the variance would not otherwise be permitted without the rezoning or conditional use. 
Sec. 37.9. - Investigations and Recommendation. 
(a)  Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the Zoning Administrator may send the application out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate (i.e., inter-agency review). Such internal municipal agencies should include the police department and public works/utilities department. External agencies may include but are not limited to the Hall County Board of Education; Georgia Regional Transportation Authority, Georgia Department of Transportation; Georgia Mountains Regional Development Center, adjacent local governments, and various departments of Hall County Government. 
(b)  Any written comments received in a timely manner shall be submitted to the Governing Body for consideration, and any such comments shall become an official public record. 
(c)  The Zoning Administrator may investigate and make a recommendation regarding any or all of the relevant matters concerning the application. Any such investigation and recommendation shall if in writing be made available to the applicant and Governing Body prior to the public hearing held by the Governing Body and shall become an official public record. 
(d)  Copies of the Zoning Administrator's findings and recommendations shall be provided to the applicant prior to the public hearing and shall be available upon request to interested members of the public prior to or at public hearing on the matter. 
Sec. 37.10. - Notice of Public Hearing. 
(a)  At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the public hearing before the Governing Body, the city shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the City a notice of the public hearing before Mayor and City Council, on the variance application. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
(b)  Each public notice sign pertaining to a concurrent variance shall state the proposed zoning classification and the section or sections of the Zoning Ordinance proposed to be varied. 
Sec. 37.11. - Public Notice Sign. 
(a)  For all variance applications the Zoning Administrator shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous location on said property one (1) or more sign(s). 
(b)  The public notice sign shall be erected not less than fifteen (15) calendar days prior to the public hearing before the Governing Body pertaining to said application. Each public notice sign shall state the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing before the Governing Body, and the location of the property. 
(c)  Each public notice sign pertaining to an amendment to the official zoning map shall state the section or sections of the zoning ordinance proposed to be varied. 
Sec. 37.12. - Public Hearing. 
The Governing Body shall hold a public hearing on all variance applications in accordance with the public hearing procedures specified in Article 35 of this zoning ordinance. 
Sec. 37.13. - Decision. 
(a)  Within a period of sixty-five (65) calendar days from the date of the public hearing held by the Governing Body on any variance application, the Governing Body shall render a decision on the application. 
(b)  The Governing Body may approve or disapprove the variance as applied for, or it may approve modifications of the application as originally proposed, and it may place conditions of approval on the application. 
(c)  In rendering a decision on any such application, the Governing Body shall consider all information supplied by the applicant and Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 37.14. - Withdrawal of Application. 
A variance application may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, upon written notice to the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 37.15. - Refunds When Application is Withdrawn. 
(a)  When a variance application is withdrawn within ten (10) calendar days from the date of approval for initiation by the Zoning Administrator, one half (½) of the entire application fee paid by the applicant shall be refunded to the applicant. The Administrator shall refund that portion of the application fee within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of withdrawal of the application. 
(b)  No portion of a required application fee shall be refunded on any application withdrawn by an applicant later than ten (10) calendar days from the date of approval for initiation by the Zoning Administrator. 
Sec. 37.16. - Limitations on the Frequency of Filing Applications. 
No variance application affecting the same or any portion of property which was denied by the Governing Body shall be accepted for filing by a property owner until twelve (12) months shall have elapsed from the date said application was denied by Governing Body. 
Sec. 37.17. - Notice of Action. 
The Zoning Administrator shall notify the applicant of the action taken by the Governing Body on the application no later than five (5) working days from the date the Governing Body took action on said application. 
ARTICLE 38. - ADMINISTRATIVE VARIANCES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 38, §§ 38.1—38.12, and enacted a new Art. 38 as set out herein. Former Art. 38 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 348-14, § 1, 3-16-2017. 

Sec. 38.1. - Authority. 
The Zoning Administrator shall have the power to authorize upon application in specific cases such administrative variances from the terms of this zoning ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this zoning ordinance will in an individual case result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this zoning ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
The Zoning Administrator may upon application consider the approval, conditional approval, or denial of administrative variances, subject to the requirements of this Article. In granting an administrative variance, the Zoning Administrator may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the location, construction, maintenance and operation of any use or building, in addition to those expressly set forth in this zoning ordinance, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.2. - Provisions that May Be Administratively Varied. 
The following provisions of this zoning ordinance may be administratively varied by the Zoning Administrator, subject to the specific limitations of this Section: 
(a)  Front building setback for a principal building, reduction not to exceed seven (7) feet. 
(b)  Side building setback for a principal building, reduction not to exceed three (3) feet. 
(c)  Rear building setback for a principal building, reduction not to exceed five (5) feet. 
(d)  Setback for an accessory building, reduction not to exceed two (2) feet. 
(e)  Maximum height of a building, not to exceed five (5) feet above the applicable maximum. 
(f)  Landscape strip minimum widths, reduction not to exceed twenty percent (20%) of the minimum required width. For example, if the minimum landscape strip width is ten feet (10'), the Zoning Administrator may authorize a reduction to no less than eight feet (8'). The Zoning Administrator may also authorize an average width of landscape strip rather than a minimum. 
(g)  Parking above the maximum or twenty percent (20%) below the minimum required as specified in Table 21.3, on a case-by-case basis based upon the scale and impacts of the request, for good cause shown, as provided in Section 21.18 of this zoning ordinance. 
(h)  The maximum height of fences and walls, not to exceed a 2-foot increase. 
(i)  Certain dimensional requirements of the TND zoning district, as specified in Table 7.2 of this zoning ordinance, may be administratively varied by the Zoning Administrator, for one or more lots for detached, single-family dwellings only, as follows: 
1.  The required minimum lot size of 6,700 square feet may be reduced to 6,000 square feet (and the corresponding maximum density may be increased from 6.5 to 7.26 dwelling units per acre); 
2.  The required minimum lot width of forty-five (45) feet may be reduced to forty (40) feet; 
3.  The minimum lot depth may be reduced from eighty (80) feet to seventy (70) feet. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.3. - Initiation of Administrative Variance Applications. 
An application for variance may be initiated by any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or owner's agent of the property for which the administrative variance is sought. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.4. - Application Requirements. 
Applications for administrative variance shall require submittal of an application requirements specified in this Section. 
(a)  Application fee as specified by this ordinance or established by resolution of the Governing Body; 
(b)  Application form furnished by the Zoning Administrator, including signed and notarized signature of property owner; 
(c)  Legal description of the property; 
(d)  Survey plat of the property; 
(e)  Letter of intent describing the proposed use of the property or other action requested; 
(f)  Site plan of the property at an appropriate engineering scale showing the proposed use and relevant information regarding proposed improvements; 
(g)  Statistics regarding the proposed development; 
(h)  Written analysis of how the proposed action compares to decision criteria specified for deciding on the subject type of application; 
(i)  Description of any special conditions voluntarily made a part of the request; and 
(j)  Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.5. - Site Plan Requirements. 
Applications for administrative variance shall include a site plan, which shall at minimum include on the site plan information specified in this Section. The Zoning Administrator may waive one or more of the requirements of this Section in individual cases when he/she determines that one or more elements of the required information specified in this Section are not essential to the review process. 
(a)  Existing and proposed buildings and structures; 
(b)  Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator to describe and/or graphically depict the requested administrative variance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.6. - Application Compliance and Completeness. 
(a)  No administrative variance application shall be processed by the Zoning Administrator unless it complies with the procedural requirements of this Article and is found to be complete with regard to application materials, payment of fees, supportive materials, and any other application requirements specified by this Article. 
(b)  If the variance application does not comply with all application submittal requirements of this Article, the Zoning Administrator shall reject the application and refuse to process it. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.7. - Criteria for Granting Variances. 
Any applicant requesting consideration of an administrative variance shall provide a written justification that one or more of the following condition(s) exist. The Zoning Administrator shall not approve an administrative variance application unless it shall have adopted findings that the one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(a)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions or practical difficulties pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the same district; 
(b)  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would effectively deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the district in which the property is located; 
(c)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the district in which the applicant's property is located; 
(d)  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this ordinance and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
(e)  The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the applicant; 
(f)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the proposed use of the land, building, or structure in the use district proposed; and 
(g)  The variance shall not permit a use of land, buildings or structures, which is not permitted by right in the zoning district or overlay district involved. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.8. - Procedures. 
Administrative variance applications shall be considered and processed in accordance with the requirements of this Section. 
(a)  Zoning Administrator shall review all applications. 
(b)  Applications must be complete and meet the requirements as set forth in section 38.2. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.9. - Withdrawal of Application. 
An administrative variance application may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request, upon written notice to the Zoning Administrator. No refunds of the application fee shall be provided in the case of a withdrawal. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.10. - Limitations on the Frequency of Filing Applications. 
No variance application affecting the same or any portion of property which was denied by the Governing Body shall be accepted for filing by a property owner until twelve (12) months shall have elapsed from the date said application was denied by Governing Body. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.11. - Appeal. 
(a)  Denial . The Zoning Administrator's denial of an administrative variance shall not be appealed as an administrative determination by the subject property owner, but any applicant denied an administrative variance may file an application for variance with the Governing Body pursuant to Article 37 of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Approval . The Zoning Administrator's approval of an administrative variance may be appealed as an administrative decision, but only if there is alleged to be an error in the administration or enforcement of this zoning ordinance. If such appeal is filed it shall be processed and considered in accordance with Article 39 of this zoning ordinance. When the administrative variance application was approved by the Zoning Administrator with conditions, and in the case of the subject property owner finds such conditions are not acceptable, the applicant shall not be authorized to file an appeal of the administrative decision but may file an application for variance with the Governing Body pursuant to Article 37 of this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 38.12. - Records. 
The Zoning Administrator shall keep public records of all administrative variances applied for and granted pursuant to this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 39. - APPEAL OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 39, §§ 39.1—39.6, and enacted a new Art. 39 as set out herein. Former Art. 39 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 39.1. - Appeal as a Remedy. 
Persons may appeal to the Governing Body for relief when aggrieved by an action or an interpretation of the Zoning Administrator made under this zoning ordinance. All such requests for relief shall be taken as an appeal to the Governing Body, as provided in this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 39.2. - Initiation. 
Appeals of an administrative decision may be initiated by any person aggrieved by a decision made under this zoning ordinance or by an officer or department head of the City. Such appeal shall be initiated within thirty (30) days of the action or decision appealed from by filing with the Zoning Administrator an application for an appeal of an administrative decision specifying the grounds thereof. If the person aggrieved by an action within this zoning ordinance does not initiate an appeal within thirty (30) days, then the decision of the Zoning Administrator shall stand, and no further administrative remedy shall be available under this zoning ordinance 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 39.3. - Application Requirements. 
No application shall be accepted for processing by the Zoning Administrator unless it meets the requirements of this Article. To initiate an appeal, an application must be submitted to the Planning Department which shall include at minimum the following: 
(a)  Application Form . A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator on the appropriate application forms. 
(b)  Fee . All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by City Council. A fee shall not be charged if the City Council initiates the appeal application. 
(c)  Written Narrative. A written narrative explaining the request and purpose for the appeal. 
(d)  Additional Requirements. In reviewing an application, the Zoning Administrator shall also be authorized to require any supporting information necessary to review an administrative decision on the record necessary to resolve the request for appeal. These may include but are not limited to plat or boundary survey, architectural renderings, or concept plan or as-built surveys. When the appeal application is referred to the Governing Body, the applicant shall be required to submit a sufficient number of scaled and reproducible size copies of such supporting documentation as determined by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 39.4. - Public Notice and Public Hearing. 
An application for appeal of an administrative decision shall comply with the public notice and public hearing process as described in Article 37 of this zoning ordinance for variance applications. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 39.5. - Stay of Proceedings. 
The filing of a completed application for an appeal of an administrative decision stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Zoning Administrator certifies to the Governing Body, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed unless the applicant for appeal of an administrative decision secures an order from a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 39.6. - Decision. 
City Council shall make findings and render a decision after the public hearing on the appeal application. The City Clerk shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision within five (5) days after City Council has rendered its decision. 
City Council may affirm, overrule or modify, in whole or in part, the rulings, or decisions or interpretations of the Zoning Administrator. In cases where an appeal is granted, the Governing body may direct the issuance of land development permits or building permits, not otherwise inconsistent with this or other ordinance adopted by City Council. 
A decision by City Council pursuant to this Article shall constitute final action and may be appealed only to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 40. - DESIGN REVIEW[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 39, §§ 39.1—39.6, and enacted a new Art. 39 as set out herein. Former Art. 39 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 40.1. - Purposes. 
Careful attention to the architectural design of buildings and the layout of development sites is in the economic interests of the City, its citizens, and business owners. Attractive and integrated architectural and site design features tend to improve an area's image, raise overall property values, attract new businesses and residents, and improve the quality of life. Research and experience have shown that there is a positive return on investment for providing attractive design features, for both government and property owners. This ordinance establishes a design review process and requires review and approval by the Zoning Administrator of design plans. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.2. - Applicability. 
This Article shall apply to all development within the city limits of Flowery Branch, unless otherwise specifically exempted from compliance. Developments within the CBD, M-1, and M-2 zoning districts shall meet all requirements as shown in Article 9 of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.3. - Exemptions. 
The following activities are exempt from filing a design review request: 
(a)  All applications for land development or building permits are required to meet the requirements of this Article and are therefore exempt from making a formal request unless the applicant chooses to do so independently, concurrently, or in advance of the building or land development permit application. 
(b)  The re-occupation of vacant office, commercial, institutional, or light industrial space within a single-tenant or multi-tenant building that received prior approval, where no new changes to the external features of the building or site inconsistent with prior approval will take place, except for a change in signage. 
(c)  Changes of ownership but which do not involve any changes to external features of the building or site inconsistent with prior approval, including signage. 
(d)  Repainting of an existing building to a similar color. 
(e)  Revisions of window or door placement. 
(f)  An increase or decrease in the number of parking spaces of ten percent (10%) from the number originally approved. 
(g)  Repair or reconstruction of existing freestanding retaining walls, decorative walls, and fences, when repaired or replaced with materials that are the same or substantially similar to those originally approved. 
(h)  Modifications to outdoor lighting fixtures involving the replacement of light fixtures, and which may involve an increase in the number of light fixtures at the same or lesser height, provided that the type of lighting and materials used for such light fixtures shall be of the same as or similar to those originally approved, and subject to the provisions of Article 23 of this zoning ordinance. 
(i)  The relocation of an access driveway or curb cut which does not affect or interfere with the approved placement of buildings or structures. 
(j)  The addition of a temporary use that is permitted in the zoning district in which the subject property is located. 
(k)  Development and activity that is specifically exempt from design review by another section of this zoning ordinance. 
(l)  Other similar minor changes as determined by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning Administrator may exempt a minor development or change to an existing development from design review, and he or she may exempt a proposed change to an existing building or structure from design review approval, where in his or her judgment, the proposed development or change to existing building or structure meets the spirit and intent of this Article and applicable design guidelines that apply to the proposed development. 
(m)  Any development activity that is within the jurisdiction of the Historic Preservation Commission and which requires a Certificate of Appropriateness according to the City's historic preservation ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.4. - Authority. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator shall have authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, or deny design review applications. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.5. - General Requirements. 
(a)  For any development, building, structure, or activity to which this Article applies, approval of a design plan shall be required before a building permit or other permit, as appropriate, is issued or any improvement, grading, alteration of land(s), or construction of building(s) commences. 
(b)  The Zoning Administrator shall not authorize, and the Building Inspector shall not issue, a building permit, a certificate of occupancy, or a development permit until all requirements of this, and any and all relevant articles pertaining to review are satisfactorily met. 
(c)  For any business, activity, or establishment which is required to obtain a business registration pursuant to the Flowery Branch City Code, no such business registration shall be issued, and operation shall not commence, until the business, activity, or establishment has either received approval of a design review request as required by this Article or has been found by the Zoning Administrator to be exempt from design plan approval. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.6. - Initiation of Design Review Requests. 
A request for design review may be initiated by any person, firm, corporation or agency, provided said individual, firm, corporation or agency is the owner or owner's agent of the property for which the design approval is sought. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.7. - Request Requirements. 
Requests for design review shall require submittal of the following requirements specified in this Section. 
(a)  Written request, including signed and notarized signature of property owner; 
(b)  Legal description of the property; 
(c)  Survey of the property; 
(d)  Letter of intent describing the proposed use of the property or other action requested; 
(e)  Site plan of the property at an appropriate engineering scale showing the proposed use and relevant information regarding proposed improvements, including landscaping; 
(f)  Statistics regarding the proposed development; 
(g)  Description of any special conditions voluntarily made a part of the request; 
(h)  Exterior elevation drawings drawn to scale and signed by an architect, engineer or other appropriate professional and submitted in sufficient number of copies as required by the Zoning Administrator. Said exterior elevation drawings shall clearly show in sufficient detail the exterior appearance and architectural design of proposed change(s) to buildings or structures and new construction, as applicable. Each application shall also indicate proposed materials, textures and colors and provide samples of materials and colors. The Zoning Administrator may accept written descriptions, photographs, or other information in lieu of signed elevation drawings and color and material samples. 
(i)  Other information as may be required by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.8. - Criteria for Considering Design Review Requests. 
The following general criteria shall be used by the Zoning Administrator in determining whether an application for design review shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied: 
(a)  Consistency with any adopted design guidelines for the type of development and/or the proposed use. 
(b)  The nature and character of the surrounding areas, and the consistency and compatibility of the proposed application with such nature and character. 
(c)  The general design, the character and appropriateness of design, scale of buildings, arrangement, texture, materials, and colors of the structure in question and the relation of such elements to similar features of structures in the immediate surrounding area, site, and landscaping. 
(d)  Among other grounds for considering a design inappropriate are the following defects: character foreign to the area, arresting and spectacular effects, violent contrasts of material, color, intense or lurid colors, a multiplicity or incongruity of details resulting in a restless and disturbing appearance, and the absence of unity and coherence in composition not in consonance with the density and character of the present structure or surrounding area. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 40.9. - Appeals. 
If the applicant wishes to appeal the decision of the Zoning Administrator, he/she may do so in compliance of Article 39 of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 41. - PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 41, §§ 41.1—41.8, and enacted a new Art. 41 as set out herein. Former Art. 41 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 41.1. - Development Permit. 
(a)  A development permit shall be required for any proposed use of land(s) or building(s), to indicate and insure compliance with all provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and any and all other relevant requirements as mandated by the City, State, or Federal government before any building permit is issued or any improvement, grading or alteration of land(s) or building(s) commences, except as exempted by this Article. 
(b)  A development permit shall be required to authorize all activities associated with development activity, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 41.2. - Exemptions from Development Permit. 
A development permit shall not be required for individual structures within approved subdivisions, nor shall a development permit be required for a detached, single-family dwelling unit on an individual lot not part of an approved subdivision or development. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 41.3. - Application for Development Permit. 
Any person seeking development activity on land within the city shall first submit to the Zoning Administrator an application for a development permit, including civil design and construction drawings. All applications for a development permit shall be made to the Zoning Administrator and shall be accompanied by three (3) complete sets of plans drawn to scale, signed and stamped by a engineer registered in Georgia who has authority to produce such plans, with his or her address. Applications shall be made in accordance with application requirements specified by the Zoning Administrator. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 41.4. - Review and Issuance of Development Permit (Also review fee schedule). 
(a)  Submittal Requirements. 
1.  Fees are due at time of submittal. 
2.  Submittal form is due every time plans are submitted. 
3.  3 sets of plans are required. 
4.  A flash drive containing all plans in .pdf format is required at every submittal. 
5.  Applicant is responsible for acquiring all outside agency approvals. 
6.  Plans are accepted at City Hall M-F between the hours of 8:00—4:00. 
7.  Resubmittals shall include City and engineering comments with a narrative explaining how each comment has been addressed. 
8.  Types of plans required - Article 6, Section 606 of the FB Code of Ordinances. 
9.  Plans must be prepared by a professional per Article 6, Section 607. 
(b)  Review Procedures. 
1.  Time of review. 
2.  Initial comments shall be sent via e-mail within 21 days. 
3.  Applicant has 21 days to re-submit after comments are sent. 
4.  Each subsequent review will have the same 21 day time line. 
5.  Number of reviews. 
a.  3 re-submittals will be allowed. 
b.  If project is not approved after 3 re-submittals it is considered void and the process will start over. 
6.  Coordination. 
a.  All submittals shall come directly to Flowery Branch. 
b.  All review comments shall be sent from Flowery Branch. 
c.  Any requested meetings with the City engineer of record will be scheduled and approved by City staff. 
d.  Any questions regarding the review shall be submitted to City staff via e-mail. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 41.5. - Duration of Validity of Development Permit. 
A development permit shall expire one (1) year after its issuance, subject to the following provisions: if the work described in any development permit has not been begun within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire, and if work described in any development permit has not been substantially completed or showing significant and consistent progress towards completion within one (1) year of the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 41.6. - Building Permit. 
(a)  The Building Inspector is hereby authorized to issue building permits in accordance with all provisions of this zoning ordinance and only after the Zoning Administrator has issued a development permit or if no development permit is required, after review of said building permit for compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  No building, or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended or enlarged, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation, grading, or filling of any lot for the construction of any building or structure be commenced until the Building Inspector has issued a building permit for such work in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Approval of a building permit shall require an application to the Building Inspector as specified in the building and related codes of the city. If the building permit is denied, the Building Inspector shall state in writing the reason for the denial and the applicant shall be notified of the denial. A record of all building permits shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person. 
(d)  Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within one-hundred-twenty (120) days of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 41.7. - Building Permit Application Requirements. 
Each application for a building permit shall be accompanied by dimensioned plans showing: 
(a)  The dimensions of the lot to be built upon (plat); 
(b)  The size and the overall building height of the building to be erected; 
(c)  The proposed use or uses and the location of the building or buildings on the lot; 
(d)  All design review requirements per Article 40 of this Ordinance and any and all other design requirements as dictated throughout this Ordinance; and 
(e)  Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this zoning ordinance are being observed. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 41.8. - Certificate of Occupancy. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the Building Inspector is required in advance of occupancy or use, any building or structure hereafter erected, or a change in the use of an existing building or structure. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the Building Inspector shall state in writing the reason for the denial and the applicant shall be notified of the denial. A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Inspector and copies shall be furnished on request to any person. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 42. - ADMINISTRATION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 42, §§ 42.1—42.3, and enacted a new Art. 42 as set out herein. Former Art. 42 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 42.1. - Fees. 
From time to time, City Council may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, the provision of inspections, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 42.2. - Right to Inspect. 
No person shall refuse entry or access to the Zoning Administrator or any authorized representative or agent of the City, including inspections personnel of the City, who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 42.3. - Zoning Administrator. 
The Zoning Administrator shall have all the necessary powers explicitly provided or reasonably implied in connection with the administration of this zoning ordinance. Where such provisions indicate the Zoning Administrator has the authority to review and approve a given application or activity, said authority shall also include the denial of such application or activity. 
(a)  Schedules. To adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary for the processing of applications established by this zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Administrative Procedures and Forms. To prepare administrative procedures, guidelines, application forms, to tend to other administrative details not inconsistent with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, and to implement the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(c)  Development Permits. . To review and approve or deny development permits and issue or refuse to issue development permits in accordance with this zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Design Review. To review and approve design plan applications in accordance with this zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Nonconforming Situations. To compel an applicant to completely correct or reduce the noncompliance of nonconforming situations, pursuant to authority and subject to the limitations of this zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Modify and Extend Application Requirements. To waive certain requirements, and to require additional information be submitted, for applications submitted pursuant to this zoning ordinance. 
(g)  Recommendations on Applications. To provide recommendations on rezoning, conditional use, and variance applications to City Council, as may be appropriate, and as authorized in this zoning ordinance. 
(h)  Administrative Variances. To grant administrative variances as authorized in this zoning ordinance. 
(i)  Inspections and Investigations. To conduct such investigations as he or she may reasonably deem necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this zoning ordinance, even if such responsibilities are delegated to code enforcement officers or other administrative or enforcement officers of the City. 
(j)  Enter Property. To enter at reasonable times upon any property for purposes of investigation, inspection and enforcement. 
(k)  Enforcement. To enforce any and all provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(l)  Delegation. To delegate the functions and responsibilities of the Zoning Administrator's position to other personnel. 
(m)  Interpretation. To interpret the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(n)  Maintain Official Zoning Maps and Overlay Zone Maps. To maintain and update the Official Zoning Map of the City, and if adopted, overlay zone maps. 
(o)  Determine Zoning Boundaries. To determine the location of the boundary of zoning districts when the exact location cannot be determined. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 43. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 348-18 , § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 6, 2018, repealed former Art. 43, §§ 43.1—43.13, and enacted a new Art. 43 as set out herein. Former Art. 43 pertained to similar subject matter. 

Sec. 43.1. - Generally. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this zoning ordinance or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to any or all of the enforcement actions and remedies described in this Article. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.2. - Stop Work Order. 
(a)  The Zoning Administrator or other enforcement official of the city upon learning or discovering a violation of this zoning ordinance or any approved site plan or permit issued pursuant to this zoning ordinance may immediately issue a stop work order which shall be posted on the job site and mailed to the applicant shown on the permit or approved site plan. 
(b)  The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.3. - Notice of Violation. 
Prior to or concurrent with the issuance of a Stop Work Order, if the Zoning Administrator, or other officer responsible for inspection and enforcement of the terms of this zoning ordinance determines that an applicant or other responsible firm, person or corporation has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this zoning ordinance, said officer shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this zoning ordinance without having first secured the appropriate permit there for, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.4. - Content of Notice of Violation. 
Notices of violation shall contain the following: 
(a)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(b)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(c)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(d)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.5. - Withholding or Revocation of Certificate of Occupancy. 
The Building Inspector or any other enforcement officer of the City may at any time refuse to issue, or revoke, a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in violation of this zoning ordinance until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.6. - Suspension, Revocation or Modification of Permit. 
The Zoning Administrator or other enforcement officer of the City may suspend, revoke or modify any permit or approval authorizing an activity or land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the enforcement officer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.7. - Denial of Additional Permits. 
The City is authorized and directed to deny and withhold permits or permissions on any new project or application pursuant to this zoning ordinance where the applicant, applicant's business or agent has failed or refused to comply with this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.8. - Suspension or Revocation of Business Registration. 
The City may revoke business registrations, work permit or other authorization for the unlawful conduct of any activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.9. - Withholding of Utility Service. 
Any enforcement officer of the City may request or direct any utility service provider to withhold utility service to any property on which a violation is alleged to have occurred. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.10. - Penalty Assessed Administratively. 
The City of Flowery Branch through authorized enforcement personnel may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremediated after receipt of the notice of violation. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.11. - Citation. 
Any enforcement officer of the City shall have authority to issue citations and to prosecute violations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
Sec. 43.12. - Civil Penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation violating, neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance, or any site plan approval or permit issued pursuant to this zoning ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance. Any violation of any such provision of this zoning ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by a combination of such punishments. Each day any violation of this zoning ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
( Ord. No. 348-18, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-6-2018 ) 
ARTICLE 44. - ANNEXATION AND ZONING 

Sec. 44.1. - Authority. 
The City of Flowery Branch is authorized by Section 1.2 of the Flowery Branch City Charter to provide for changes by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries of the city. The City is authorized to annex lands in accordance with state law (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.2. - Scope. 
This article addresses the application for annexation by a property owner or group of property owners under the 100% and 60% methods of annexation. It therefore does not apply to other methods of annexation authorized by state law (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.3. - Conference with Zoning Administrator Prior to Filing. 
Prior to filing an application for annexation of property into the city limits, the property owner(s) is strongly encouraged to schedule and attend a meeting with the Zoning Administrator, the purpose of which is to discuss the zoning district or districts potentially applicable to the property to be annexed and to determine the most appropriate zoning district of the city to be applied to the annexed area in the event that development exists on the property. Property owners proposing to annex property already developed are encouraged to bring a copy of an as-built survey of the property, if available. The Zoning Administrator may also advise the applicant on the procedures to be followed in annexation and zoning the subject property as specified in state law (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.) and the City of Flowery Branch zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.4. - Applications and Application Requirements. 
Applications for annexation shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall include the following requirements: 
(a)  A completed application for annexation; and 
(b)  Boundary survey of the property or properties proposed to be annexed, or a plat of same with reference to its recording in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Hall County; and 
(c)  A written and electronic copy in Microsoft Word-compatible format of the Legal description of the property or properties proposed to be annexed, matching the boundary survey or plat submitted; and 
(d)  An application for zoning of the property or properties to be annexed by the city, to one or more city zoning districts as described in the City of Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance (see Sec. 44.5 for details). 
(e)  For annexation applications involving property of 100 acres or more, the applicant shall also be required to file an application to amend the comprehensive plan of the city to at minimum indicate the proposed character and future land use plan map designations for the subject property or properties. 
(f)  There is no fee associated with filing an application for annexation and, if applicable, an application to amend the comprehensive plan. However, the property owner or property owners shall be responsible for paying a fee for a rezoning application unless waived by the Zoning Administrator and authorized by the City Manager per Section 34.4 of this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.5. - Zoning Application for Lands to Be Annexed. 
(a)  An application for rezoning of the property or properties proposed for annexation shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator concurrently with the filing of any application by a property owner for annexation. 
(b)  The rezoning application shall meet the requirements for submittal of materials as specified in Section 34.5 of this zoning ordinance; provided however, that the Zoning Administrator may waive the requirements for a site plan, letter of intent, and statistics regarding the proposed development if the applicant indicates in the annexation application that there is no intent to develop the property within 180 days of the effective date of the annexation if approved. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.6. - Zoning Procedures for Properties to Be Annexed. 
(a)  The city shall complete the procedures required by state law (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.) for the proposed zoning of annexed land, except for the final vote of the municipal governing authority, prior to adoption of the annexation ordinance but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required under O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6 (reference: O.C.G.A. § 36-36-4). If the annexation request is denied, any action by the City Council on the zoning shall be null and void. 
(b)  The rezoning procedure shall comply with the public notice and procedural requirements specified in Article 34 of the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance for rezoning applications and the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66 et seq.). 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.7. - Concurrent Applications. 
Applicants for annexation are authorized to file one or more concurrent applications for variance or conditional use pertaining to the property to be annexed. If such concurrent applications are filed, they must meet all requirements specified for the types of applications by the Flowery Branch Zoning Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.8. - Selected Reference to Annexation Procedures. 
Annexation procedures are specified by state law (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-1 et seq.). Those procedures include but are not limited to the following which are articulated here for the convenience of the city and annexation applicants. 
(a)  The city notifies the county in which land to be annexed is located of any proposed annexation (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-6). Objections by the county are possible (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11). Annexations cannot result in unincorporated islands as defined and prohibited in O.C.G.A. § 36-36-4. 
(b)  Annexations accomplished via property owner application require approval of the City Council and adoption by ordinance. 
(c)  The effective date of the annexation (and thus, the zoning) is determined as specified in O.C.G.A. § 36-36-2. Following annexation approval, the city files a report identifying any property annexed with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs and with the county governing authority of the county in which the property being annexed is located (reference: O.C.G.A. § 36-36-3). The city will also update its boundary and zoning maps to reflect approved annexations. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.9. - Nonconformities. 
Any use existing at the time of annexation approval on property annexed by the city which does not comply with the use provisions of the city's zoning district assigned to said annexed property shall be considered a nonconforming use. Any annexed property which has been subdivided in a manner that does not meet the requirements of the city's zoning district assigned to said annexed property shall be considered a nonconforming lot or lots. Existing developed conditions on property annexed may not meet height, bulk, setback, and/or other requirements of this zoning ordinance, in which case they are nonconforming buildings and situations. All such nonconformities are governed by Article 18 of this zoning ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.10. - Conformity with Zoning Ordinance. 
Lands hereafter annexed into the city limits shall, upon the effective date of such annexation, be subject to all applicable procedural and substantive requirements of this Ordinance as now or hereafter amended. Any new use of an annexed property after zoning approval shall only be permitted if it conforms to all applicable provisions of this Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
Sec. 44.11. - Issuance of Permits. 
No application for a development or building permit shall be filed on newly annexed property until the first day of the month following the effective date of the annexation approval. 
( Ord. No. 525, § 1, 7-7-2016 ) 
ARTICLE 45. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 45.1. - Conflict With Other Laws. 
Whenever the regulations of this zoning ordinance require: a greater width or size of yards; a lower height of buildings; a smaller number of stories; a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied; or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of this zoning ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such more restrictive statute shall govern. 
Sec. 45.2. - Severability. 
Should any Article, Section or provision of this zoning ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declarations shall not affect the validity of the zoning ordinance as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 45.3. - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. Specifically, Ordinance No. 308, the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Flowery Branch, Georgia, as amended, is hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE 51. - FILM AND MUSIC PROJECTS 

Sec. 51.1. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  This Chapter sets forth rules and regulations to govern and authorize individuals and film companies to conduct filming activities in the City of Flowery Branch without unreasonably impacting the peace and comfort of the residents of the community; to assure that such activities are consistent with considerations of the public health, safety, and general welfare; to ensure the protection of property; and to provide a streamlined process for issuing film production permits. The requirements provided in this Chapter shall be separate and in addition to those provisions of the City of Flowery Branch Business License Code, and/or other codes adopted by reference, regarding business regulation and licensing. 
(b)  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate filming and recording activity within the City of Flowery Branch in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Business License Office shall mean the Flowery Branch Business License Office, which for purposes of this Chapter shall be considered an agent of the Flowery Branch City Council. 
(b)  Camera Ready Liaison shall mean the designated staff person of the Lake Lanier Convention and Visitors Bureau, Inc. who serves as the Camera-Ready Liaison for the Georgia Film Office. 
(c)  Chief shall mean the serving Chief of the City of flowery Branch or his/her designee. 
(d)  Fire Marshall shall mean the serving Fire Marshall of Hall County or his/her designee. 
(e)  Engineering shall mean the designated staff person from the Flowery Branch City Engineer's office or engineering firm designated to represent the City of Flowery Branch. 
(f)  Planning and Community Development shall mean the Flowery Branch staff person from the City of flowery Branch Planning and Community Development department. 
(g)  Municipalities shall mean duly constituted cities located in whole or part within Hall County. 
(h)  News Purposes shall mean filming, videoing, or otherwise recording news events for television, radio, or internet newscasting by reporters, photographers, audio technicians, camera persons in the employ of a newspaper, news service, or similar entity where the event is not preplanned, and the film or tape is originally broadcast within twenty-four (24) hours of the event, not including magazine or documentary programs. 
(i)  Filming Activity shall mean the staging, shooting, filming, videoing, photographing, or other similar process conducted for the making of still photographs, motion pictures, television programs, music videos, commercials, and other commercial and non-theatrical productions. 
(j)  Studio shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities are regularly conducted on the premises. 
(k)  Film Permit shall mean the written authorization from the City of Flowery Branch Business Office to conduct the filming activity outlined in the permit. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.3. - Permit required. 
Except as otherwise provided in section 51-4, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in filming activity as defined in section 51-1 any place in the city limits of Flowery Branch, other than an established studio as defined in section 51-1 or within an enclosed structure, without a City of Flowery Branch film permit. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.4. - Exceptions. 
The following are not required to obtain a permit: 
(a)  Noncommercial filming or videotaping activities conducted solely for private or family use; 
(b)  Film activity conducted for use in a criminal investigation or civil or criminal court proceeding; 
(c)  Film activity conducted for news purposes as defined in section 51.2; 
(d)  Film activity conducted for education, government, and public access and local origination for public television or public cable or public internet channels within the State of Georgia; 
(e)  Non-profit 501c tax exempt organizations and other governmental agencies if their film project is not for commercial use; 
(f)  Any film activity deemed by the City Council of Flowery Branch to be in the public interest. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of the City to suspend film activity otherwise excepted when deemed necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, or when such activity poses an immediate hazard to persons and/or property. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.5. - Application review and permit conditions. 
(a)  Before granting a film permit, the Business Office shall review the application and shall consult with all relevant City and County officials as deemed necessary to ensure the health and safety of the citizenry of Flowery Branch. 
(b)  Conditions deemed necessary by the Business Office to ensure the health, safety, and general wellbeing of the general public may be placed on any film permit. Conditions may include (but are not limited to) the following: 
1.  Requirements regarding the presence of government employees, such as police or fire at the permittee's expense; 
2.  Requirements regarding traffic control, such as the placement of traffic control devices and signs at the permittee's expense; 
3.  Requirements regarding clean up and restoration of property used in the film activity at the permittee's expense; 
4.  Restrictions regarding the use of firearms and noise creating and/or hazardous devices; 
5.  Restrictions regarding stunts involving the use of pyrotechnics, vehicle crashes, and other hazardous activities and/or materials; 
6.  Requirements regarding partial or full nudity in public places; 
7.  Restrictions regarding the time of the film activity; 
8.  Requirements regarding the notification to nearby businesses and/or residences. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.6. - Fees. 
The fee for permits issued pursuant to the chapter shall be an application fee of $100.00 and a permitting fee of $100.00 per day or as may be adjusted from time to time considering the duration and scope of any particular project. The applicant shall pay such fee upon delivery of the application to the Business Office. The estimated cost of reimbursement for government personnel and equipment shall be paid at the time of permit issuance. Should the actual cost of governmental personnel and equipment exceed the estimated cost, the permit holder may be invoiced for the difference. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.7. - Insurance. 
The applicant shall provide the business Office with evidence of insurance for general liability and covering any liability of the permittee, permittee's lessees, and any State or local government authorities. The insurance policy shall be in an amount not less than one million dollars or such higher amount as determined by the Business Office to be appropriate to protect against foreseeable risks for bodily and personal injury liability and property damage arising from or in connection with the film activity. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.8. - Liability and indemnification. 
The permittee shall hold harmless, indemnify, and defend all State and local governments and their officers, employees, and agents from and against any and all losses, claims, or judgements for damages to any person or property arising from the film activity or issuance of the film permittee. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.9. - Permit revocation. 
The Business Office may revoke the film permit if the permittee, or any agents, employees, volunteers, or contractors of the permittee fail to comply with the permit conditions and requirements, or if it is determined after issuance that the permit application is false or inaccurate in any way. The Business Office shall provide the permittee with the grounds for revocation in writing or via e-mail within a reasonable time of determining the basis for revocation. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.10. - Permit suspension. 
Any permit issued shall be subject to immediate suspension by the Business Office if it is found necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.11. - Appeals. 
The applicant or permittee may appeal a permit denial, revocation, or suspension. The appeal shall be filed with the Business Office and shall be no later than five business days prior to the next officially scheduled City Council meeting. The appeal shall be heard by the City Council and their decision shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
Sec. 51.12. - Unlawful conduct not sanctioned. 
The granting of a permit does not absolve the permittee or its agents from complying with all Federal, State, and local laws, other than for conduct expressly described in the application and not subject to a condition or requirement of the permit/ For example, the permit may allow stunts that include speeding on a roadway that would otherwise be illegal. 
( Ord. No. 542, Exh. A, 3-1-2018 ) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in the table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Georgia state law. 

 