THE CODE OF THE CITY OF FLEMINGTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
FLEMINGTON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Sandra S. Martin 
Mayor 
____________ 
Paul Hawkins, Mayor Pro Tem 
Palmer Dasher 
Gail Fox Evans 
Dotty Bailey Fermin 
Charles Richardson 
Donnie Smith 
City Council 
____________ 
Craig Stafford 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Terri Willett 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Flemington, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and Beth Tattershall, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Terri Willett, City Clerk, and Mr. Craig Stafford, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Flemington, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Flemington, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Flemington, Georgia. 2007. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF FLEMINGTON, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
WHEREAS, the duly elected governing authority of the City of Flemington, Georgia is authorized under Article 9, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia to enact reasonable ordinances to protect the health, safety and general welfare of the public: 
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF FLEMINGTON, GEORGIA: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Flemington, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 10, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 13, 2007, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1000.00 and costs or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or both such fine and imprisonment or punishment may be fixed by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing by sentence to work on the public streets or public works of the city for a term not to exceed 12 months, as now or hereafter provided by law and may impose any punishment up to the maximums specified by general law for offenses with its concurrent jurisdiction or both, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate an intention to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 13, 2007 that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective upon adoption. 
APPROVED AND ORDAINED by the City of Flemington, Georgia as of this 12th day of February, 2008. 
CITY OF FLEMINGTON, GEORGIA 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
Adding to this table with each supplement helps users of this Code of Ordinances to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein, at the request of the city on March 13, 2019, is the charter of the City of Flemington, Georgia. The charter is placed on file with the Clerk of Superior Court of Liberty County, Georgia. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, the same system of headings and catchlines and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 the term "recorder's court" has been changed to "municipal court" and the terms "city recorder" and "recorder" have been changed to "municipal judge." The previous charter, §§ 1—32, derived from 1941 Ga. Laws (Act No. 49), page 1436. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWER 

Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
The city and the inhabitants thereof are reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Flemington, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. The city council for the City of Flemington held its initial organizational meeting on February 17th, 1941. Subsequently, without absence, and in full compliance with existing federal and state laws, the City of Flemington has continued the election process to maintain a perpetual city council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The corporate boundaries of this city shall be as described and set forth in Appendix A of this charter and said Appendix A is incorporated into, and made a part of, this charter. 
(b)  The city clerk shall maintain a current map and written legal description of the corporate boundaries of the city, and such map and description shall incorporate any changes which may hereafter be made in such corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Editor's note— Appendix A is on file with the city. 
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present and future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in the charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by the charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention, or failure to mention, particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 1.13. - Examples of power. 
(a)  Animal Regulations. To regulate and license, or to prohibit the keeping, of running-at-large of animals and fowl, and to provide impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift or human destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance, and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted hereunder; 
(b)  Appropriations and Expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia and to provide for the payment for the expenses of the city; 
(c)  Building Regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, fire safety, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(d)  Business Regulation and Taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(e)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(f)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations; 
(g)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or wellbeing of the citizens of the city; 
(h)  Environmental Protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment and vital areas of the city, the region, and the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of stormwater and establishment of a stormwater utility, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(i)  Fire Regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and, from time to time, to extend, enlarge or restrict the same, to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for variations thereof; 
(j)  Garbage Fees. To levy, fix, assess and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary services charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefitting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees; and to provide the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(k)  General Health, Safety and Welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(l)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(m)  Health and Sanitation. To prescribe standards for health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(n)  Jail Sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and other public property in the city, to provide for commitment or such persons to any jail, to provide for the use of pretrial diversion and any alternative sentencing allowed by law, or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(o)  Motor Vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(p)  Municipal Agencies and Delegation of Power. To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(q)  Municipal Debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(r)  Municipal Property Ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(s)  Municipal Property Protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city, and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(t)  Municipal Utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, stormwater management, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility, and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties, and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(u)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(v)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(w)  Planning and Zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to insure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(x)  Police and Fire Protection. To exercise the power of arrest through dual appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and firefighting agency; 
(y)  Public Hazards: Removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(z)  Public Improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(aa)  Public Peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of loitering, disorderly conduct, drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(bb)  Public Transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(cc)  Public Utilities and Services. To grant franchises or make contracts for, or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the public service commission; 
(dd)  Regulation of Roadside Areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(ee)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan and other employee benefit plans and programs for officers and employees of the city; 
(ff)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city, and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(gg)  Sewer Fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(hh)  Solid Waste Disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials, and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(ii)  Special Areas of Public Regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, the manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors; to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; to license and tax professional fortunetelling, palmistry and massage parlors; and to restrict adult bookstore to certain areas. 
(jj)  Special Assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(kk)  Taxes: Ad Valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(ll)  Taxes: Other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(mm)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(nn)  Urban Redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; 
(oo)  Other Powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 1.14. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six (6) councilmembers. The city council established shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.11. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
The mayor and members of the city council shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of election of mayor and members of the council; each shall continue to reside therein during that member's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy: filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or occurrence of any event specified by the constitution of the State of Georgia, Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment by the city council or those members remaining. 
(c)  This provision shall also apply to a temporary vacancy created by the suspension from office of the mayor or any councilmember. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected and appointed officers of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of Interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties. 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment, or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of the official's judgment or action in the performance of those official duties. 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Title 50, Chapter 14 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which the official is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or the private interest of the official or others. 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm or corporation which to the official's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the official is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the official has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that official shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this charter applies who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of Public Property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employees of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit or profit but shall use such property only in their capacity as an officer or employee of the city. 
(e)  Contracts Voidable and Rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract of sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of Elected Official. Except where authorized by law neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that official was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any appointive office in the city until one year after the expiration of the term for which that official was elected. 
(g)  Political Activities of Certain Officers and Employees. No appointive officer of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. No employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying for or election to any public office in this city or any other public office which is inconsistent, incompatible or in conflict with the duties of the city employee. Such determination shall be made by the mayor and council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for Violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office of position. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit an office of position as described in paragraph (1) above, shall be ineligible for appointment or election to employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof, and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
(b)  In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter and the constitution and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Flemington and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The city council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on the day of the first regular meeting in January following a regular election. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor-elect or city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members by a judicial officer authorized to administer oaths and shall, to the extent that it comports with federal and state law, be as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear)(affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor)(councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America. "I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof. I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding. I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the constitution and laws of Georgia. I have been a resident [of my district and] the City of Flemington for the time required by the constitution and laws of this state and by the municipal charter. I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Flemington to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward, or expectation thereof." 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or at least four (4) members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 48 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such council member presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by the law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairs and officers of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the approval of the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum voting. 
(a)  Four (4) councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of four (4) councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  No member of the city council shall abstain from voting on any matter properly brought before the council for official action except when such councilmember has a conflict of interest which is disclosed in writing prior to or at the meeting and made a part of the minutes. Any member of the city council present and eligible to vote on a matter and refusing to do so for any reason other than a properly disclosed and recorded conflict of interest shall be deemed to have acquiesced or concurred with the members of the majority who did vote on the question involved. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "It is hereby ordained by the governing authority of the City of Flemington" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by a councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided in section 2.24. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or four councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists, and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Section 50-14-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of section 2.22(b) for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.26. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose, all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Flemington, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or addition to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.27. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of 4 years and until a successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of service. The mayor shall forfeit the office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.28. - Mayor pro tem. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's physical or mental disability, suspension from office or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The mayor pro tem shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in section 2.14. When acting as mayor, the mayor pro tem shall continue to vote but only votes in the case of a tie. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(a)  Preside at all meetings of the city council; 
(b)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(c)  Have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(d)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; 
(e)  Only votes in the event of a tie on matters before the city council; is counted toward a quorum as any other councilmember; 
(f)  Prepare and submit to the city council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; and 
(g)  Fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall establish. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate or leave vacant all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the employees of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All employees shall receive such compensation as established by city council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary, and shall establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by city council, except where other appointing authority terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission or authority within the city shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  All board members serve at-will and may be removed at any time by a vote of four (4) members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice-chair, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorney as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of the person's position as city attorney. 
(b)  The city attorney is not a public official of the city and does not take an oath of office. The city attorney shall at all times be an independent contractor. A law firm, rather than an individual, may be designated as the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by city council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 3.14. - Position classification and pay plans. 
The mayor, in his or her sole discretion, shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at-will and may be removed from employment at any time, by order of the mayor, upon approval of the city council, unless otherwise provided by ordinance or this charter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There may be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Flemington. In the event there is a court known the Municipal Court of the City of Flemington, the following shall apply: 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Any individual appointed as a judge shall serve for a minimum term of one year and until a successor is appointed or if the judge is removed from office as provided in code section 36-32-2.1. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that the judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in section 2.20. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or ten (10) days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for 180 days or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing as now, or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation, and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and care taking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two (2) days before the hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offences against state laws committed within the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgement of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Liberty County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Election Code (Title 21, Chapter 2 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated) as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 5.11. - Election of the city council and mayor. 
Officers are all elected for four year terms and are sworn in following the election and prior to taking office on January 1st. They hold office until their successors are duly elected and take the oath of office. Changes to the manner of electing the governing authority of a municipality may only be made by the general assembly. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election every four (4) years in the odd years, on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and six (6) councilmembers at one election and at every other regular election thereafter. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 5.12. - Non-partisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 5.13. - Election by plurality. 
(a)  The candidate for mayor receiving the highest number of votes shall be deemed elected mayor, and the six candidates receiving the highest number of votes for councilmember shall be deemed elected councilmembers. 
(b)  In the event multiple candidates for mayor are tied for receiving the most votes or in the event that ties in number of votes received by multiple candidates for council results in a situation where no clear winner can be declared for some of the council seats, a run-off shall be held. The candidate for mayor receiving the highest number of the votes cast in such run-off election shall be declared the winner. The candidate or candidates for council receiving the most votes cast in such run-off election shall be seated in the remaining council seats unfilled in the general election. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under the Georgia Election Code. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one of more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by the following method: 
Following a hearing at which an impartial panel, appointed by city council, shall render a decision. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Liberty County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council, by ordinance, shall have the power to establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by two installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity, and if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purpose of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies and other similar organizations. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, assessments, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abating property owners. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes and fees. 
The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due to the city under section 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of FI FA's; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program or venture for which they were issued. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.21. - Short term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31st of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.22. - Lease/purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies provided the contract terminate without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Section 36-60-13 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and report of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budget and plans. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.25. - Submisssion of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor; except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by decision shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 1st day of July of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amount appropriate for operation of the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance or resolution setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation adopted pursuant to section 6.24. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinances shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council by ordinance or resolution may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.29. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but not later than 60 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.24. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the 1st day of each fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance or resolution. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.30. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.31. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(a)  It is in writing; 
(b)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(c)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to section 2.21. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.32. - Centralized purchasing. 
The city council shall have the power by ordinance to prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 6.33. - Sale or lease of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey, or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as not or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut-off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amount and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance as may be provided by law. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 7.11. - Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Reserved. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidated or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 7.16. - Repealer. 
An act incorporating the City of Flemington in the County of Liberty, approved February 17, 1941 (Ga.L.1941, p.1436) is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this charter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
Sec. 7.17. - Effective date. 
This charter shall become effective on December 11th, 2018. 
(Ord. of 12-11-2018(1)) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The Charter is derived from 1941 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 49), page 1436. 

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Charter of those ordinances that are included herein. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Flemington, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Flemington Code." 
State Law reference— Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council or the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; and in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond but are subscribed thereto, they are bound thereby pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(1). 
City. The term "the city" or "this city" means "City of Flemington, Georgia." 
Code. The term "Code" shall mean The Code of the City of Flemington, Georgia. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the last day shall be counted; and if the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having that privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise that privilege or to discharge such duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
Council. The term "council" or "city council" means the Council of the City of Flemington. 
County. The term "the county" or "this county" means the County of Liberty, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. The term "delegation of authority" means a provision that authorizes or requires a city officer or city employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(4). 
Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared by ordinance or statute pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(5). 
Keeper or proprietor. The term "keeper" or "proprietor" means persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
Limits or corporation. The term "limits" or "corporation" means the corporate limits (legal boundary) of the City of Flemington, Georgia. 
Mayor. The term "mayor" means the mayor of the City of Flemington, Georgia. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Municipality. The term "municipality," as it appears in this Code, means the City of Flemington, Georgia. 
Name of officer. Whenever the name of an officer is given, it is construed as though the words "of the City of Flemington" were added. 
Nontechnical and technical terms. A term or phrase shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical terms or phrases and any others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to that meaning. 
Number. The singular or plural number each includes the other pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(6), unless the other is expressly excluded. 
Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read as "and," and the term "and" may be read as "or" if the sense requires it. 
Ordinances. The term "ordinances" means ordinances of the City of Flemington, Georgia, and all amendments thereto. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, means any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The term "penal ordinances" means the rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" means corporations as well as individuals pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8), (15). 
Property. The term "property" means real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, schoolyard or adjacent open space, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of public or private ownership. 
Real property. The term "real property" means lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his/her place of habitation, and to which, whenever he/she is absent, he/she has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps is his/her residence. 
Seal. The term "seal" includes impressions on the paper itself, as well as impressions on wax or wafers. With the exception of official seals, a scrawl or any other mark intended as a seal shall be held as such pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(17). 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory. The term "may" is permissive. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" means a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "the state" or "this state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, public alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," as applied to a building or land, means any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, that building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. The present or past tense includes the future tense pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(7). 
Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
Written, in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" includes any representation of words, letters, numbers or figures, whether by printing or otherwise, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of those sections nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Descriptive headings, citations and notes etc., not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation of this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Invalid or unconstitutional provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect or any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or providing subdivision regulations. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(14)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing sections or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ___ to ___" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code and included in this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code, effect of new ordinances, amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. Chapters, sections and subsections, or any part thereof, repealed by subsequent ordinances, may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances until such time that the Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section ___ of The Code of the City of Flemington, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Flemington, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ___, that reads as follows:…." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be, of this Code. 
(e)  When necessary, sections and subsections to the Code may be renumbered by the official codifier for the city to fulfill the intent of the city council but all such changes shall be approved in advance by the city attorney. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalties; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or any offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in this Code or in any ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do an any act is declared to be unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of that provision of this Code or that ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment or alternative sentencing by sentence to work on the public streets or public works of the city for a term not to exceed 12 months, as now or hereafter provided by law and may impose any punishment up to the maximums specified by general law for offenses with its concurrent jurisdiction or both, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The infliction of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit or license or the taking of other punitive or remedial action where called for or permitted under the provisions of the city's Charter or Code. 
State Law reference— General penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a); limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner except by ordinance or other official act of the city council which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished according to the general penalties described in section 1-10. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; code of ethics as it pertains to state public officials, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - No deannexations. 
No requests for deannexation will be approved. 
(Ord. of 9-27-1994, § 5) 
Secs. 2-2—2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEGISLATIVE BODY 

Sec. 2-21. - Municipal government. 
The municipal government of the city shall be vested in a mayor and six councilmembers, who shall compose the city council. 
Sec. 2-22. - Mayor. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city. He/she shall see that the ordinances, bylaws, rules and orders of the city council are faithfully executed. The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the city council, but shall have no veto power. The mayor shall have a right to remove any city employee for cause, subject to final approval of the city council either at the next succeeding regular meeting or a special meeting called for the purpose, approving the action of the mayor. 
Sec. 2-23. - Council. 
The mayor and council shall have the right to do and perform such acts and things as may be necessary or expedient for the conduct of the affairs of the city, and the welfare of its citizens, and such other general powers and authority as are granted to municipalities under the laws of the state, or that may hereafter be granted to municipalities. 
Sec. 2-24. - Meetings. 
Regular meetings of the city council are held at the city hall or at such other place as may be designated, on a day and at a time determined by the council, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
State Law reference— Open and public meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-25. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided, the procedures of the city council shall be governed by the most current edition of Robert's Rules of Order. 
Sec. 2-26. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
State Law reference— Local governments under the Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99; maintenance of public records, O.C.G.A. § 45-6-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-27—2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal authority over offices and employments, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; fair employment practices of state employers, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 47-2-1 et seq.; and Georgia Firemen's Pension Fund, O.C.G.A. § 47-7-1 et seq.; Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.; Georgia Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90 et seq. 

Sec. 2-56. - Officer selection. 
The mayor and council shall have the right and power to appoint or elect a city physician, a city attorney, a city engineer, a superintendent of construction, a marshal, deputy marshals, and such other officers and employees as necessary. 
Sec. 2-57. - Consolidation of offices. 
The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for the consolidation of any two or more of said offices in one person. 
Sec. 2-58. - Term of employment. 
All officers shall hold their employment at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2-59. - Compensation. 
The salary of each officer shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2-60. - City clerk; duties. 
The city council shall elect a clerk. The clerk shall keep an accurate record and minutes of all meetings of the council. The clerk shall perform all other duties prescribed by the mayor and council. The clerk shall be paid such salary as the mayor and council may deem adequate. 
Sec. 2-61. - City treasurer; duties. 
The mayor and council shall elect a treasurer of the city; fix the term of office; fix the amount of bond for the office; and fix the salary for the office. The treasurer shall be the custodian of all moneys and securities of the municipality. The treasurer shall keep a correct book account of the same and shall render an accounting thereof, when, and as called for by the city council. The treasurer shall do and perform such duties as the city council may prescribe. 
Secs. 2-62—2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-81—2-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS (RESERVED) 

Secs. 2-104—2-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE (RESERVED)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Minimum budget, accounting, and auditing requirements for local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; discretionary management and disposal of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2. 

Secs. 2-135—2-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Aug. 14, 2007, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as Art. VII is at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-150. - Definitions. 
Censure shall mean a public expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
City official shall mean any person who is an elected official of the City of Flemington. 
Confidential information shall mean any information, which by law or practice is not available to the general public. 
Employee shall mean any person who is a fulltime or parttime employee of the City of Flemington. 
Formal reprimand shall mean an action taken by the ethics committee and/or mayor and council against a person or entity found to be in violation of this article issued in writing to the person or entity, chastising the person or entity for the violation. 
Government or city shall be construed to mean the City of Flemington, Georgia government. 
Immediate family shall mean the employee or city official, spouse and children of said parties. 
Private business shall mean any business which employs or is owned by a city official or employee. 
Reprimand shall mean an expression of disapproval, either public or private. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1) 
Sec. 2-151. - Acceptance of gifts. 
With the exception of campaign contributions which shall be reported in accordance with state laws, no city official shall solicit or accept directly or indirectly anything of value from any person, corporation, or group which: 
(1)  Has, or is seeking to obtain, contractual or other business or financial relationships with the city; 
(2)  Seeks to have a city official exercise a matter of discretion in his or her favor; 
(3)  Seeks to have interests which may be affected by the performance or nonperformance of the official duty of the city official; or 
(4)  Has the appearance to influence a city official in the performance of the official's duties. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.1) 
Sec. 2-152. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this section that city officials avoid any action or inaction whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-152 which might result in, or create the appearance of: 
(1)  Using public office for private financial, business, social or fraternal gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Adversely affecting the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government; or 
(4)  Purposefully or intentionally violating laws involving moral turpitude as defined by state law. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.2) 
Sec. 2-153. - Financial interests of members. 
City officials may not: 
(1)  Have direct or indirect financial interests that conflict substantially with their responsibilities and duties as government servants; or 
(2)  Engage in, directly or indirectly, financial transactions as a result of, or primarily relying upon, information obtained from their office. Aside from these restrictions, city officials are free to engage in lawful financial transactions to the same extent as private citizens. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.3) 
Sec. 2-154. - Use of public property. 
A city official shall not use city government property of any kind for any purpose other than officially approved activities, nor direct employees to use such property for any purpose other than officially approved activities. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.4) 
Sec. 2-155. - Use of confidential information. 
A city official shall not directly or indirectly, make use of, or permit others to make use of, for the purpose of furthering a private interest, official information not made available to the general public. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.5) 
Sec. 2-156. - Coercion by city official. 
A city official shall not use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person, business, entity or group by providing any benefit to them or persons within his immediate family, or those with whom an official has business or financial ties or social ties. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.6) 
Sec. 2-157. - Voting in matters of personal interest. 
A city official shall not vote on an ordinance, amendment, or resolution in a meeting that would directly affect his or her private business interests or property interests; nor such interests of his immediate family. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.7) 
Sec. 2-158. - Unauthorized purchases. 
A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city nor obligate city funds for such payment, without prior official authorization for such expenditure. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.8) 
Sec. 2-159. - Meetings of the council. 
Meetings of the council shall be conducted in accordance with the O.C.G.A., tit. 50, ch. 14, as amended. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.9) 
Sec. 2-160. - City attorneys used for private business. 
A city official shall not use the attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or private business without paying the attorney just compensation. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.10) 
Sec. 2-161. - Unauthorized use of public employees. 
A city official shall not use their superior position to request or require a city employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical work on behalf of his family, business, social, church or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; 
(3)  Personally work for them without offering just compensation; and/or 
(4)  Perform work allegedly for the benefit of the city without prior official authorization. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.11) 
Sec. 2-162. - Travel expenses. 
A city official shall not draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference only to fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the prorata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.12) 
Sec. 2-163. - Penalties. 
The code of ethics to be observed by city officials and employees are set forth herein, and any violation thereof shall subject the offender to disciplinary action which may include censure and reprimand, formal or informal, public or private. Power to administer a greater punishment shall include power to administer the lesser. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-1.13) 
Secs. 2-164—2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-171. - Ethics committee. 
The ethics committee shall consist of three members appointed by the council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall serve a two-year term. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-6) 
Sec. 2-172. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the ethics committee. The ethics committee may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. A copy of any filed complaint shall be forwarded to the party against whom the complaint is filed. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the ethics committee shall review and investigate it to determine whether the complaint is justified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. 
(c)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to conduct investigations through hearings and collect evidence and information concerning any complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the ethics committee shall be empowered to document their findings and dismiss those complaints which are frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council, provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the ethics committee shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. 
(e)  The ethics committee shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, applications for reinstatement and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. 
(f)  Should the committee determine after a hearing that disciplinary action is warranted, it shall make written findings and recommendations to the city council. 
(g)  The official against whom a complaint is filed may present evidence to the ethics committee and/or city council concerning any alleged complaints. The final disciplinary decision and/or penalties shall only be determined after hearing and opportunity to present evidence. 
(h)  Employees who are charged with violation of the code of ethics will be given due process according to the city's personnel policies and procedures. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-6.1) 
Sec. 2-173. - Additional regulations. 
This article shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-6.2) 
Sec. 2-174. - Right to appeal. 
Decisions of the mayor and council pursuant to this Code shall be reviewable by the county superior court upon notice in writing filed within 30 days of receipt of notice of the decision. Review by the superior court shall be limited to inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the mayor and council which supported the decision of mayor and council. Provided however, the council's refusal or failure to take action pursuant to this Code shall not be reviewable by the superior court. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-6.3) 
Sec. 2-175. - Conflict of interest. 
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this chapter applies shall engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or personal interest, direct or indirect, which interferes with the proper discharge of or impairs their judgment or action in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-6.4) 
Secs. 2-176—2-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CONFLICT OF INTEREST, POLITICAL ACTIVITIES AND CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-181. - Acceptance of gifts, gratuities, special privileges. 
(a)  Employees and city officials shall not accept any gifts, loans, rewards, favors, or services that may reasonably tend to improperly influence them in the discharge of their official duties. This limitation is not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value which are distributed generally nor to prohibit loans from regular institutions. It is particularly important that employees and officials guard against relationships which might be construed as or give the appearance of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. 
(b)  City officials and employees shall not use or attempt to use, including but not limited to knowledge obtained by or through their employment or by virtue of their position, to secure an economic benefit or advantage, special privilege or exemption for themselves or others. 
(c)  City officials and employees shall not accept employment or engage in any business or professional activity which they may reasonably expect would require or induce them to disclose confidential information acquired by them by reason of their official position. 
(d)  Employees shall not accept payments from outside sources for professional services (i.e., teaching, instructing, speaking engagements, consulting, honorariums) when such activities are done on city time or when such services pertain to the purchase or sale of city property. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-11) 
Sec. 2-182. - Proprietorship of creations. 
All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of city facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-12) 
Sec. 2-183. - Confidential information. 
City officials and employees shall not disclose confidential information gained by reason of their official position, nor shall they otherwise use such information for their personal gain or benefit. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-13) 
Sec. 2-184. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  If an employee of the city is an officer, director, agent or member of, or owns any interest in an entity which is subject to the regulation of, or which has financial commitments with the city, they shall file a sworn statement detailing the interest or commitment with the city clerk. 
(b)  Employees shall not transact any business in their capacity as city employees with any business entity of which he or she is an officer, director, agent, member, or in which he or she owns a controlling interest, excluding civic, charitable or religious organizations. 
(c)  Employees shall not have personal investments in enterprises which create a conflict or a perceived conflict between their personal interest and public interest. A passive interest by any official or employee in any public or private entity with which interest is five percent or less will not constitute a sufficient interest to raise a presumption or a perceived conflict of interest. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-14) 
Sec. 2-185. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold themselves out as a candidate in any city election while holding such employment. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaign for elections of the mayor or city council for the city during any period of time. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during their duty, service, or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city does not seek to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates. Therefore, except as provided in subsection (b), nothing contained in this Code shall be construed to restrict the right of any employee to hold membership in or support a political party, to vote as they choose, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicle in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. of 8-14-2007, § 2-15) 
Chapter 6 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Dec. 9, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 6, §§ 6-1—6-6, and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former Ch. 6 pertained to adult entertainment and derived from Ord. No. 1997-2, §§ 1—3, §§ 5, 6, 2-25-1997. 

Sec. 6-1. - Public purpose. 
Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Garden Grove, California, Hinesville, Georgia, Austin, Texas, and Warner-Robins, Georgia, whose experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city; and based on the documentary evidence and oral testimony presented by a law enforcement professional, at the mayor and city council hearing on August 12, 2008; and based on the evidence and testimony of persons who have appeared before members of the mayor and city council on other occasions and on documentary evidence submitted to the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council takes note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
It is the finding of the mayor and city council of the City of Flemington that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," (whether such alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises or not) begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
Among the acts of criminal behavior found to be associated with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, live commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment, are disorderly conduct, prostitution, public solicitation, public indecency, drug use and drug trafficking. Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with the commercial combination of live nudity and alcohol, commercial nudity in general, and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhood, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove described. The mayor and city council finds it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city, as well. 
Furthermore, it is the finding of the mayor and city council that other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in surrounding communities. 
The mayor and city council finds that the negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments upon the city are similar whether the adult entertainment establishment features live nude dancing or sells video tapes depicting sexual activities. The mayor and city council of the city therefore finds that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, and of churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the mayor and city council of the city finds that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment. The board finds that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions and further finds that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To that end, this chapter is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which more than ten square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainer means any person employed by an adult entertainment establishment who exposes his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein. For purposes of this section, adult entertainers include employees as well as independent contractors. 
Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." 
Adult entertainment establishment shall be defined to include the following types of business: 
(1)  Any commercial establishment that employs or uses any person live, in any capacity in the sale or service of beverages or food while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, so as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial establishment which provides live entertainment where any person appears unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose any portion of his or her "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities," as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial establishment which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) herein; 
(4)  Any commercial establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, sexually oriented materials, devices or novelties, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein or having a segment or section comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial establishment utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment establishment" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. Performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings. 
Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Nonconforming establishment means an adult entertainment establishment which was lawfully operated as of the passage of this chapter, but is now in violation of the zoning restrictions imposed in section 6-6, below. 
Operator means the manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
Owner means any individual or entity holding more than a 20 percent interest in an adult entertainment establishment. 
Premises means the defined, closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein adult entertainment is performed. 
Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, cleft of the buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Children's day care facility shall be defined as a structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of children away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purpose of this chapter the term "children's day care facility" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," or "pre-school." 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-3. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, or corporation to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on, in or upon any premises within the area of the city an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter without first procuring an annual license to do so except as provided below when the mayor and city council fails to approve or deny an application for an adult entertainment license within 30 days as required by this chapter. The issuance of such an annual license shall not be deemed to authorize, condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. No annual license for an adult entertainment establishment shall be issued by the city if the premises to be used also holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. Any premises licensed as an adult entertainment establishment shall not be eligible to apply at any time for a license to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises. There shall be an annual regulatory fee for each adult entertainment establishment licensed within the city in the amount of $750.00. The annual regulatory fee must be paid to the city clerk within ten days after the city clerk approves the initial application for an adult entertainment establishment license or a renewal thereof. In any event, no adult entertainment establishment license or renewal thereof shall be issued until the most recent annual regulatory fee has been paid. All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file an application with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year. Any renewal application received after November 30 shall pay, in addition to said annual regulatory fee, a late charge of 20 percent. If a license renewal application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs as hereinafter set forth in this chapter will be assessed. All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the calendar year and the full annual regulatory fee must be paid for a license renewal application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full annual regulatory fee shall be paid for a license renewal application filed after July 1 of the license year. Any person renewing any license issued hereunder who shall pay the annual regulatory fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to said annual regulatory fee and late charges, pay simple interest on the delinquent balance at the annual rate then charged by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States on unpaid federal income taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-4. - On-premises operator required. 
An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all operating hours. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-5. - Application process and qualifications. 
(a)  Process. Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct, or carry on any adult entertainment establishment in the incorporated areas of the city shall make application to the city clerk. Such application shall be made on forms furnished by the city, shall be made in the name of the adult entertainment establishment by an applicant who is a natural person and an agent of the adult entertainment establishment and shall include the name(s) of the operator(s) as defined in section 6-2 and of the owner(s) as defined section 6-2. If the adult entertainment establishment is a corporation, then the agent for purposes of making application for a license hereunder shall be an officer of the corporation. If the adult entertainment establishment is a partnership, the agent for such purposes shall be a general partner. At the time of submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee payable in cash or by certified check in the amount of $1,000.00 shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The application for license does not authorize the operation of, engaging in, conduct or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s); 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), if any, for a period five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s) are at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The operator(s)' height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the operator(s) at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  The business license history of the adult entertainment establishment seeking a license and whether such establishment, in previous operations in this or any other location under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of revocation or suspension; 
(9)  If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, the name of the corporation, exactly as shown in its ordinances of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation. If the application is on behalf of a limited partnership, a copy of the certificate of limited partnership filed with the city clerk shall be provided. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the adult entertainment establishment is to be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  With respect to the applicant, the operator(s) and the owner(s), all convictions, (excluding misdemeanor traffic violations unrelated to driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol) within the past five years, including a complete description of the crime or violation, the date of the crime or violation, date of conviction (including plea of guilty or nolo contendere), jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of disposition have been fully completed. Each person required to disclose convictions hereunder shall also provide a signed and notarized consent, on forms prescribed by the state crime information center, authorizing the release of his or her criminal records to the city clerk; 
(12)  A complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the operator(s); 
(13)  If the person or business entity on whose behalf application for a license is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name as properly recorded. If the application is made on behalf of a corporation, a copy of its authority to do business in the state, including ordinances of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any; 
(14)  At least three character references for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s) from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or any operator(s) or owner(s) and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted. The city shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s), who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(15)  The address of the premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted, or carried on; 
(16)  A plat by a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises where the adult entertainment establishment will be operated, engaged in, conducted or carried on in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any residential area, church, school, public park or children's day care facility, establishment selling alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine or other adult entertainment establishment; 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If application is made on behalf of an individual, the individual; 
b.  If application is made on behalf of a partnership, by a general partner; 
c.  If application is made on behalf of a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If application is made on behalf of any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(c)  Appearance by applicant. The applicant shall personally appear before the city clerk and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(d)  Investigation; standards for granting of license. The city shall have 30 days from the date of actual receipt of the application to investigate the facts provided in the application and the background of the applicant, the operator(s) and owner(s). The city clerk shall stamp the date of actual receipt of each application on the first page thereof and notify the applicant of the actual receipt of the application within five business days of actual receipt of such application. The mayor and city council shall approve or deny any application for an adult entertainment establishment license within 30 days of actual receipt of such application. The application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be granted if the city clerk finds: 
(1)  The required $1,000.00 investigative fee has been paid; 
(2)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(3)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s), as evidenced by the GCIC and NCIC reports provided by the applicant, has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, masturbation for hire, sexual battery, rape, child molestation, enticing a child for indecent purposes, or any offense included in the definition of a "criminal offense against a victim who is a minor" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 42-1-12 within a period of five years. For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which the applicant was allowed to avail himself of the Georgia First Offender Act unless the applicant is later adjudicated guilty of having violated the terms of his first offender treatment; 
(4)  Neither the applicant nor any of the operator(s) or owner(s) has had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit revoked for cause by the city or any other city or municipality located in or out of this state prior to the date of application within the preceding five years; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment and location of the premises of the adult entertainment establishment as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(7)  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be an operator(s) as defined in section 6-2 on the premises at all times during which the business is open; 
(8)  The proposed premises will be located at least the minimum distances set forth in this chapter from any residential use, church, school, public park or children's daycare facility or establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises, or another adult entertainment establishment; and 
(9)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of and will not be in conflict with this chapter or any other law, ordinance or regulation, of the city, the state or the United States. 
The city clerk shall deny the application for an adult entertainment establishment license if the application fails to meet any requirement contained in the city's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-6. - Regulation of adult entertainment establishments. 
(a)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be subject to and in compliance with section 6.14 ("OC-1" Overlay Commercial District) of the city zoning ordinance. All distances shall be measured pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-2-2 and regulation 560-2-2.32 of the State Revenue Commission (2007). 
(b)  Location. Adult entertainment establishments, including all derivatives thereof as set out within section 3.46 of the city zoning ordinance, shall be located only within districts zoned B-2 or A-1 with the following provisions: 
(1)  B-2—Only upon the approval of the governing authority after a public hearing and compliance with the provisions set forth in the adult entertainment ordinance [this chapter]. In no event shall any such activity within district B-2 be located within 750 feet of any church, school, children's daycare, public park or other property zoned AR-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4 or PUD or within 1,000 feet of any other activity which provides the same type entertainment. 
(2)  A-1—Only upon the approval of the governing authority after a public hearing and compliance with the provisions set forth in the adult entertainment ordinance [this chapter] and only if it is also at least 2,000 feet from any church, school, children's daycare, public park or other property zoned AR-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4 or PUD and at least 1,000 feet from any other activity which provides the same type entertainment. 
(c)  Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. No employee employed as an adult entertainer shall have been convicted of an offense described in section 6-5 (d)(3) of this chapter within the five years immediately preceding the proposed employment at or by an adult entertainment establishment. Any adult entertainer who is convicted of any such crimes while employed as an adult entertainer shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "licensed premises" shall mean the premises where an adult entertainment establishment for which a license is obtained pursuant to this chapter operates, conducts or carries on its business. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Hours of operation. An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
(e)  Display of licenses. An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display the license required by this chapter. 
(f)  Performance area. All dancing by adult entertainers at adult entertainment establishments shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(g)  Lighting. All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(h)  Covering of windows and doors. All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this chapter shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-7. - Conduct or activities prohibited. 
(a)  Advertising without license. No person, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Employment of minors or unpermitted persons. No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 18 years or an adult entertainer who has not obtained a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(c)  Contact between patrons, employees. No dancing or other performance by an adult entertainer at an adult entertainment establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. No patron, customer or guest shall be permitted to touch, caress or fondle any specified anatomical area of or any part of the body or clothing of any adult entertainer. No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any adult entertainer. No adult entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(d)  Engaging in specified sexual activities prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall be allowed to engage in any specified sexual activity as defined in section 6-2 on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  Public indecency prohibited. No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-8. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoyment thereof in the manner provided by law. It may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, engaging in, conducting or carrying on an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-9. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment. 
(a)  Cleaning of licensed premises. All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and the state. 
(b)  Inspection of licensed premises. The city fire marshal shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments, to determine compliance with and enforce all applicable fire, health and other codes of the city. 
(c)  Inspection for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The city law enforcement agency shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with and enforce all provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances, regulations and laws. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-10. - Denial, suspension or revocation of license; hearing. 
(a)  Grounds. 
(1)  A license may be denied to persons or entities that have submitted an incomplete application or that have failed to satisfy any of the requirements of the city's ordinance regulating adult entertainment establishments [this chapter]. 
(2)  Any of the following shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license: 
a.  The making of any statement on an application for a license issued hereunder which is material and is later found to be false; 
b.  Violation of any of the regulations or prohibitions of this chapter; 
c.  With respect to the applicant, operator(s) and owner(s), conviction of or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any of the crimes which would make such person or adult entertainment establishment ineligible to hold a license as outlined above. 
(b)  Denial; procedure. Within 30 days of actual receipt of an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, the mayor and city council shall either approve or deny the application. In no event shall the decision whether to approve or deny the adult entertainment establishment license application be withheld for more than 30 days after actual receipt of the application. In the event that such an application is held without decision for a period of more than 30 days, however, the license application shall be deemed approved, and expressive conduct may begin immediately notwithstanding the fact that no license has been issued. The city clerk shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license to an applicant who informs the city clerk of the fact that an application has been submitted, but no decision has been made thereon for a period of more than 30 days following actual receipt of the application. Notwithstanding the fact that the license provided by this sentence shall not be a prerequisite to the commencement of business operations contemplated by the application, the city clerk shall issue an adult entertainment establishment license under such circumstances within three business days of actual receipt of written notice by the applicant of such circumstances. In the event that the mayor and city council denies an application for an adult entertainment establishment license, notice of such denial shall be delivered to the applicant in person or by certified mail within five business days of such denial. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees or agents pursuant to this chapter, may seek review of such decision by filing an appropriate pleading in the county superior court or any other court of competent jurisdiction including, but not limited to, a mandamus petition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 9-6-20—9-6-28. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city, its officials, employees, or agents pursuant to this chapter may also seek review of such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari or an appeal to the superior court. 
(c)  Suspension or revocation; procedure. Whenever the city clerk finds reasonable grounds exist to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder, the clerk shall schedule a hearing to consider such suspension or revocation and shall, at least 20 days prior to the hearing, notify the licensee of the time and date of the hearing and the proposed action and the grounds therefore. The licensee shall be entitled to present evidence and cross-examine any witnesses at the hearing, with or without legal counsel. The mayor and city council shall make its decision within ten days of the hearing and shall notify the licensee in writing within five business days of the decision. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-11. - Miscellaneous. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this chapter shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-12. - Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse. 
Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-13. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All resolutions or ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with this chapter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-14. - Physical layout of establishment. 
Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
(2)  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted area or aisle so that there is an unobstructed view of anyone occupying the booth from the area in which the cash register for the adult entertainment establishment is located. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleanable. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
(3)  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Sec. 6-15. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Any owner of an adult entertainment establishment in any district which was operated within the law prior to the adoption of this ordinance from which this chapter is derived, claiming a nonconforming use, which was rendered a legal nonconforming use at the time of adoption of this chapter shall register such legal nonconforming use with Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) within six months from said effective date of this chapter. Such registration shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that said owner enjoys the protection afforded to non-conforming uses provided for herein. A zoning permit shall be issued by the LCPC for all registered legal non-conforming uses. 
(b)  Failure to register as required hereunder shall constitute a rebuttable presumption that said owner does not enjoy the protection afforded to non-conforming uses in this definition. 
(c)  In the event of the sale or other conveyance of the property within five years of the date of adoption of this ordinance from which this chapter is derived, the new property owner shall make application to transfer the zoning permit for the registered legal nonconforming use to the purchaser in order that the purchaser may enjoy the same protection afforded to non-conforming uses provided for herein. 
(d)  In the event of the abandonment of use for 12 consecutive months, the zoning permit for the registered legal nonconforming use shall be null and void and the above regulations shall apply. 
(e)  In the event of the sale or other conveyance of the property at any time after five years from the date of adoption of this chapter, the zoning permit for the registered legal nonconforming use shall be null and void and the above regulations shall apply. 
(f)  Corporate ownership provision and other business entities. All registering owners who are corporations having ten or less stockholders shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders and the percentage of stock owned by each. If a named stockholder therein is another corporation, the same information shall be given for the stockholding corporation. If the identity of the stockholders or their percentage of ownership should change, that information shall be sent to the director of planning or his designated representative for processing. Any change in 30 percent or more of the voting stock of the corporation shall constitute a conveyance for the purposes of this section. All other registering owners who are business entities shall list the names and addresses of the partners and/or managers with an ownership interest in the business entity. For partnerships, limited partnerships, limited liability partnerships, and limited liability companies, any transaction in which 30 percent or more of an ownership interest is transferred from one person or group of persons to one person or group of persons so that control in interest of the grantee is transferred or assigned to another person or group of persons shall constitute a conveyance for the purposes of this section. 
(g)  Trust provision. Any change in a beneficial interest in a trust agreement shall constitute a conveyance for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Church or sanctuary is defined for the purpose of this chapter to be a stand-alone building on one parcel of land whose sole use and active use is religious, church-related, or sanctuary-related and is not located on a commonly platted area which has common or shared parking such as shopping centers, strip malls, etc. 
Distances shall be measured in a straight line and shall be computed from the property line of a library, church, school/educational building, school grounds, college campus, licensed commercial child care center, or residentially zoned property to the building of the location in which is located the business for which the license is being sought. 
Distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages include, but are not limited to, whiskey, rum, gin, brandy, vodka, tequila, beer, wine and all alcoholic beverages of a similar nature and a similar alcoholic content. 
Licensee means an establishment holding a license to engage in the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises by the drink. 
Original alcoholic beverage license is defined as a license issued to a specific business owner at a specific location. Change in either business ownership and/or business location requires another application for an original alcoholic beverage license. An alcoholic beverage license is nontransferable. 
Premises means the definite closed or partitioned-in locality, including attached patios, porches, or cook-out areas, whether room, shop or building, wherein distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages are sold by the drink. 
Recreational venue is defined as an establishment that includes facilities for recreational activities (bowling, billiard, etc.). For purposes of this chapter, the recreational component in connection with alcoholic sales has to be approved by mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 1, 5-25-1977; Ord. No. 2011-01, 10-11-2011) 
Sec. 10-2. - Lewd, immoral, etc., conduct prohibited. 
(a)  All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for storage and sale of food for human consumption. It shall be unlawful to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices. 
(b)  Lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices, as mentioned in subsection (a) of this section, shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Nude, topless or bottomless dancing. 
(2)  Nude, topless or bottomless waiters or waitresses. 
(3)  Mud wrestling. 
(4)  The showing of pornographic or obscene films. 
(5)  Any entertainment with explicit sexual actions. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 2, 5-25-1977; Ord. of 3-28-1988, § 2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Sales to minors or incapacitated persons. 
Sale to minors or incapacitated persons is prohibited. No licensee shall sell or give away, or permit the sale or gift to, or the procuring for, any such distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages to any minor, to any person who is mentally incompetent, or to any person who is physically or mentally incapacitated due to the consumption of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 3, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-4. - Minors prohibited on licensed premises; consumption by minors. 
(a)  Minors are prohibited on licensed premises unless accompanied by a parent or guardian. No licensee shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises, unless such minors are accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to drink or possess any distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 4, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-5. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Sunday sales prohibited. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, offered for sale, dispensed, or given away in any place of business on Sunday, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. Every person operating a place of business solely and exclusively for the purpose of selling or dealing in alcoholic beverages shall keep such business closed on Sunday. 
(b)  Affidavit required. The licensee of any eating establishment desiring the privilege to sell or otherwise dispense distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wine on Sunday in accordance with this subsection shall, before dispensing such beverages on Sunday, file an affidavit with the city clerk, certifying under oath that: 
(1)  Such establishment holds or has applied for a current city business license to operate a restaurant, and for a current alcoholic beverage license; and 
(2)  Such establishment, if an existing business, derived at least 70 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales income from the sale of prepared meals or food during the preceding calendar year or, if a new business, fully intends and expects to derive at least 70 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales income from the sale of prepared meals or food during the remainder of the current calendar year. 
Such affidavit may be submitted at any time that the conditions stated in this subsection (b) are met, and must be submitted annually with such establishment's alcoholic beverage license renewal application if Sunday sales authorization is to be continued. 
(c)  Authorization. The alcoholic beverage license of an establishment which has properly filed such affidavit will be marked to indicate authorization to dispense alcoholic beverages between the hours of 12:30 p.m. Sunday and 12:00 midnight Sunday. Any establishment not complying with this section is hereby specifically prohibited from dispensing alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(d)  Qualifications. To qualify for a Sunday sales permit, any licensed restaurant, in addition to the requirements of this section, shall: 
(1)  Be a bona fide public eating place which actually and regularly prepares and serves food on the premises; 
(2)  Have a full kitchen facility open and operating to prepare food on the premises for consumption in the establishment, such kitchen to include at a minimum one cooking stove and/or oven or equivalent apparatus (this requirement is not met by a microwave over and/or food rotisserie), one standard-size food refrigerator and freezer, kitchen sink, and any and all food service requirements of the county health department; 
(3)  Have a specific area of the establishment set aside, set up, and operating to serve prepared food on the premises; 
(4)  Have a printed or posted menu from which selections for prepared food can be made; and 
(5)  Provide its full food service to the public on any Sunday when alcoholic beverages are dispensed. 
This subsection shall not be applicable to any recognized festival event sponsored by a nonprofit community organization. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 11, 5-25-1977; Ord. of 12-13-2005, § I) 
Sec. 10-6. - Misrepresentation of quantity, brand name, etc. 
It shall be illegal for licensees hereunder to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 12, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-7. - Display of prices. 
All licensees hereunder shall display in prominent places on the premises their current prices of spirituous liquors, wines, champagnes or malt beverages by the drink. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 13, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-8. - Off-premises sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any sales to be made outside of the building, premises or place of business licensed for such sale. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 15, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-9. - Violation. 
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by the holder of a license hereunder shall subject the holder of such license to revocation of said license. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 32, 5-25-1977) 
Secs. 10-10—10-36. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 10-37. - Factors considered in issuing licenses. 
In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder shall be granted, in addition to all provisions of this chapter, the following shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct this business. 
(2)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages, whether or not he/she has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(3)  If the applicant is a previous holder of a license to sell distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he/she conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business. 
(4)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(5)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses in the trading area of the place for which the license is sought. 
(6)  A person whose license issued under the police powers of any governmental entity has been previously suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 5, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-38. - Disqualification for conviction. 
No original license shall be issued to any person, partnership or corporation organized for pecuniary gain where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, or his/her spouse, shall have been convicted or shall have taken a plea of nolo contendere within ten years immediately prior to the filing of said application for any felony or misdemeanor of any state or of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations. The term "conviction" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; where the violation is for misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond or municipal ordinance, the city council, after investigation, may waive same as disqualification. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 6, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-39. - Citizenship required. 
No license hereunder shall be granted to any applicant who is not a citizen of the United States. Where the applicant is a corporation, the principal stockholder must meet the requirements of this section and the license shall be issued to the corporation and the principal stockholder. If the applicant is a partnership, the requirements of this section shall apply to all partners. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 7, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-40. - License fee. 
An annual license fee as specified in the fee schedule shall be charged for the initial license issued to any licensee hereunder, and an amount as specified in the fee schedule for each renewal license. License fees shall be paid in advance on or before December 31 of each year for an annual license and any new license granted hereunder during a calendar year shall pay the full license fee without proration. 
License fees for authorized catered functions and events shall be paid in the amount as specified in the fee schedule at least a week prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 8, 5-25-1977; Amd. of 7-13-2004(2); Ord. No. 2011-01, 10-11-2011) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that the city fee schedule is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 10-41. - Wholesale purchases, container size. 
The holders of said licenses may purchase alcoholic beverages from wholesalers licensed by the state in sizes of one-fifth of a gallon or larger containers unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size contents, and then said license holders may purchase said brand in the nearest size to said minimum size containers. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 9, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-42. - Per-bottle or per-package sales prohibited; exception. 
Licensees hereunder shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages by the bottle or package, except that wines, champagnes and malt beverages may be sold by the bottle or package for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 10, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-43. - Term of license; refund. 
No license shall issue for less than a calendar year period, or the remainder thereof, and in case of the revocation or surrender of such license before the expiration of such calendar year period, the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 16, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-44. - Sales hours. 
The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are opened. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 17, 5-25-1977; Ord. of 10-31-1988, § I) 
Sec. 10-45. - Certain convictions to bar employment. 
It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages by the drink hereunder any person in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers and musicians, who have been convicted in this or any other state or by the United States or any other country of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 18, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-46. - Employee alcohol cards. 
(a)  Every person, 18 years of age or older, working or serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in a place of business shall have an employee alcohol card signed by the deputy sheriff of the city setting forth thereon the name of the employer and the location of the place of employment. It shall be unlawful for the holder of any retail license hereunder for consumption on the premises of alcoholic beverages to permit any person to work or serve in or about such place of business unless such person has such a card. This shall not include performers, entertainers and musicians engaged in temporary work. 
(b)  Applications for an alcohol card will be made at the city hall. An alcohol card application must be completed, returned and approved prior to employment. The permanent alcohol card will be issued within three business days from the date of receipt of application. 
(c)  All alcohol cards will stay on file with management during the term of employment. The cards will be returned, by management, to the city hall when the applicant is no longer employed by the establishment. Management is required to produce on request by local law enforcement any alcohol cards for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 20, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-47. - Timeframe for obtaining license. 
All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than two weeks from the date of the approval of the application and if not so obtained, the permit shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 21, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-48. - Conditions for six different classifications of alcoholic beverage licenses. 
(1)  Classification 1 is for on-premise consumption in hotels. No original license for consumption of alcohol on premises shall be issued hereunder for any location in the city unless the business is licensed by the city as a hotel in good standing with the city, and which has a minimum of 60 rooms available for occupancy, and also has a maximum of one on-site social gathering area totaling less than 1,200 square feet to serve all alcohol beverage related products; the building/hotel shall not be within 25 feet of any library, school/educational building, school grounds, college campus, licensed commercial child care center, church building, and shall not be within 25 feet of any area zoned residential. The hours of operation permitted for one social gathering area with alcohol sales shall be from 4:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m., with no Sunday sales allowed. 
(2)  Classification 2 is for on-premise consumption in restaurants. No original alcoholic beverage license shall be issued unless the applicant files an affidavit with the city clerk that the business shall derive at least (60 percent of revenue) from food and non-alcoholic drinks. This business shall also have a full-service kitchen and meet the qualification of subsection 10-5(d) of this chapter. The distance from libraries, schools/educational buildings, college campuses, licensed commercial child care centers, and churches shall be 100 feet to the building for which the alcoholic beverage license is applied and shall be 100 feet from any area zoned residential to the building for which the alcoholic beverage license is applied. 
(3)  Classification 3 is for on-premise consumption in establishments with recreational facilities or venues also serving food. The compatibility of a recreational facility or venue in combination with alcohol sales shall be approved by mayor and council. The alcoholic beverage license shall be for beer and wine only. No original license shall be issued unless the applicant files an affidavit with the city clerk that the business shall derive at least 65 percent from a combination of revenue from food sales and revenue from the recreational venue. Notwithstanding foregoing, the revenue from food sales alone shall be a minimum of 15 percent. 
The distance from libraries, schools/educational buildings, school grounds, college campuses, licensed commercial child care centers, and churches shall be 300 feet to the building for which the alcoholic beverage license is applied and shall be 300 feet from any area zoned residential to the building for which the alcoholic beverage license is applied. 
(4)  Classification 4 is for on-premise consumption in clubs, lounges, and bars and other similar establishments. The distance from libraries, schools/educational buildings, school grounds, college campuses, licensed commercial child care centers, and churches shall be 500 feet to the building for which the alcoholic beverage license is applied and shall be 500 feet from any area zoned residential to the building for which the alcoholic beverage license is applied. 
Required parking for classification 4 establishments shall be one parking space per three maximum occupancy of the building for which the license has been applied and approved. 
This subsection (referring to classification 4 requirements) shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued at least 12 months prior to October 11, 2011. 
(5)  Classification 5 is for off-premise consumption in retail stores and package stores. For an off-premise alcoholic beverage license including distilled spirits, the distance from the building in which the business is located for which the license is being sought to schools/educational buildings, school grounds, licensed commercial child care centers, libraries, and college campuses shall be 600 feet; the distance to churches from the building in which the business is located for which the license is being sought shall be 300 feet; and the distance from the building in which the business is located for which the license is being sought to any area zoned residential shall be 300 feet. 
For an off-premise alcoholic beverage license including wine and beer, the distance from the building in which the business is located for which the license is being sought to churches, schools/educational buildings, school grounds, college campuses, libraries, and licensed commercial child care centers, shall be 300 feet; and the distance from the building in which the business is located for which the license is being sought to any area zoned residential shall be 300 feet. 
(6)  Classification 6 is for on-premise consumption for events. In order to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized catered function or a temporary nonprofit function held by a nonprofit organization, an applicant shall be required to: 
a.  Apply to the city for an event permit. The application shall include the name of the applicant; the date, address and time of the event; and a copy of the applicant's alcoholic beverage license. 
b.  Provide satisfactory reports as required to the State of Georgia on forms provided by the state, stating the quantity of any and all alcoholic beverages transported from the applicant's primary premises to the location of the authorized catered function and such other information as may be required by the state. 
c.  Maintain original event permits and documents in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverage to the catered function at all times. 
d.  For nonprofit or not-for-profit organizations, providing documents evidencing the organization's proof of existence and good standing as a nonprofit or not-for-profit organization with approval by the organization of the applicant's authority to act on the organization's behalf. 
Eligibility to cater functions. 
a.  Any applicant who holds an alcohol beverage license issued by any jurisdiction in the state to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises may be issued an off-premises license which authorizes such applicant to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink off-premises in connection with an authorized catered function. For purposes of this section an "authorized catered function" may include a function held on publicly or privately owned property. 
b.  Any applicant validly existing and operating pursuant to the laws of the state as a nonprofit (not-for-profit) organization may be issued a temporary license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink in connection with an authorized temporary nonprofit function. For purposes of this section an "authorized temporary nonprofit function" may include a function held on publicly or privately owned property. 
c.  An event permit may be approved for beer, wine, and distilled spirits for an authorized catered or an authorized temporary non-profit function. 
d.  The applicant shall furnish at least one uniformed law enforcement officer to be present for the duration of the event. 
Reporting for verification of percentage. The license holder of a classification 2 (restaurant) or classification 3 alcoholic beverage license (classification 3: establishments with recreational facilities or venues also serving food) shall file a gross income report with the city clerk. It is the option of the license holder to file either monthly or quarterly. If filed on a monthly basis, the report shall not be filed later than the 20th day of the subsequent month. If filed on a quarterly basis, the report shall not be filed later than 20th day following the end of each calendar quarter. The manner of filing the gross income report with the city clerk shall be consistent within a 12-month period. 
This report shall be filed on a form designated by the city clerk and must be accompanied by a certified copy of the identified license outlet sales tax report for the applicable month or quarter. Alternatively, in lieu of filing the report on a form designated by the city clerk, the license holder may file a certification signed by a certified public accountant attesting that the establishment is meeting the applicable percentage of food, and if applicable, recreational venue sales requirement(s) in relationship to the establishment's reported gross income. If the business with a classification 2 or 3 alcoholic beverage license cannot meet the required percentage ratios for two consecutive reporting periods, or for two nonconsecutive reporting periods in any 12-month period, the license might be revoked or put on probationary status after a hearing pursuant to section 10-49 of this chapter. All alcohol beverage license fees are set out in the city's fee schedule. 
Alcohol sales in adult entertainment clubs are prohibited. As provided for in section 6-3 of this Code, an adult entertainment establishment is prohibited from having and applying for an alcoholic beverage license. 
Brown-bagging is prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other commercial establishment to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages, which is known as "bring your own bottle" or brown-bagging. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 22, 5-25-1977; Ord. No. 2010-02, 11-9-2010; Ord. No. 2011-01, 10-11-2011) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2011-01, adopted Oct. 11, 2011, changed the title of § 10-48 from conditions prohibiting license issuance to conditions for six different classifications of alcoholic beverage licenses. 
State Law reference— Sales of alcoholic beverages near church, school, or housing authority property, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 10-49. - Suspension or revocation. 
No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city hereunder shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon the prior three-day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such businesses, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state or federal law, or for the violation of any city ordinance other than the traffic ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 23, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-50. - Renewal. 
All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 24, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-51. - Authority to approve or deny license applications. 
Licenses hereunder shall be mere grants or privileges and the city council shall have the discretion to approve or deny any application for a license to sell spirituous liquors by the drink. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 25, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-52. - Nontransferability. 
(a)  Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable, except as otherwise provided herein. In case of the death of any person holding such a license, or any interest therein, the same may be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, if otherwise qualified. 
(b)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(c)  Should a transfer of a location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new location shall be considered as a new license hereunder. 
(d)  A licensee may take in partners or additional stockholders where it is determined that the additional capital furnished is to be used exclusively for additional inventory or expanding the facilities of the business or for building new facilities and where it appears that the licensee himself/herself receives directly none of the additional capital invested. Under this section an additional partner or new principal stockholder must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 26, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-53. - Timeframe for opening establishment. 
All applicants for licenses hereunder must, within six months after the approval of said license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the products authorized by said license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale as referred to in this section within the six-month period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 27, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-54. - Cessation of business. 
Any holder of a license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the product or products as authorized in the said license, but who shall, for a period of three consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the said license, shall, after said three-month period, automatically forfeit his/her license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 28, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-55. - City to prescribe license application forms. 
The city council shall prescribe forms for new or renewal applications hereunder. All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the city council and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the city council. Failure to produce such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of such application. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 29, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-56. - Omission of application information. 
Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial thereof, and if any license has been granted under these circumstances, same shall be cause for the revocation of the license. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 30, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-57. - Advertising regulations. 
No licensee hereunder shall advertise in any news media or by any other means the fact that distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages by the drink may be purchased at such establishment; provided that the licensees hereunder shall be permitted to use the words "your favorite beverages served." 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 31, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-58. - Display of licensing regulations. 
It shall be the duty of the management of premises licensed hereunder to maintain a copy of the licensing regulations on such premises and to instruct each and every employee of the terms thereof. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 33, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-59. - License required for sale. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages for use or consumption on the premises without the license required herein. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 34, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-60. - License fee to accompany application; refund of fee. 
Each application for license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check or cash for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate fee payable by check or cash in an amount as set by council to defray the cost of investigation and report. If the application is denied and the license refused, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the separate payment shall be retained as the cost of filing and processing the application. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 35, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-61. - Compliance with state law. 
All applicable state laws, rules and regulations governing the sale of distilled spirits or alcoholic beverages must be complied with by any applicant for a license hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 36, 5-25-1977) 
Sec. 10-62. - Certification of acceptance. 
No person shall be approved for a license hereunder, or approved for employment by a licensee, unless such person shall have read these regulations in full text and certify in writing the fact of such reading and knowledge thereof. 
(Ord. No. 77-2, § 37, 5-25-1977) 
Secs. 10-63—10-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX ON LIQUOR BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 10-87. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Flemington and, variously, the incorporated territory of the city wherein the City of Flemington is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Drink means any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Licensee means any person who holds a license from the city to dispense liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
Liquor or distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of the year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, nonprofit corporation, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of liquor or distilled spirits by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any liquor or distilled spirits dispensed by the drink. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed by this article. 
Tax means any tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 10-88. - Imposition and rate of tax. 
There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 10-89. - Collection of tax. 
Every licensee holding a license to dispense liquor or distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is authorized and required to collect the tax imposed under this article from the purchaser of liquor sold by the drink within his/her licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 3) 
Sec. 10-90. - Due date; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such taxes collected by the licensee shall be due and payable to the revenue department of the city on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Return, persons required to file, contents. The remittance of the taxes collected under this article shall be made and a return shall be filed with the revenue director by every licensee showing the gross sales of liquor by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, along with such other information as may be required by the revenue director. 
(c)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50, the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act. 
(d)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city with a minimum amount of penalty due of $25.00. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 4) 
Sec. 10-91. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax, authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the revenue director is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he/she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his/her possession or that may come into his/her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination, service of. The revenue director shall give to the licensee written notice of his/her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his/her business address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when it delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in case of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whatever shall last expire. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 5) 
Sec. 10-92. - Determination if no return is made. 
If any person fails to make a return, the revenue director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of liquor by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the revenue director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 10-91(c). 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 6) 
Sec. 10-93. - Collection of unpaid tax. 
(a)  Alcohol license to dispense by the drink conditioned upon payment and drink remittance of tax. As a condition for holding a license to dispense liquor by the drink, a licensee must comply with this article and collect and remit the tax imposed in the manner prescribed. Failure to comply will subject the licensee to suspension of alcohol dispensing privileges and other actions as set out herein and within this Code. 
(b)  Action for delinquent tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the revenue director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(c)  Duty of successors of assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase price. If any licensee liable for any amount under this article sells out his/her business or quits the business, his/her successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt issued by the revenue department reflecting payment in full of the amount due or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he/she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him/her to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 7) 
Sec. 10-94. - Credits for overpayments. 
If is determined that a licensee has overpaid the tax imposed under this article, overpaid penalties or interest, or has paid the tax more than once, the revenue director may, upon the filing of a claim by the licensee and audit of the claim, authorize credit of the overpayment toward the current amount of tax due and payable from the licensee. All claims for overpayments must be made by the licensee, his/her administrators or executors, and must be made in writing within three years from the date of payment stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 8) 
Sec. 10-95. - Administration generally; record- keeping. 
(a)  Authority of revenue director. The revenue director or his/her authorized representative shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax herein imposed. The revenue director shall have the authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state, for the administration and enforcement of the provision of this article and the collection of the taxes provided herein. 
(b)  Records required. Every licensee for the sale of liquor by the drink in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers as the revenue director may require and in such form as the revenue director may require. 
(c)  Examination of records, audits. The revenue director or any person authorized in writing by him/her may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administering the provisions of this article, the revenue director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the revenue director when required and shall set for the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax collected thereon, or such other information as the revenue director may require. 
(Ord. of 2-14-2006, § 9) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 14-19. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is to implement the Dangerous Dog Control Law (O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.). 
(b)  Rabies control officers for the county board of health are designated as dog control officers for the city and are hereby given authority to carry out the duties of dog control officers as provided in the Dangerous Dog Control Law (O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.). 
(c)  The county board of health is hereby designated to hold, for the city, hearings provided for in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24. 
(Ord. of 12-28-1988, §§ I, II) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1—18-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-19. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or agent to violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or to erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted under the technical codes. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the technical codes is committed or continued, and, upon conviction, be punishable as provided by section 1-10. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 9.2) 
Sec. 18-20. - Liability. 
Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustment and appeals, or member of the electrical advisory and appeals board, charged with the enforcement of the technical codes, acting for the city in the discharge of his/her duties, shall not thereby render himself/herself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his/her duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or board member because of such act performed by him/her in the enforcement of any provision of the technical codes shall be defended by the city attorney until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 10.1) 
Sec. 18-21. - Advertising. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who is not an electrical contractor, conditioned air contractor or plumbing contractor duly licensed by the state construction industry board to display a sign stating or implying that he/she is carrying on a business of an electrical, conditioned air or plumbing contractor within the city, to claim orally that such is the case or to advertise by use of a business card, stationery, publication, or any other means that he/she or they are operating a contracting business in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 9.1) 
Sec. 18-22. - Technical codes. 
The city hereby adopts the state minimum standard codes, most current edition: 
International Building Code (ICC); 
National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); 
International Fire Code (ICC); 
International Existing Building Code (ICC); and 
International Property Maintenance Code (ICC); 
Sec. 18-23. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to recognize various mandatory standard codes as adopted by the state (hereinafter referred to collectively as "the technical codes" and individually by the specific code name (e.g., the plumbing code) and to provide for the administration and enforcement of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 1.2) 
Sec. 18-24. - Code remedial. 
(a)  Generally. The technical codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(b)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of the technical codes except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
(c)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan by the city, under the requirements of the technical codes shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee thereof shall be liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to inspection or permitting. 
(d)  Scope. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  Generally. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the technical codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
b.  Building. The provisions of the state minimum standard building code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
c.  Electrical. The provisions of the state minimum standard electrical code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
d.  Gas. The provisions of the state minimum standard gas code shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. There requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances, and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
e.  Mechanical. The provisions of the state minimum standard mechanical code shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fitting and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. 
f.  Plumbing. The provisions of the state minimum standard plumbing code shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewage system. 
g.  Fire prevention. The provisions of the state minimum standard fire prevention code shall apply to the repair, equipment, use, occupancy and maintenance of every existing building or structure or any existing appurtenance connected or attached thereto. 
(2)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of the technical codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of the technical codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(3)  Appendices. To be enforceable, the appendices included in the technical codes must be referenced in the code text or specifically included in the adopting ordinance. 
(4)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes without separate adoption. If specific portions of the standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(5)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his/her designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 1.3) 
Sec. 18-25. - Availability for review. 
A copy of each of the technical codes and amendments thereto are on file in the office of the building official and are available for review upon request. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 2.2) 
Sec. 18-26. - Appendices. 
Appendices to the technical codes are as adopted by the state department of communities affairs. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 2.3) 
Sec. 18-27. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  Generally. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official or his/her designated representative shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official or his/her designated representative. 
(c)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official or his/her designated representative to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, §§ 3.1—3.3) 
Secs. 18-28—18-57. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL 

Sec. 18-58. - General. 
The county building official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of the technical codes; is hereby given the authority to issue citations for violations of this article and the technical codes; is hereby authorized to issue subpoenas; and is authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with their spirit and purpose. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 4.1) 
Sec. 18-59. - Right of entry. 
(a)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of the technical codes, or whenever the building official or his/her designated representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official or his/her designated representative may enter such building, structure or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he/she shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he/she shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(b)  When the building official or his/her designated representative shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official or his/her designated representative for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 4.2(4.2.1, 4.2.2)) 
Sec. 18-60. - Stop work orders. 
Stop work orders shall be enforced pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 4.2(4.2.3)) 
Sec. 18-61. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official or his/her designated representative may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of the technical codes, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application of plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(b)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official or his/her designated representative that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the technical codes. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 4.2(4.2.4.1, 4.2.4.2)) 
Sec. 18-62. - Unsafe buildings or systems. 
All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 4.2(4.2.4.3)) 
Sec. 18-63. - Requirements not covered by code. 
Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by the technical codes, shall be determined by the building official or his/her designated representative. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 4.2(4.2.4.4)) 
Sec. 18-64. - Alternate materials and methods. 
The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official or his/her designated representative. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 4.2(4.2.4.5)) 
Secs. 18-65—18-86. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 18-87. - Permit application. 
(a)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for that work. 
(b)  Exceptions. Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by the state minimum standard mechanical code; 
(5)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(c)  State license required. Applications for electrical, mechanical or plumbing permits may only be made by, and will only be issued to, an individual holding a valid state electrical, mechanical or plumbing license or to an individual performing work on a single-family dwelling or farm owned and occupied by the individual applicant; provided, however, all work pursuant to such permit must be in conformity with all provisions of the technical codes and this article. 
(d)  Joint responsibility. It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner and contractor to see that a permit is obtained before any work is commenced. 
(e)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(f)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official or his/her designated representative without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(g)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner or his/her authorized agent; or, if section 18-88(b) applies, then the application must be signed by the licensed contractor or individual owner occupant. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official or his/her designated representative. 
(h)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. One or more extensions of time for periods of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building official for the application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.1) 
Sec. 18-88. - Drawings and specification. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building official or his/her designated representative, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of the state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his/her official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All group A.E and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 5,000 square feet (465 m 2 ) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. Where called for in the floodplain regulations, an architect or engineer shall be required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire-resistant floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
(1)  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(2)  Building floor plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class of the hazardous materials stored. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.2) 
Sec. 18-89. - Examination of documents. 
(a)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(b)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures, the affidavit shall state that plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the building code as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.3) 
Sec. 18-90. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building official shall act upon an application for permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he/she shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his/her refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and issuance of such permit is pending, the building official may, at his/her discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his/her own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the interior walls, bay, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant presents to the building official or his/her designated representative a plat or survey certified by a state registered land surveyor, or other evidence acceptable to the building official, showing the location of applicable street rights-of-way and building setback lines; and it shall be the duty of the building official or his/her designated representative to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the state minimum standard building code. 
(e)  Contractors' responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of the technical codes. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions approved shall be in writing by the building official or his/her designated representative. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official or his/her designated representative, are hazardous or complex, the building official or his/her designated representative shall require that the architect or engineer who signed the affidavit or prepared the drawings or computations shall supervise such work. In addition, the architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official or his/her designated representative written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his/her stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are approved by the building official or his/her designated representative. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he/she shall endorse in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his/her authorized representative. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.4) 
Sec. 18-91. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the prescribed fees have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(c)  Accounting. The building official or his/her designated representative shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected and the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(d)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official or his/her designated representative, the valuation of building alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.5) 
Sec. 18-92. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing buildings inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He/she shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He/she shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official or his/her designated representative, he/she shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this section. He/she may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspections services provided that after investigation he/she is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his/her agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or his/her designated representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the director of inspections. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building official or his/her designated representative upon notification from the permit holder or his/her agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his/her agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical codes: 
(1)  Building: 
a.  Foundation inspection: to be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection: to be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place, all concealed wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection: to be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical: 
a.  Underground inspection: to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: to be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing: 
a.  Underground inspection: to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. This inspection shall require a pressure test on all water supply lines, and ten feet of head pressure on drain lines. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to installation of wall or ceiling membranes. This inspection shall require a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: to be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(4)  Mechanical: 
a.  Underground inspection: to be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: to be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: to be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas: 
a.  Rough piping inspection: to be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection: to be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be covered have been concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: to be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes, to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this Code, and to ensure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official or his/her designated representative. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel and structural frames. Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official or his/her designated representative. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his/her agent shall notify the building official or his/her designated representative after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official or his/her designated representative has been received. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.6) 
Sec. 18-93. - Certificates. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official or his/her designated representative. 
(2)  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official or his/her designated representative shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
(3)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
(4)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official or his/her designated representative and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(b)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Service utilities. 
(1)  Connections. No person, firm, corporation, association or other entity (including public utility companies) shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official or his/her designated representative and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(2)  Temporary connection. The building official or his/her designated representative may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Authority to disconnect. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official or his/her designated representative shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.7) 
Sec. 18-94. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official or his/her designated representative may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he/she is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of group S and group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(c)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official or his/her designated representative on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.8) 
Sec. 18-95. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his/her agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 5.9) 
Secs. 18-96—18-118. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND APPEALS 

Sec. 18-119. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals. The board shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.1) 
Sec. 18-120. - Membership. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall consist of seven members and shall include one architect or professional engineer, two general building construction contractors, one master plumbing contractor, one conditioned air contractor, one at-large member from the construction industry, and one at-large member from the general public. Each member shall have at least 6 years experience in his/her field of expertise. A board member shall not act in a case in which he/she has a personal or financial interest. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.2) 
Sec. 18-121. - Terms. 
Members shall be appointed for a term of four years, but shall continue to serve until reappointed or a replacement is named by the governing authority. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the governing authority. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the governing authority, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.3) 
Sec. 18-122. - Quorum and voting. 
Four members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting all business of the board. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.4) 
Sec. 18-123. - Secretary of board. 
The building official or his/her designated representative shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.5) 
Sec. 18-124. - Powers. 
The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 18-125 to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the building, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.6) 
Sec. 18-125. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the director of inspections. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his/her duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variances. The construction board of adjustment and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Conditions of the variance. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the building, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of these codes. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official or his/her designated representative, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his/her order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.7) 
Sec. 18-126. - Procedures of the board. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of the building, gas, mechanical or plumbing codes. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in each case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the building, gas, mechanical and plumbing codes, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after the filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 6.8) 
Secs. 18-127—18-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ELECTRICAL ADVISORY AND APPEALS BOARD 

Sec. 18-151. - Appointment. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the electrical advisory and appeals board. The board shall be appointed by the county board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.1) 
Sec. 18-152. - Membership. 
The electrical advisory and appeals board shall consist of five members and shall include two licensed electrical contractors, three registered consulting electrical engineers (one from the Georgia Power Company, and one from the Canoochee Electric Membership Corporation, and one from the Coastal Electric Membership Corporation). All members of the board shall have not less than six years experience in their field. A board member shall not act in a case in which he/she has a personal or financial interest. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.2) 
Sec. 18-153. - Terms. 
Members of the electrical advisory and appeals board shall be appointed for four years but shall continue to serve until reappointed or a replacement is named by the governing authority. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the governing authority. Continued absence of any member from regular meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the governing authority, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.3) 
Sec. 18-154. - Quorum. 
Three members of the electrical advisory and appeals board shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting all business of the board. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.4) 
Sec. 18-155. - Secretary of board. 
The building official shall act as secretary of the electrical advisory and appeals board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote of each member, the absence of a member and failure of a member to vote. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.5) 
Sec. 18-156. - Powers. 
The electrical advisory and appeals board shall have the power to hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the electrical code. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.6) 
Sec. 18-157. - Appeals. 
(a)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system or his/her duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the electrical advisory and appeals board whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
(1)  The building official or his/her designated representative rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of the electrical service system. 
(2)  The provisions of the electrical code do not apply to this specific case. 
(3)  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
(4)  The true intent and meaning of the electrical code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(b)  Variance. The electrical advisory and appeals board, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of the electrical code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the electrical code or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
(1)  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
(2)  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
(3)  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by the electrical code to other buildings, structures or service system. 
(4)  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or electrical service system. 
(5)  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of the electrical ode and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Conditions of the variance. In the granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with the electrical code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of the electrical code. 
(d)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the decision is rendered by the building official. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(e)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his/her order, limit the time for such appeals to a shorter period. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.7) 
Sec. 18-158. - Procedures of the board. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
(b)  Decisions. The electrical advisory and appeals board shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of the electrical code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after the filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. of 7-27-1993, § 7.8) 
Secs. 18-159—18-184. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 18-185. - State safety fire commission rules; adoption by reference. 
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prevention of destruction of life and property by fire, explosion and related hazards, the state minimum fire safety standards of the state safety fire commissioner, under the authority of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12. Such rules are hereby adopted to the same extent as if fully set out herein. Copies of such rules are on file at the office of the city fire inspector. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 1) 
Sec. 18-186. - Purpose. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of prescribing rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the control of fire hazards; regulating the installation, use, and maintenance or equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises, and open areas; providing for the abatement of fire hazards; establishing the responsibilities and procedures for code enforcement; and setting forth the standards for compliance and achievement of the objectives, that certain code known as the Official Code of the City of Flemington, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, of which code at least one copy is on file in the office of the city fire inspector, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city; provided, however, that should any provision of the fire prevention code adopted hereby be in conflict with any other provision of this Code of Ordinances, the provision of this Code of Ordinances shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 26) 
Sec. 18-187. - Amendments. 
The following deletion and amendments to the fire code are made to the code adopted in this chapter: 
(1)  The mayor and city council shall be responsible for the enforcement of the fire code. The mayor and city council may detail qualified members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. To assist in the performance of the responsibilities and duties placed upon the mayor and city council, a bureau of fire prevention in the fire department has been created. The bureau shall operate under the supervision of the fire chief. The fire chief shall designate a fire official of the fire department as fire marshal. The fire marshal shall be responsible for the direct administration of the fire code as may be set forth by the fire chief. The fire marshal shall be appointed on the basis of examination or other method for determining qualifications. The fire chief may also designate such number of technical inspectors as shall from time to time be authorized by the mayor and city council. Such technical inspectors shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the mayor and city council to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city, covering the following: 
a.  The prevention of fires. 
b.  The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive materials. 
c.  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment. 
d.  The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes. 
e.  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire, from factories, schools, halls, theaters, and amphitheaters for any purpose. 
(3)  The fire chief shall prepare instruction from the fire marshal and the fire marshal's assistants, and forms for their use in the reports required by this article. 
(4)  Before a certificate of occupancy may be issued, the fire marshal or the fire marshal's assistants shall inspect and approve the premises by the guidelines set forth in the fire code. 
(5)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises on a periodic basis and shall make such recommendations for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life and property from fire. 
(6)  Whenever any inspector, as defined above, shall find in any building or upon any premises or other places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulations of waste paper, boxes, shaving, or any highly flammable materials especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstruction to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, the inspector shall recommend the same to be removed or remedied from such premises or buildings, subject to the appeals procedure provided for in the fire code. 
Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such recommendation within 30 days after the service of such recommendation shall be liable to penalties prescribed by the mayor and city council. The service of any such recommendation may be made upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant personally or leaving it with any person in charge of the premises or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of such premises or by mailing such copy by certified mail to the owner's last known post office address. Whenever it may be necessary to serve such a recommendation upon the owner of the premises, such recommendation may be served by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of the recommendation or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction or officer making the recommendation, by mailing such copy by certified mail to the owner's last known post office address. All such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within 30 days, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(7)  The fire marshal shall make an annual report of the activities of the bureau of fire prevention and shall transmit this report to the mayor and city council through the fire chief. This report shall contain all proceedings under the fire code with such statistics as the fire chief may wish to include therein. 
(8)  The fire chief or the fire marshal shall recommend any amendment to the fire code or ordinances which shall be desirable. 
(9)  The provisions of the fire code shall apply equally to both public and private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(10)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted by this article; fail to comply therewith; violate or fail to comply with any recommendation made thereunder; shall build in violation of any details, statements, specifications, or plans submitted or approved thereunder; or operate not in accordance with the provision of any certificate, permit, or approval issued thereunder, and from which no appeal had been taken; or who shall fail to comply with such a recommendation as affirmed or modified by the fire marshal within the time fixed herein, shall severally be subject to the penalties set forth by the mayor and city council. 
(11)  The board of appeals for the fire code shall be that board of appeals which is established by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 27) 
Sec. 18-188. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "city" is used in the fire code, it shall be held to mean the City of Flemington. 
(b)  Whenever the words "fire marshal" are used in the fire code, it shall be held to mean the fire inspector. 
(c)  Whenever the words "bureau of fire prevention" are used in the fire code, it shall be held to mean the Hinesville fire department bureau of fire prevention. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 28) 
Sec. 18-189. - City officials to cooperate with state officials. 
All city officials, department heads, and employees shall lend their cooperation to the state safety fire commissioner, state fire marshal, and their deputies or assistants, whenever called upon by them in the enforcement of the Georgia Safety Fire Law and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 18-190. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Obstruction. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building materials or in any other manner whatsoever any cistern, fire hydrant, standpipe, sprinkler connection, or other fire department connection, which would hinder approach to the same by any member of the fire department. No person shall put any posts or installations of any nature whatsoever nearer than 24 inches to any of the objects mentioned in this subsection without first obtaining written permission from the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  Installation. The barrel of fire hydrants shall be set perpendicular to the ground with the lowest discharge outlet at least 15 inches above finished grade. A cutoff valve shall be installed between the fire hydrant and the main. 
(c)  Sprinkler system. All sprinkler installation contractors shall notify the fire department's bureau of fire prevention prior to performing any type or work, repair, test or maintenance inside the city. All sprinkler installation contractors shall be licensed by the state to perform any type of sprinkler work. All plans and drawings must be submitted to the fire department's bureau of fire prevention before work may begin. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 3) 
Sec. 18-191. - Fire lane. 
It shall be an unlawful act for any person to park or block any fire lane in the city, either by traffic or other means. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 4) 
Sec. 18-192. - Special assembly occupancies. 
Special assembly occupancies shall include, but not be limited to, all buildings, grandstands, or portions thereof for gathering together 50 or more persons for such purposes as deliberation, worship, entertainment, eating, drinking, or amusement. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 5) 
Sec. 18-193. - Liquefied petroleum gas cylinder storage. 
(a)  LP gas cylinder storage shall not be within ten feet of any means of egress or source of ignition. 
(b)  Enclosures for LP gas cylinders shall be properly anchored to prevent moving. 
(c)  LP gas storage areas shall be outside of any building. 
(Ord. of 8-9-2005, § 6) 
Secs. 18-194—18-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 

Sec. 18-220. - Short title, authority, and applicability. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Impact Fees" law of Flemington, Georgia, or the "Impact Fee Ordinance" for short. 
(b)  Authority. This article has been prepared and adopted by the city council, in accordance with the authority provided by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph III of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, the Georgia Development Impact Fee Law (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended), and such other laws as may apply to the provision of public facilities and the power to charge fees for such facilities. 
(c)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to use any other legal methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. 
(2)  This article shall apply to all areas under the regulatory control and authority of the city and such other areas as may be included by intergovernmental agreement. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-221. - Findings, purpose, and intent. 
(a)  Findings. The city council finds and declares: 
(1)  That an equitable program for planning and financing public facilities to serve new growth and development is necessary in order to promote and accommodate orderly growth and development and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city; and, 
(2)  That certain public facilities as herein defined have been and must be further expanded if new growth and development is to be accommodated at the same level of service available to existing development; and, 
(3)  That it is fair and equitable that new growth and development shall bear a proportionate share of the cost of such public facilities necessary to serve new growth and development. 
(b)  Purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of this article is to impose impact fees, as hereinafter set forth, for certain public facilities, as hereinafter defined. 
(2)  It is also the purpose of this article to ensure that adequate public facilities are available to serve new growth and development in the city and to provide that new growth and development bears a proportionate share of the cost of new public facilities needed to serve them. 
(c)  Intent. This article is intended to implement and be consistent with the City of Flemington Comprehensive Plan, as it has been adopted or may be amended in accord with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 et seq.); and the applicable development impact fee compliance requirements, as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs and amended from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-222. - Rules of construction and definitions. 
The provisions of this article shall be construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(a)  Rules of construction. Unless otherwise stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this article: 
(1)  In the case of a conflict between words or phrases as used in this article and as used in other codes, regulations, or laws of the city, such difference shall not affect the meaning or implication of such words or phrases as used in this article. 
(2)  In the case of a conflict between the text of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future and words used in the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other legal or similar entity. 
(6)  The conjunction "and" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
(7)  The conjunctions "or" and "and/or" indicate that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(8)  The use of "either ... or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly and not in combination. 
(9)  The word "includes" or "including" and the phrase "such as" shall not limit a term to the specific example or examples given but are intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character. 
(10)  The article, section, and paragraph headings and enumerations used in this article are included solely for convenience and shall not affect the interpretation of this article. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below. 
Administrator means the mayor of Flemington, Georgia, or the mayor's designee, who is hereby charged with implementation and enforcement of this article. 
Building permit means the document authorizing the construction, repair, alteration of, or addition to a structure in accordance with the International Building Code (with Georgia amendments) or any other state minimum building code adopted by the city (see section 18-22), or any permit authorizing the installation or replacement of a mobile home. 
Capital improvement means an improvement with a useful life of ten years or more, by new construction or other action, which increases the service capacity of a public facility. 
Capital improvements element means a component of the Flemington comprehensive plan adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70 which sets out projected needs for system improvements during a planning horizon established in the comprehensive plan, a schedule of capital improvements that will meet the anticipated need for system improvements, and a description of anticipated funding sources for each required improvement. 
City means the City of Flemington, Georgia, a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
City council means the city council of Flemington, Georgia. 
Commencement of construction, for private development, means initiation of physical construction activities as authorized by a development or building permit and leading to completion of a foundation inspection or other initial inspection and approval by a public official charged with such duties; and for public projects, means expenditure or encumbrance of any funds, whether they be development impact fee funds or not, for a public facilities project, or advertising of bids to undertake a public facilities project. 
Comprehensive plan means the Flemington plan or planning elements as adopted or amended in accord with O.C.G.A. § 36-70 and the applicable minimum standards and procedures for local comprehensive planning as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. The comprehensive plan for Flemington is included within the most recently adopted or amended Liberty County Joint Comprehensive Plan prepared by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
Day means a calendar day, unless otherwise specifically identified as a "work" day or other designation when used in the text. 
Developer means any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
Development means any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, any of which creates additional demand and need for public facilities. 
Development approval means any written authorization, such as issuance of a building permit, land disturbance permit, or other approval for grading or site development, or other forms of official action required by local law or regulation, which authorizes the commencement of construction. 
Development impact fee means a payment of money imposed upon development as a condition of development approval to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of system improvements needed to serve new growth and development. 
Development impact fee assessment means the determination of the amount of a development impact fee that would be due for issuance of a particular building permit. 
Development impact fee collection means the receipt by the city of the amount due for an impact fee assessed for a particular building permit. 
Dwelling unit means a residence in which all living rooms are accessible to each other from within the residence, and in which the use and management of all sleeping quarters, all appliances for sanitation, cooking, ventilating, heating, cooling, or lighting are designed for the use of one family. A dwelling unit may be a one family detached home, or a single residence located in a duplex, an apartment building or a condominium structure. 
Encumber means to legally obligate by contract or otherwise commit to use by appropriation or other official act of the city council. 
Excess capacity means that portion of the capacity of a public facility or system of public facilities which is beyond that necessary to provide adequate service to existing development at the adopted level of service standard. 
Fee assessment. See "Development impact fee; assessment". 
Fee collection. See "Development impact fee; collection". 
Feepayor means that person who pays a development impact fee or his successor in interest where the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees which is required by this article has been expressly transferred or assigned to the successor in interest. In the absence of an express transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to any refund of previously paid development impact fees, the right or entitlement shall be deemed "not to run with the land." 
Floor area means the total number of square feet of heated floor space within the exterior walls of a building. Also referred to as the "gross floor area". 
Individual assessment determination means a finding by the administrator that an individual assessment study does or does not meet the requirements for such a study as established by this article or, if the requirements are met, the fee calculated therefrom. 
Individual assessment study means the engineering, financial, or economic documentation prepared by a feepayor or applicant to allow individual determination of a development impact fee other than by use of the applicable fee schedule. 
Level of service means a measure of the relationship between service capacity and service demand for specified public facilities as established by the city in terms of demand to capacity ratios, the comfort and convenience of use or service of such public facilities, or both. 
Present value means the current value of past, present, or future payments, contributions, or dedications of goods, services, materials, construction, or money, as calculated using methods of financial analysis acceptable to the administrator for determination of "net present value." 
Project means a single improvement or set of interrelated improvements undertaken together within a finite time period at a specific location. With regard to land development, a project may be identified as those construction activities authorized collectively by a building permit or other development approval, or for an interrelated collection of buildings and common public facilities such as a residential subdivision or an office park. 
Project improvements means site specific improvements or facilities that are planned, designed, or built to provide service for a specific development project and that are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of that project only, and that are not "system" improvements. The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement, and the physical location of the improvement on-site or off-site shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a "project" improvement or a "system" improvement. If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental service or facilities capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. No improvement or facility included in a plan for public facilities and approved for public funding by the city council shall be considered a project improvement. 
Property owner means that person or entity that holds legal title to property. 
Proportionate share means that portion of the cost of system improvements that is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of a project. 
Public facilities means: (a) public safety facilities, including fire protection facilities and law enforcement facilities, and (b) roads, streets, and bridges, including rights-of-way, traffic signals, landscaping, and any other components of local, state or federal streets or highways. 
Service area means a geographic area defined within the city or through intergovernmental agreement in which a defined set of public facilities provide service to development within the area. 
System improvement costs means costs incurred to provide additional public facilities capacity needed to serve new growth and development. 
(1)  System improvement costs include planning, design, and construction; land acquisition, land improvement, design, and engineering related thereto; including the cost of constructing or reconstructing system improvements or facility expansions. 
(2)  System improvement costs may include but are not limited to the construction contract price, surveying and engineering fees, related land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys' fees, and expert witness fees), and expenses incurred for qualified staff or any qualified engineer, planner, architect, landscape architect, or financial consultant for preparing or updating the capital improvement element. 
(3)  System improvement costs include administrative costs, provided that such administrative costs shall not exceed three percent of the total amount of the costs. 
(4)  Projected interest charges and other finance costs may be included as system improvement costs if the impact fees are to be used for the payment of principal and interest on bonds, notes, or other financial obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance the capital improvements element. 
(5)  System improvement costs do not include routine and periodic maintenance expenditures, personnel training, and other operating costs. 
System improvements means capital improvements that are public facilities and are designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to "project improvements." 
Unit of development means the standard incremental measure of land development activity for a specific type of land use upon which the rate of demand for public service and facilities is based, such as a dwelling unit, square foot of floor area, motel room, etc. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-223. - Imposition of development impact fees. 
Any person who after the effective date of this article engages in development shall pay a development impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this article. 
(a)  Construction not subject to impact fees. 
(1)  The following projects and construction activities do not constitute "development" as defined in this article, and are therefore not subject to the imposition of impact fees: 
a.  Rebuilding no more than the same number of units of development (as defined in this article) that were removed by demolition, or destroyed by fire or other catastrophe, on the same lot or property. 
b.  Remodeling or repairing a structure that does not result in an increase in the number of units of development. 
c.  Replacing a residential housing unit with another housing unit on the same lot or property. 
d.  Placing or replacing a manufactured home in a manufactured home park on a prepared manufactured home pad in existence and operation prior to the effective date of this article. 
e.  Placing a temporary construction or sales office on a lot during the period of construction or build-out of a development project. 
f.  Constructing an addition to or expansion of a residential dwelling unit that may increase the floor area or number of rooms but does not increase the number of housing units. 
g.  Adding uses that are typically accessory to residential uses and intended for the personal use of the residents, such as a deck or patio, detached garage or utility shed, satellite antenna, pet enclosure, or private recreational facilities such as a swimming pool or tennis court. 
(2)  A person claiming to be not subject to impact fees under subsection (a)(1) of this section, above, shall submit to the administrator information and documentation sufficient to permit the administrator to determine whether such claim is correct. 
(b)  Grandfathered projects. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, that portion of a project for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this article shall not be subject to development impact fees so long as the building permit remains valid and construction is commenced and is pursued according to the terms of the permit. 
(c)  Method of calculation. 
(1)  Any development impact fee imposed pursuant to this article shall not exceed a project's proportionate share of the cost of system improvements, and shall be calculated on the basis of levels of service for public facilities that are the same for existing development as for new growth and development. 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the calculation of impact fees shall be net of credits for the present value of taxes or other revenues as established in the capital improvements element, and which: 
a.  Are reasonably expected to be generated by new growth and development; and 
b.  Are reasonably expected on the basis of historical funding patterns to be made available to pay for system improvements of the same category for which an impact fee is imposed. 
(3)  The method of calculating impact fees for public facilities under this article shall be maintained for public inspection as a part of the official records of the city, and may be amended from time to time by official act. 
(4)  In addition to the cost of new or expanded system improvements needed to be built to serve new development, the cost basis of a development impact fee may also include the proportionate cost of existing system improvements to the extent that such public facilities have excess service capacity and new development will be served by such facilities, as established in the capital improvements element. 
(5)  Development impact fees shall be based on actual system improvement costs or reasonable estimates of such costs, as set forth in the capital improvements element. 
(d)  Service areas. The city limits of the City of Flemington, Georgia, or such other area established by intergovernmental agreement, each constitute a single service area for applicable public facilities subject to impact fees under this article. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-224. - Fee assessment and payment. 
(a)  Fee schedule. 
(1)  Payment of a development impact fee pursuant to the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A, shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by the city, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  When a land development activity for which an application for a building permit has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure other than a shopping center, the total development impact fee shall be the sum of the fees for each and every building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or structure. Shopping centers shall be assessed a single impact fee, in accordance with Attachment A, as a single use without regard to its individual tenants. 
(3)  In the event that an applicant contends that the land use category of the proposed development is not shown on the fee schedule or fits within a different category, then: 
a.  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall make a determination as to the appropriate land use category and the appropriate development impact fee. 
b.  In making such determination, the administrator may require such additional information from the applicant as necessary to form a logical fee determination relative to the land use categories shown on the adopted fee schedule. 
c.  If the land use of the proposed development is not similar to a land use category shown on the adopted fee schedule, then an appropriate fee may be determined by the administrator as an individual assessment in accordance with the individual assessment determinations section of this article. 
d.  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(b)  Timing of assessment and payment. 
(1)  Development impact fees shall be assessed at the time an application for a building permit is received by the city, and such development impact fees shall be collected in full by the city as a prerequisite to issuance of the building permit. 
(2)  For projects not involving issuance of a building permit, all development impact fees shall be collected at the time of approval of the development permit or such other authorization to commence construction or to commence use of a property, whichever is earliest. 
(3)  If the final use of a building cannot be determined at the time of the initial building permit, the administrator shall have the authority to collect a development impact fee based on the most likely use of the building, and shall adjust the fee in accordance with the following: 
a.  Prior to the completion of the project, and as a condition to the issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy, as applicable, the developer shall recertify in writing to the administrator the actual land use or uses of the project, and shall present an architect's certificate of the actual gross square footage of floor area attributable to each use. 
b.  In the event that the actual land use or uses and/or the actual gross square footage applicable to the actual land use or uses differs from that originally certified, and in the event that the impact fee applicable to the actual land use or uses and/or gross square footage exceeds the impact fee previously paid, the developer shall be required to pay the amount of the excess as a condition to the issuance of an interior finishes permit or a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  The amount of the excess shall be based upon the impact fee schedule in effect on the date the interior finishes permit or the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
d.  If the actual gross square footage constructed after the issuance of the building permit is less than the amount originally certified, the developer shall be entitled to a refund of the excess portion of the fee in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, any future change in demand for public facilities in excess of the average demand anticipated at the time of issuance of the original building permit shall result in the assessment of such additional fee as would otherwise have been due. Future changes in demand may result from a change in the land use category of the occupant of the building or property, the expansion of a building or use on a property that results in an increase in the units of development (as defined herein), or the subsequent discovery of facts unknown or misrepresented at the time of issuance of the original building permit. 
(c)  Individual assessment determinations. An individual assessment of development impact fees for a particular property or proposed use may be established as follows: 
(1)  At their option, an applicant for development approval may petition the administrator for an individual assessment determination of development impact fees due for their project in lieu of the fee established on the fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A. 
(2)  In the event that an applicant elects an individual assessment, the applicant shall submit an individual assessment study. The individual assessment study shall: 
a.  Be based on relevant and credible information from an accepted standard source of engineering or planning data; or, 
b.  Be based on actual, relevant, and credible studies or surveys of facility demand conducted in the city or its region, carried out by qualified engineers or planners pursuant to an accepted professional methodology. 
(3)  The applicant shall provide any other written specifications as may be reasonably required by the administrator to substantiate the individual assessment determination. 
(4)  The administrator in his or her reasonable discretion shall determine whether the content of an individual assessment study satisfies the requirements of this article. A negative determination by the administrator may be appealed to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(5)  Any fee approved as an individual assessment determination shall have standing for 180 days following the date of approval. Payment of such an approved individual assessment determination shall constitute full and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system improvements as individually levied by the city, and shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Fee certification. Upon application to the administrator, a property owner or developer may receive a certification of the development impact fee schedule attached hereto and incorporated herein as Attachment A or a certified fee for a particular project, as applicable. 
(1)  The administrator shall provide an applicant with a written certification of the impact fee schedule within five working days after the administrator's receipt of a completed application. The fee schedule certified by the administrator shall establish the impact fee schedule for the proposed development activity for a period of 180 days from the date of certification. 
(2)  The administrator shall provide the applicant with a written certification of an individual fee determination within 30 days after receipt of a completed application. The individual fee determination certified by the administrator shall establish the total impact fee for the proposed development activity for the 180 day period immediately following the date of such certification. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the issuance of any certification of an individual fee determination, any additions to the proposed development activity different from the development activity identified in the original application shall negate any such certification. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Editor's note— "Attachment A" can be found at the end of this chapter as "Appendix A." 
Sec. 18-225. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-226. - Deposit and expenditure of fees. 
The city shall comply with all applicable accounting requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-8 of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Law, which include the following: 
(a)  Maintenance of funds. 
(1)  All development impact fee funds collected for future expenditure on construction or expansion of facilities pursuant to this article shall be maintained in one or more interest-bearing accounts until expended. Restrictions on the investment of development impact fee funds shall be the same that apply to investment of all such funds generally. 
(2)  Separate accounting records shall be maintained for each category of system improvements (fire protection, law enforcement, and road improvements) and for administration fees collected. 
(3)  Interest earned on development impact fees shall be allocated to each category of system improvements and the administration accounts in proportion to the impact fees collected, shall be considered funds of the account on which it is earned and shall be subject to all restrictions placed on the use of development impact fees under this article. 
(b)  Expenditures; restrictions. 
(1)  Expenditures from the system improvements impact fee accounts shall be made only for the category of system improvements for which the development impact fee was assessed and collected. 
(2)  Expenditures from the administration account may be expended directly for administrative purposes or transferred to the general fund to cover administrative costs. 
(3)  Except as provided below, development impact fees shall not be expended for any purpose that does not involve building or expanding system improvements that create additional capacity available to serve new growth and development. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, the following shall be considered general revenue of the city, and may be expended accordingly: 
a.  Impact fees collected to recover the present value of excess capacity in existing system improvements; 
b.  Any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee; and, 
c.  Any portion of the impact fee (but not to exceed three percent of the total) collected and allocated by the administrator for administration of this article. 
(c)  Annual report. 
(1)  The administrator shall prepare an annual report to the city council as part of the annual audit describing the amount of any development impact fees collected, encumbered, and used during the preceding fiscal year by category of public facility. 
(2)  Such annual report shall be prepared following guidelines of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), and submitted to DCA in conjunction with the annual update report of the city's capital improvements element. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-227. - Credits. 
When eligible, feepayors shall be entitled to a credit against impact fees otherwise due and owing under the circumstances and in the manner set forth in this section. 
(a)  Credits; restrictions. 
(1)  Except as provided in the following subsection (a)(2), no credit shall be given for construction, contribution, or dedication of any system improvement or funds for system improvements made before the effective date of this article. 
(2)  If the value of any construction, dedication of land, or contribution of money made by a developer (or his or her predecessor in title or interest) prior to the effective date of this article for system improvements that are included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element, is greater than the impact fee that would otherwise have been paid for the project, then the developer shall be entitled to a credit for such excess construction, dedication, or funding. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, any credit due under this section shall not constitute a liability of the city, and shall accrue to the developer to the extent of impact fees assessed for new development for the same category of system improvements. 
(3)  In no event shall credit be given for project improvements as defined in this article. 
(b)  Granting of credits. 
(1)  Credit shall be given for the present value of any construction of improvements, contribution or dedication of land, or payment of money by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest for system improvements of the same public facilities category for which a development impact fee is imposed, provided that: 
a.  The system improvement is included for impact fee funding in the capital improvements element; 
b.  The amount of the credit does not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding, as shown in the capital improvements element; and, 
c.  The city council shall have explicitly approved said improvement, contribution, dedication, or payment and the value thereof prior to its construction, dedication, or transfer. 
(2)  The credit allowed pursuant to this section shall not exceed the impact fee due for any particular public facilities category for which a development impact fee is imposed, unless a greater credit is authorized under a private contractual agreement executed under the provisions of this article. 
a.  Any credit amount in excess of the impact fee due for any particular public facilities category may be carried over and applied to the impact fee due in the same public facilities category for another development by the developer, or to a successor in interest, within the city. 
b.  To qualify as a "successor in interest" for entitlement to a credit, notice must have been given to the administrator of a legal transfer or assignment of the right of entitlement to the credit, including the name and mailing address of the grantor, and written, notarized authorization of the grantor and the name and mailing address of the grantee. 
(c)  Guidelines for credit valuation. Credits under this section shall be valued using the following guidelines: 
(1)  For the construction of any system improvements by a developer (as defined in this article) or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the developer must present evidence satisfactory to the administrator of the original cost of the improvement, from which present value may be calculated. 
(2)  For any contribution or dedication of land for system improvements by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the original value of the land shall be the same as that attributed to the property by the validated tax appraisal prior to the time of dedication, from which present value may be calculated. 
(3)  For any contribution of capital equipment that qualifies as a system improvement by a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest and accepted by the city, the value shall be the original cost to the developer of the capital equipment or the cost that the city would normally pay for such equipment, whichever is less. 
(4)  For any contribution of money for system improvements from a developer or his or her predecessor in title or interest accepted by the city, the original value of the money shall be the same as that at the time of contribution, from which present value may be calculated. 
(5)  In making a present value calculation, the discount rate used shall be the interest rate being earned on the city's impact fee funds, and the average annual inflation rate shall be based on the consumer price index (the CPI) for the value of the contribution, calculated as the change in the CPI between the date of the contribution and the current date. 
(d)  Credits; application. 
(1)  Credits shall be given only upon written application of the developer to the administrator. A developer must present written evidence satisfactory to the administrator at or before the time of development impact fee assessment. 
(2)  The administrator, in his or her reasonable discretion, shall review all applications for credits and make determinations regarding the allowance of any claimed credit, and the value of any allowed credit. 
(3)  Any credit approved by the administrator shall be acknowledged in writing by the administrator and calculated at the time of impact fee assessment. 
(4)  Appeals from the decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council in accordance with the administrative appeals section of this article. 
(e)  Credits; abandoned building permits. 
(1)  In the event that an impact fee is paid but the building permit is abandoned, credit shall be given for the present value of the impact fee against future impact fees for the same parcel of land. 
(2)  A building permit shall be deemed abandoned if no construction has been commenced prior to the expiration of the building permit, construction commenced but construction activity ceased for a period of two months, or no certificate of occupancy is issued prior to the expiration of the building permit. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-228. - Refunds. 
(a)  Eligibility for a refund. 
(1)  Upon the request of an owner of property on which a development impact fee has been paid, the city shall refund the development impact fee if: 
a.  Capacity is available in the public facilities for which the fee was collected but service is permanently denied; or, 
b.  After collecting the fee when service is not available, the city has failed to encumber the development impact fee or commence construction within six years after the date that the fee was collected. 
(2)  In determining whether development impact fees have been encumbered, development impact fees shall be considered encumbered on a first-in, first-out (FIFO) basis. 
(b)  Notice of entitlement to a refund. When the right to a refund exists due to a failure to encumber development impact fees, the city shall provide written notice of entitlement to a refund to the feepayor who paid the development impact fee at the address shown on the application for development approval or to a successor in interest who has given notice to the municipality or county of a transfer or assignment of the right or entitlement to a refund and who has provided a mailing address. Such notice shall also be published within 30 days after the expiration of the six-year period after the date that the development impact fees were collected and shall contain the heading "Notice of Entitlement to Development Impact Fee Refund". 
(c)  Filing a request for a refund. A request for a refund shall be made in writing to the administrator within one year of the time the refund becomes payable or within one year of publication of the notice of entitlement to a refund, whichever is later. Failure to make a claim for a refund within said time period shall result in a waiver of all claims to said funds. 
(d)  Payment of refunds. 
(1)  All refunds shall be made to the feepayor within 60 days after it is determined by the administrator that a sufficient proof of claim for refund has been made, but no sooner than 30 days after publication of the notice of entitlement to the refund. 
(2)  A refund shall include a refund of a pro rata share of interest actually earned on the unused or excess impact fee collected. 
(3)  In no event shall a feepayor be entitled to a refund for impact fees assessed and paid to recover the cost of excess capacity in existing system improvements, for any portion of an impact fee collected as a repayment for expenditures made by the city for system improvements intended to be funded by such impact fee, or for that portion of the fee payment that was assessed for administration of this article or for recovery of the cost of preparation of the capital improvements element. 
(4)  The feepayor shall have standing to sue for a refund under the provisions of this article if there has been a timely application for a refund and the refund has been denied or has not been made within one year of submission of the application for refund to the city. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-229. - Private contractual agreements. 
(a)  Private agreements; authorized. Nothing in this article shall prohibit the voluntary mutual approval of a private contractual agreement between the city and any developer or property owner or group of developers and/or property owners in regard to the construction or installation of system improvements and providing for credits or reimbursement for such system improvement costs so incurred, provided that: 
(1)  The system improvements are included for impact fee funding in the most recently adopted capital improvements element; and, 
(2)  The amount of any credit or reimbursement granted shall not exceed the portion of the system improvement's cost that is eligible for impact fee funding. 
(b)  Private agreements; provisions. A private contractual agreement for system improvements may include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following provisions: 
(1)  Modify the estimates of impact on public facilities according to the methods and provisions concerning the calculation of impact fees, provided that any such agreement may allow the city to assess additional development impact fees after the completion of construction according to the fee schedule set forth in this article. 
(2)  Permit construction of, dedication of property for, or other in-kind contribution for specific public facilities of the type for which development impact fees would be imposed in lieu of or with a credit against applicable development impact fees that would normally be paid by the subsequent builders of the project developed by said private party or parties. 
(3)  Provides for reimbursement of the system improvement cost through the granting of credits to the private party or parties to the private agreement as impact fees are paid by the subsequent builders, developers, or occupants of the project developed by said private party or parties. 
(4)  Permit a schedule and method of payment appropriate to particular and unique circumstances of a proposed project in lieu of the requirements for payment under this article. 
(c)  Private agreements; procedure. 
(1)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the administrator for review and negotiation, prior to submission to the city council. 
(2)  Any private agreement proposed by an applicant pursuant to this section shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney as to form and sufficiency prior to consideration by the city council. 
(3)  Any such agreement must be presented to and approved by the city council prior to the issuance of the first building permit in the development. 
(4)  Any such agreement shall be executed or approved by mortgagees, lien holders or contract purchasers in addition to the landowner, and shall require the applicant to submit such agreement to the clerk of superior court for recording on the deed records. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-230. - Periodic review and amendments. 
(a)  Article amendments. This article may be amended from time to time as deemed appropriate or desirable. 
(b)  Capital improvements element periodic review. 
(1)  Annual review. At least once each year, the city council shall review and may update the capital improvements element so as to maintain, at a minimum, a schedule of system improvements for each of the subsequent five years. The capital improvements element update may include changes in funding sources or project costs, or changes in the scheduling of projects, but new projects cannot be added. The capital improvements element update shall be submitted to the regional commission for their review, in accordance with the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs. 
(2)  Amendment. In conducting a periodic review of the capital improvements element and calculation of development impact fees, the city council may determine to amend the capital improvements element. Amendments to the capital improvements element shall comply with the procedural requirements of the development impact fee compliance requirements as adopted by the Georgia Board of Community Affairs, and shall be required for any change to the capital improvements element that would: 
a.  Redefine growth projections, land development assumptions, or goals or objectives that would affect system improvements proposed in the capital improvements element; 
b.  Extend the horizon of the capital improvements element as needed to maintain a 20-year planning period or to be consistent with an update to the comprehensive plan; 
c.  Add a new public facility category for impact fee funding, modify impact fee service areas, or add new system improvement projects; 
d.  Recalculate level of service standards for any public facility category; or 
e.  Make any other revisions needed to keep the capital improvements element up to date. 
(c)  Continuation of validity. Failure of the city council to undertake an annual review of the capital improvements element shall result in the continued use and application of the latest adopted development impact fee schedule; project listings, including estimated costs and impact eligibility percentages; and data upon which the level of service standards and impact fee calculations are based. The failure to periodically review such data shall not invalidate this article. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-231. - Administrative appeals. 
(a)  Eligibility to file an appeal. Only applicants or feepayors who have already been assessed an impact fee by the city or who have already received a written determination of individual assessment, refund or credit amount shall be entitled to an appeal. Such appeals may address: 
(1)  The imposition and/or the amount of an impact fee. 
(2)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of credits applicable to an impact fee. 
(3)  The entitlement to and/or the amount of a refund of an impact fee. 
(b)  Appeals process. 
(1)  The aggrieved applicant or feepayor (hereinafter, the "appellant") must file a written appeal with the administrator within 15 days of the decision or written determination from which the appeal is taken. 
(2)  Such written appeal shall constitute an application for relief, shall be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the appeal and the relief sought, and shall include: 
a.  The name and address of the appellant; 
b.  The location of the affected property; and, 
c.  A copy of any applicable written decision or determination made by the administrator (from which the appeal is taken). 
(3)  Within 15 days after receipt of the appeal, the administrator shall make a written final decision with respect to the appeal, such decision to be of sufficient content to set forth the basis for the determination. The final decision shall be mailed or electronically transferred to the appellant at the address listed in the appeal. 
(4)  Appeals from the final decision of the administrator shall be made to the city council within 30 days of the administrator's final decision. 
(5)  The city council shall thereafter consider the appeal at a regularly scheduled meeting within 30 days provided that at least two weeks written notice of the meeting can be given to the appellant. 
a.  The city council shall decide the issue within a reasonable time following the meeting, but in no case later than its next regular meeting, unless the appellant agrees to an extension to a later date. 
b.  Any party making an appeal shall have the right to appear at the meeting to present evidence and may be represented by counsel. 
c.  The city council shall hear and consider the appeal under the rules and procedures for conducting a quasi-judicial hearing. 
(c)  Payment of impact fee during appeal. 
(1)  The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of a development impact fee as a condition to the issuance of development approval. 
(2)  An appellant may pay a development impact fee under protest to obtain a building permit, and by making such payment shall not be estopped from exercising the appellant's right of appeal or receiving a refund of any amount deemed to have been collected in excess. 
(3)  Construction can commence and continue as authorized by a building permit issued under protest, but a certificate of occupancy or connection to electric power cannot be authorized until after the appeal is decided. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-232. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Enforcement authority. 
(1)  The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the administrator and such personnel, building official, officer of the court, or other knowledgeable person as the administrator may designate depending on the circumstances. 
(2)  The administrator or the administrator's designee shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by this article and shall have the right to issue a written notice, a stop work order or citation for violations, as the administrator or the administrator's designee in his or her reasonable determination may deem appropriate to the circumstances. Refusal of written notice of violation, stop work order or citation under this article shall constitute legal notice of service. The citation shall be in the form of a written official notice issued in person or by certified mail to the owner of the property, or to his or her agent, or to the person performing the work giving rise to such violation. The receipt of a citation shall require that corrective action be taken within 30 days unless otherwise extended at the discretion of the administrator. 
(3)  The administrator may suspend or revoke any building permit or withhold the issuance of other development approvals if the provisions of this article have been violated by the developer or the owner or their assigns. 
(b)  Violations. 
(1)  Knowingly furnishing false information on any matter relating to the administration of this article shall constitute a violation. 
(2)  Proceeding with construction of a project that is not consistent with the project's impact fee assessment, such as the use category claimed or units of development indicated, shall constitute a violation. 
(3)  Failure to take corrective action following the receipt of a citation shall constitute a violation. 
(4)  A violation of this article shall be a misdemeanor punishable according to law, including the general penalty provisions of the City's Code of Ordinances. In addition to or in lieu of criminal prosecution, the city council shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil court to enforce this article, including recourse to such civil and criminal remedies in law and equity as may be necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article, including but not limited to injunctive relief to enjoin and restrain any person from violating the provisions of this article and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the implementation of specific corrective actions. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Sec. 18-233. - Repealer, severability, and effective date. 
(a)  Repeal of conflicting laws. Any and all other articles, resolutions or regulations, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. Where this article overlaps with other articles or regulations adopted by the city council, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(b)  Severability. If any sentence, clause, part, paragraph, section, or provision of this article is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the validity of the article as a whole or any other part hereof shall not be affected. 
(c)  Incorporation by reference of Georgia law. It is the intent of the city council that this article shall comply with the terms and provisions of the Georgia Development Impact Fee Law (O.C.G.A. 36-71-1 et seq. as amended). To the extent that any provision of this article is inconsistent with the provisions of said Chapter 36-71, the latter shall control. Furthermore, to the extent that this article is silent as to any provision of said Chapter 36-71 that is otherwise made mandatory by said Chapter 36-71, such provision shall control and shall be binding upon the city. 
(d)  Effective date. 
(1)  This article shall take effect upon its adoption. 
(2)  Any building permit for new construction or expansion of an existing building issued between the adoption date of this article and its effective date must begin construction and continue to completion, without abnormal interruption or delays, under the terms of the permit so issued. No extension or renewal of such a permit shall be allowed unless the applicable impact fee is first paid in full. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Appendix A. - Impact Fee Schedule 

 
NOTE: ITE Code means the land use code assigned in the Trip Generation manual, published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers, 9th Edition. 
"Square foot" means square foot of gross building floor area. 
(Ord. of 1-8-2019(1)) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— License and business regulations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-19. - Application. 
Every person transacting or offering to transact any business or working at or offering to work at any trade, occupation or profession within the limits of the city (except such as are exempt by law) shall obtain a license to transact such business, trade, occupation or profession, to be issued by the city clerk, after approval by the mayor and council in certain instances hereinafter provided for, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Form of application. Each application for a business license or permit as required herein shall be in writing and upon forms provided by the city clerk. 
(2)  Contents of application. Each application shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, home address, telephone number and social security number of the applicant if an individual; 
b.  Address and telephone number of principal place of business if applicant is a corporation or partnership; 
c.  Name, home address, telephone number and social security number of each officer, director, shareholder and partner if the applicant is other than an individual; 
d.  Location of the proposed business; 
e.  Nature of business to be conducted; 
f.  All trade names used by applicant within the immediately preceding three years; 
g.  Location and nature of all businesses for which the applicant has been issued a license within the immediately preceding three years; 
h.  Whether or not the applicant has ever been denied a business license or had a business license suspended or revoked; 
i.  Complete record of all arrests and convictions of the applicant and each partner, officer or director of the applicant for violations of any laws or ordinances of the city, state or federal government; and 
j.  Such additional information, which the city clerk or the mayor and council may find reasonably necessary to the administration of this chapter. 
(3)  Verification. The information provided in each application shall be verified under oath by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner if a partnership, or by an officer if a corporation. 
(4)  License fee. Unless specified herein, all fees payable with respect to any license or permit required by this chapter shall be as established by the mayor and council from time to time. A schedule of such fees shall be maintained by the city clerk and shall be made available to any applicant upon request. 
(5)  Payment of fee. The fee chargeable for such license shall accompany each application. The fee payable for any license issued prior to June 1 shall be 100 percent of the annual fee, without proration. The fee payable for any license issued after June 1 shall be 50 percent of the annual fee, without further proration. 
(6)  Issuance of receipts. The city clerk shall issue a receipt to the applicant for the amount of the fee tendered with the application for a license, provided that such receipt shall not be construed as approval of the application, nor shall it entitle or authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(7)  Rebate of fee. Upon the disapproval of any application for which a fee has been submitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall refund such fee, provided that the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the city. 
(8)  Confidentiality of information. All information furnished or secured under the authority of this section shall be kept in strict confidence by the city clerk, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of this chapter. 
(9)  State or federal license or permit. If any applicant is by law required to have a license or permit from the state and/or the federal government, or an agency or either, in order to engage in the business for which the application is made, a copy of such license or permit shall be attached to the application. 
(10)  Certificate of good standing. If the applicant is a corporation or other business entity required to be registered with the office of the secretary of state, the applicant shall furnish with the application evidence that the corporation or other entity is in good standing. 
(11)  Taxes current. Each applicant shall furnish a statement from the county tax commissioner verifying that all ad valorem taxes with respect to the business have been paid. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-1) 
Sec. 22-20. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  Review by city clerk. If any provision of this chapter provides for the review of an application for a license by a city or county officer designated therein, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the application to such officer within 48 hours of the time of the receipt of the application. The officer charged with the duty of reviewing the application shall make a recommendation to the city clerk within seven days after receiving a copy of the application. 
(b)  Council considerations. The city clerk without review and approval by the mayor and council may issue licenses unless otherwise provided herein. Licenses for the operation of establishments selling whiskey and other alcoholic beverages at retail shall not be issued unless approved by the mayor and council at a regular meeting. Notwithstanding the authority herein granted to the city clerk, the city clerk may in his/her discretion refuse to issue any license until the mayor and council have approved the application. 
(c)  Limitations on issuance. No license shall be issued to any applicant whose place of business is not in full compliance with all minimum standard building codes and with all zoning ordinances adopted by the city. 
(d)  Factors considered. In determining whether or not any license applied for hereunder or renewal of any license shall be granted, in addition to all provisions of this chapter, the following factors shall be considered in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  The applicant's reputation, character, mental and physical capacity to conduct the business; 
(2)  If the applicant has previously held a business license issued by the city, whether or not the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance regulating such business; 
(3)  If the applicant has previously held a business license issued by the city, whether the manner in which the applicant conducted such business required unusual law enforcement observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinances relating to such business; 
(4)  The location for which the license is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values; and 
(5)  Whether the applicant or, if the applicant is not a natural person, the owner and/or manager has had a business license revoked or suspended by any governmental entity. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-2) 
Sec. 22-21. - Display of license. 
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the city to keep his/her license posted in a conspicuous place on the premises used for such business at all times. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-3) 
Sec. 22-22. - Inspections. 
(a)  Search of premises. Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided for or required by ordinance, or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance with any ordinance provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer, employee or agent of the city who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested. 
(b)  Testing of material. Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer, employee or agent of the city requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis. 
(c)  Refusal to allow inspection or testing. In addition to any other penalty which may be provided for herein, the failure or refusal of a licensee to permit inspection or testing as required in this section, or the interference by such licensee with the such inspection or testing, shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the license; provided however, no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises stating that such inspection or testing is desired. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-4) 
Sec. 22-23. - Revocation, suspension, etc. 
No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city pursuant to this chapter shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause, as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing before the mayor and council. Prior to any hearing to consider revocation or suspension of a license issued hereunder, the city shall provide not less than three days prior written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or grounds upon which such hearing shall be held. "Due Cause" for suspension or revocation of any license granted hereunder shall include, without limitation, the following, whether said acts are committed by the named licensee, the owner of the business if different from the licensee, an employee of the business or by the individual responsible for the day-to-day operation of the business: 
(1)  Providing false or misleading information on the application for such license; 
(2)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  The violation of any federal, state or local laws, ordinances or regulations enacted for the purpose of regulating the business for which the license was issued; 
(4)  The violation of any state or federal law or of any local ordinance, whether city or county, other than misdemeanor traffic ordinances. 
The mayor and council, after affording the licensee notice of the charges and opportunity to be heard with respect to any revocation or suspension proceedings, may, upon a finding of due cause, revoke such license in its entirety, suspend the same for a specified period of time, place the licensee on probation, or place other conditions thereon as the mayor and council may deem necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-5) 
Sec. 22-24. - Change of location. 
In the absence of any provision to the contrary, the location of any licensed business or occupation may be changed, provided ten days' notice thereof is given to the city clerk, and provided that all building and zoning requirements are complied with. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-6) 
Sec. 22-25. - Transfer of licenses. 
All licenses shall be personal to the licensee to whom issued, but in cases where the ownership is changed and both the name and location of the licensed business or occupation are maintained, the mayor and council may allow the license to be transferred. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-7) 
Sec. 22-26. - Duplicate licenses. 
A duplicate license shall be issued by the city clerk to replace a previously issued license which has been lost, stolen, defaced, or destroyed without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee, upon the filing of a sworn affidavit attesting to such fact and the payment of a fee, if any, to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-8) 
Sec. 22-27. - Branch offices. 
For the purposes of this chapter, each branch establishment or location wherein a representative of the owner is employed and is authorized to transact business for such owner shall be deemed a separate place of business for which a separate license shall be required, provided that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch offices. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-9) 
Sec. 22-28. - Separate licenses required for each business. 
A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location shall be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses for which a license is required. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-10) 
Sec. 22-29. - Fee payment; renewals. 
(a)  Levy of tax. An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees (fulltime and parttime) of the business or practitioner. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city clerk. 

 
(c)  Tax limit; exemptions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § I-11; Ord. of 6-8-2004) 
Sec. 22-30. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall conduct a business or occupation without having obtained a license therefor as required by this chapter, or who shall violate any other provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an offense. 
Secs. 22-31—22-48. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS LICENSE FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Insurance license fees, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-49. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $15.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § II-1) 
Sec. 22-50. - License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $10.00 per location for each year. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § II-2) 
Sec. 22-51. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurance. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § II-3) 
Sec. 22-52. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § II-4) 
Sec. 22-53. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 22-49 and 22-50 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § II-5) 
Secs. 22-54—22-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 22-80. - Depository financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Depository financial institution means state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations. 
Gross receipts shall have the same meaning as, and be determined in accordance with, the O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(b)  Levy. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon depository financial institutions at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(c)  Due date; filing of return. Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date of taxes levied by this section shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § III-1) 
Secs. 22-81—22-103. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 22-104. - Malt beverage manufacturers and dealers. 
(a)  License required. Each manufacturer, wholesale dealer, brewpub, and retail dealer of malt beverages, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, who does business within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Factors for consideration by mayor and council. The mayor and council, in passing upon an initial application for a malt beverage license at the final meeting thereon, shall be guided by the following factors as to whether to grant or deny such application: 
(1)  The proximity of other establishments selling malt or alcoholic beverages to the proposed location; 
(2)  The character of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location; 
(3)  The proximity of churches, schools and playgrounds to the proposed location; 
(4)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons; 
(5)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom; 
(6)  The information set forth in the application; 
(7)  Whether any malt or alcoholic beverage license previously issued for such location was ever revoked or suspended for cause; and 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever sold malt or alcoholic beverages illegally within the city. 
(c)  Change of location. A license issued under the provisions of this section shall permit the sale or manufacture of malt beverages only on the premises described in the application. 
(d)  Sanitary conditions. All premises used for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-1) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulations of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-105. - Wine retailers. 
(a)  License required. Each person engaged in the business of retailing wine shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Factors for consideration. In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to sell wine at retail, the mayor and council shall be guided by the same considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the sale or manufacture of malt beverages. 
(c)  Change of location. A license issued under the provisions of this section shall permit the sale at retail of wine only on the premises described in the application. 
(d)  Sanitary conditions. All premises used for the retail sale of wine shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-2) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulations of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq.; wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-106. - Alcoholic beverage manufacturers and distributors. 
(a)  License required. Each manufacturer, wholesale distributor, and retail distributor of alcoholic beverages, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2, whose place of business is located within the corporate limits of the city, shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Factors for consideration. In deciding whether to grant or deny the application for a license to manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages, the mayor and council shall be guided by the considerations as those applied in granting or denying a license for the manufacture or sale of malt beverages. 
(c)  Change of location. A license issued under the provisions of this section shall permit the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages only on the premises described in the application. 
(d)  Sanitary conditions. All premises used for the sale or manufacture of alcoholic beverages shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition as required by the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-3) 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulations of alcohol, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-107. - Solid waste collectors. 
(a)  License required. Each person engaged in the business of solid waste collection and disposal within the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Application. Application for a license to engage in the business of solid waste collection and disposal shall be made as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Review of application. No action on any application for a license to engage in the business of solid waste collection and disposal shall be taken by the mayor and council until the county director of public works, or equivalent, has reviewed such application and forwarded his/her recommendation thereon to the city clerk, in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-4) 
Sec. 22-108. - Flea markets. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  This section shall set forth the requirements and procedures for the operation of a "flea market", excluding garages sales, in the city. A license to operate a flea market shall authorize the license holder to rent stalls or spaces within the bounds of a specific location to the vendors of handcrafted items or to the vendors of new merchandise or secondhand items. Manufacturers or the holders of any retail license in the city for the sale of similar merchandise will not be allowed to sell in flea markets. Said license shall authorize the tenant to operate without procuring any business license, except should any tenant operate for more than four weekends in a one-year period, a regular business license for that tenant will be required. 
(2)  The license holder shall collect and be responsible for the collections and payment of all sales taxes from his/her tenants, except those holding flea market tenant licenses. 
(b)  License required. It shall be unlawful for a "flea market" operator, as defined in this section, to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adequate restroom facilities means, as stated above, restroom facilities for a permanent site must be permanent in construction and meet the specifications as determined by the designated building official. Restroom facilities for a casual site may be provided by portable sanitary structures, which must be approved by the county health department or by a written agreement with an adjacent business establishment. Such written agreement shall be provided to the city. 
Casual site means a casual "flea market" site, one where permanent structures are not allowed. Generally, it is considered as a site which is used no more than one weekend per three-month period and no more than four weekends per one-year period. 
Permanent site means a permanent "flea market" site, one which has permanent structures both for the use as stalls for vendors and other accessories such as bathroom facilities. A permanent site must have as minimum, one men's restroom and one women's restroom, both of which must meet the applicable specifications as determined by the city's designated building official. Generally, a permanent site is one which is used on a weekly basis. 
(d)  General requirements. A flea market must: 
(1)  Be located on property zoned as follows: 
a.  A permanent site must be in an area zoned B-2 (General Commercial) and must be approved by conditional use permit. 
b.  A casual site must be in an area zoned B-1 (Neighborhood Commercial) or B-2 (General Commercial) and must be approved by a conditional use permit. 
(2)  Provide adequate access, egress, parking, and security at the proposed location. 
(3)  Have adequate restroom facilities available. Proof of availability must be provided with the submittal of the application. 
(e)  Specific requirements. A flea market licensee must: 
(1)  Keep records pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 10-1-360 for 12 months of the following information taken from the seller's/tenant's driver's license or other appropriate identification: 
a.  Name. 
b.  Street address. 
c.  City/state. 
d.  Driver's license number or social security number. 
e.  Telephone number (direct from seller). 
(2)  Not allow the sale of food or beverages unless tenants have a valid certificate or permit issued by the county health department. 
(3)  Ensure that no alcoholic beverages are sold. 
(4)  Provide a minimum of 15 designated nine-foot by nine-foot stalls available for rent. 
(5)  Not allow one tenant to rent more than two stalls. 
(6)  A casual site must not have any permanent structures specifically for the use of the flea market. 
(7)  Days of operation: Permanent site—Friday and Saturday only; Casual site—Saturday only. 
(f)  Sketch required. License application must include a sketch drawing of the proposed site. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-5) 
Sec. 22-109. - Charitable solicitations. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable means patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
Contribution means the donation of money or other thing of value to any person as defined herein. 
Person. In addition to an individual, the term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, including a league, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society, and any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent, or other similar representative thereof. 
Promoter means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign for solicitations. 
Religious and religion. The terms "religious" and "religion" shall not include the term "charitable" as herein defined, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
Solicit and solicitation mean the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea of representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this section. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as herein defined: 
(1)  Any oral or written request. 
(2)  The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or publication. 
(3)  The making of any announcement to the press, over the radio, by telephone or by telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith. 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose. 
Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall solicit contributions within the city without a permit from the city authorizing such solicitation; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established persons organized and operating exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the financial profit of any person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof, voluntarily and without compensation for the making of such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person. 
(c)  Permit application. An application for a permit to solicit shall be made to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city. The application herein required shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reasons such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name and address or headquarters of the person applying; 
(2)  The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitations; 
(3)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations; 
(4)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation; 
(5)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or payment for work to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons; 
(6)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city; 
(7)  Such other information as may be reasonably necessary and required by the city in order for the city to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not unfavorable to, the public welfare. 
(d)  Investigation of application. The city clerk designated therefor shall examine all applications filed under this section and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation as deemed necessary for the clerk to perform his/her duties hereunder. Upon request, any applicant shall make available for inspection by the clerk, or any person designated by him/her as a representative, all of the applicant's books, records and papers at any reasonable time. 
(e)  Standards for issuance. The city shall issue the permit herein provided for whenever the following facts exist: 
(1)  That all of the statements made in the application are true; 
(2)  That the control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons; and 
(3)  That the solicitation is promoted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(f)  Use of fictitious name. No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his/her name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this section. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-6) 
State Law reference— Charitable solicitations, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-110. - Pawnbrokers; secondhand dealers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pawnbroker means any person with whom property is deposited as security for the payment of a debt. 
(b)  License required. Each pawnbroker doing business within this municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(c)  Location. Pawnbrokers must be located in an area zoned B-2 (General Commercial) and must be approved by conditional use permit. 
(d)  Review of application. The mayor and council shall take no action on any application for a pawnbroker's license until the county sheriff, his/her designated agent or other designated law enforcement officer has reviewed such application and forwarded his/her recommendation thereon to the city clerk. 
(e)  Buying and receiving from minors. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any secondhand jewelry store, or for any pawnbroker, junk dealer or secondhand dealer, to buy, take or receive by any way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, ware or merchandise or article of personal property of any kind from any persons under the age of 18 years. 
(f)  Sunday operation. No pawnbroker shall open his/her place of business or conduct any business therein on Sunday. 
(g)  Pledges to be openly displayed. Every pawnbroker shall have his/her pledges openly displayed so that the inspection authorized by this chapter may be easily made. 
(h)  Premises to be open to police. It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to admit to his/her premises any law enforcement officer who may desire at any time to search for articles missing or stolen, or to make any inspection authorized by this chapter, without the formality of a search warrant. 
(i)  Inspection of pledges and purchases. All articles pledged or sold to pawnbrokers shall, at all times, be subject to inspection and examination by any law enforcement officer. 
(j)  Books and records. 
(1)  All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. Such description shall include the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. There shall be entered also the name of the person who sold or deposited the same, the time when it is done, the amount paid or advanced and a description of the persons selling or pawning, including his/her name, address, color and estimated weight and height. 
(2)  When pledges are sold or otherwise disposed of, the date of sale and a complete description of the person making the purchase shall also be recorded and made a part of the permanent record kept by the pawnbroker. This description shall include name, driver's license or military ID number, and present address of purchaser. 
(3)  When entries to be made. The entries required by this section shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible and, in no event, more than one hour thereafter. 
(4)  Inspection. The books required to be kept by this section shall, on a daily basis, if necessary, be subject to inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
(5)  False entries. It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in the business of a pawnbroker to make any false entry in any books as required by this section. 
(k)  Holding period. Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold such goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least ten days after the date of purchase or ten days after the term of the loan is ended, before disposing of the same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise. This provision cannot be waived. 
(l)  Exporting. No pawnbroker doing business in the city shall ship any goods or unredeemed pledges out of the city without first submitting to the county sheriff's department or other designated law enforcement agency a list of the articles to be shipped out of the city. This list shall include a full description of the articles or goods. 
(m)  Suspension or revocation of licenses. Any person failing to comply with any provision of this section or other ordinance or regulation passed by the city council for the conduct of the business of a pawnbroker shall be subject to having his/her license to conduct such business revoked or suspended for a definite period, in the discretion of the city council. Such suspension or revocation shall result from conviction in the municipal court of any owner or employee of the business for a violation of any provision of this section or other ordinance or regulations covering the conduct of the business. 
(n)  Penalties. A violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable as provided by section 1-10. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-7) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to license pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 
Sec. 22-111. - Used car dealers. 
(a)  License required. Any used car or used motor vehicle dealer, as such terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-47-2, who does business within this municipality shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Review of application. The mayor and council shall take no action on any application for a license under this section until the county sheriff, his/her designated agent or other designated law enforcement officer has reviewed such application and forwarded his/her recommendation thereon to the city clerk. 
(c)  Restriction on issuance. No license under this section shall be issued to any applicant who has not been licensed by the state board of registration of used car dealers, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-47-13. 
(d)  Records. Each used car or used motor vehicle dealer licensed hereunder shall keep a record of all motor vehicles offered for sale, exchange, or disposal to the public, which record shall show the make of said motor vehicle, the year of its manufacture, its serial number, and its engine number, and which record shall always be kept available for the inspection by any law enforcement officer at any time. It shall be the further duty of every such person to immediately report to the county sheriff the presence in his/her place of business of any motor vehicle on which the serial or engine number has been defaced or altered. 
(e)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to apply to any individual making an isolated sale of his/her own vehicle. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-8) 
State Law reference— Used Motor Vehicle Dealers' and Used Motor Vehicle Parts Dealers' Registration Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-47-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-112. - Junk dealers and junkyards. 
(a)  License required. Each junk dealer, as such term is defined in this section, who does business within this municipality, shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business premises means the area of the junkyard, as defined herein, within the city. 
Junk means old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones; wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no longer used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping of parts; but "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as byproducts, waste or scraps from the operation of his/her own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his/her own manufacturing process. 
Junk dealer means a person who operates a junkyard, as defined in this subsection, within the city. 
Junkyard means a yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined in this subsection, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such acts are to be used for charity. 
(c)  Application. Application for a license under this section shall be made as provided in article II of this chapter, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the application during the previous five years; 
(2)  The name, residence address, and telephone number of each person employed or intended to be employed in the business as of the time the application is filed; 
(3)  A sketch of the actual premises to be used in connection with the business, giving distances in feet and showing adjoining roads, property lines, buildings, and uses; 
(4)  A description of the materials with which any buildings to be used in connection with the licensed business are or are to be made; 
(5)  A sketch giving distances, showing the location of such buildings on the business premises; and 
(6)  A diagram or plan giving distances and heights, showing floors, exits, entrances, windows, ventilators, and walls. 
(d)  Review of application. No action on any application for a license to operate a junkyard shall be taken by the mayor and council until the planning commission has reviewed such application and forwarded its recommendation thereon to the city clerk. 
(e)  General operating requirements. The following general operating requirements shall apply to all junk dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this section: 
(1)  The junkyard, together with things kept therein, shall at all times be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(2)  No space not covered by the license shall be used in the licensed business. 
(3)  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place on the premises in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes. 
(4)  No weeds shall be permitted to attain a height of more than four inches. 
(5)  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is junk as defined herein and is in use in the licensed business. 
(6)  No junk shall be allowed to rest upon or protrude over any public street, walkway, or curb, or become scattered or blown off the business premises. 
(7)  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height and shall be arranged so as to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes. 
(8)  No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the licensed business shall be kept on the premises, nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard. 
(9)  Gasoline and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premises. 
(10)  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the building code; and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open except in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and state law. 
(11)  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on any Sunday, Christmas, Thanksgiving, or at any time between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(12)  The area on the premises where junk is kept (other than indoors) shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height as prescribed by the council, measured from ground level. The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind excepting one sign of the licensee not exceeding in size the limitations contained in any applicable sign ordinance or regulation of the city. Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of the licensed business. 
(13)  The licensee shall permit inspection of the business premises by any law enforcement officer at any reasonable time. 
(14)  No junkyard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any junkyard be operated in such a manner as to become injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the community or of any nearby residents. 
(f)  Records. Each acquisition of junk shall be recorded in a permanent-type register kept on the business premises, giving the name and residence address of the person from whom the acquisition was made, a description of the junk acquired, and the date of the transaction. Such data shall be held available for inspection by any law enforcement officer. 
(g)  Minors. No junk dealer shall have any business dealings as a junk dealer with a minor, nor shall a junk dealer's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a junk dealer employ a minor to assist him/her in his/her business. 
(h)  Stolen goods. Every junk dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles, or things of value, which may have been lost or stolen, shall upon demand produce such article or thing to any law enforcement officer for examination. 
(i)  Vehicles. Every vehicle used by a junk dealer in the conduct of his/her business shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the owner and proprietor thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-9) 
State Law reference— Junk dealers, O.C.G.A. § 73-22-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-113. - Auctions. 
(a)  License required. Each person who desires to conduct an auction within this municipality shall be required to obtain a license therefor from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Application. Application for a license under this section shall be made as provided in article II of this chapter, except that such application shall contain the following additional information: 
(1)  A statement setting forth when, where, and for how long the auction sale will be conducted; 
(2)  A certified copy of the state auctioneer's license of the person who is to conduct the auction; and 
(3)  A full and true inventory of all the articles to be sold at the auction sale, together with an affidavit that all information contained in the application is true and that the inventory contains a true listing of all the articles to be sold at said auction. 
(c)  Restrictions on sale. No auction sale shall be held except as set forth in the application and affidavit and no other articles shall be sold except those included in the sworn inventory unless a new affidavit shall be filed listing additional goods to be sold. No other person shall be allowed to conduct the auction sale except such person listed in the affidavit unless a new affidavit is filed setting forth such other person who may be employed to conduct such auction and cry off such goods. 
(d)  Bond. Every applicant for a license under this section shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city in the amount prescribed by the mayor and council, with surety acceptable to and approved by the city clerk, conditioned that the applicant, if issued a license hereunder, will comply fully with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the city and the laws of this state regulating and concerning auctions and auctioneers, will render true and strict accounts of all his/her sales to any persons employing him/her to make the same, will not practice any fraud or deceit upon bidders or purchasers of property from him/her at any auction sale or suffer or permit any person in his/her employ to practice any such fraud or deceit, and will pay all damages which may be sustained by any person by reason of any fraud, deceit, negligence, or other wrongful act on the part of the licensee, his/her agent, or employees in the conduct of any auction or in the exercise of the calling of auctioneer. The city clerk in his/her discretion in lieu of a bond may permit a liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, which conforms to the requirements of this subsection. 
(e)  Cappers, boosters, or by-bidders. It shall be unlawful for any person to act or to employ another in any auction sale as a by-bidder or what is sometimes known as a "capper" or "booster", or to make or to accept any false or misleading bid, or to pretend to buy or sell any article sold or offered for sale at such auction. 
(f)  Exemptions. Nothing in this section shall be held to apply to auction sales conducted by trustees or referees in bankruptcy, executors, administrators, receivers, or other public officers acting under judicial process, nor to the sale of real property at auction. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-10) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority to license auctioneers, O.C.G.A. § 43-6-25.1. 
Sec. 22-114. - Circuses, carnivals, and public exhibitions. 
(a)  License required. No person shall conduct or operate a circus, carnival, or public exhibition, as such terms are defined herein, without having first obtained a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means and includes amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, and booths for the conduct of games of skill, food dispensing facilities, and sideshows. 
Public exhibition means and includes circuses, menageries, sideshows, and other similar itinerant amusement enterprises, which are open to the public and for admission to which a fee is charged. 
(c)  Conditions of license issuance. No license under this section shall be issued until the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  The operator and sponsor of the circus, carnival, or public exhibition have each assumed full responsibility for maintaining order and for keeping the site clean and free of trash, papers, and other debris, and have placed trash containers in adequate number and in convenient locations for the use of the public; 
(2)  The applicant has placed on file with the city clerk a certificate or certificates of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damage arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or exhibition pursuant to state law. 
(d)  Inspections. The county sheriff, his/her designee or any other law enforcement officer shall be permitted access to the premises at any time for the purpose of inspections and patrols of the premises used for the activities licensed herein. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-11) 
State Law reference— Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; Carnival Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-13-1 et seq.; insurance requirements, O.C.G.A. § 43-1-15 et seq. 
Sec. 22-115. - Parades. 
(a)  Registration and permit. Any person who wishes to organize, form, or conduct a parade as defined in this section shall be required to register such parade with the city clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the event and to obtain a permit therefor. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parade means any march, ceremony, demonstration, exhibition, or procession of any kind upon any public street of the city. 
(c)  Application. Application for a permit to conduct a parade shall be made to the city clerk in writing, shall be signed by the person responsible for the conduct of the parade, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The time proposed for the parade; 
(2)  The route of the proposed parade; 
(3)  The number of vehicles (if any) and number of persons whose participation is anticipated in the proposed parade; 
(4)  The name and address of the person or organization sponsoring or promoting the proposed parade; and 
(5)  The name and address of the person making the application for a parade permit. 
(d)  Review of application. The city clerk shall forward the application to the mayor, who shall review the information set forth in the application and ascertain the following: The extent of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to be anticipated at the time and place of and on the route of the proposed parade; the availability of law enforcement officers to escort the proposed parade and to direct traffic in conjunction with the proposed parade; and whether or not, in the light of all the circumstances, the proposed parade will unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public. 
(e)  Disposition. In the event the mayor determines in view of all the circumstances that the proposed parade will unreasonably burden and interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he/she shall deny the request for a parade permit; and if he/she determines on the contrary that the proposed parade will not unreasonably burden or interfere with the normal use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by the general public, he/she shall grant the parade permit. In either case the mayor shall indicate his/her disposition on the application and shall notify the applicant of the action taken. 
(f)  Exemption. The provisions of this section shall be inapplicable to any parade that is conducted under the supervision of a practicing mortician in conjunction with any funeral. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-12) 
Sec. 22-116. - Billiard and pool rooms. 
(a)  License required. Each person keeping, operating, or maintaining a business establishment containing more than two pool or billiard tables within the corporate limits of the city for use by the public shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Hours of operation. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or pool room in the city to permit such establishment to be open for business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or between the hours of 12:00 midnight on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on Monday. 
(c)  Location. Poolrooms must be located in an area zoned B-2 (general commercial) and must be approved by conditional use permit. 
(d)  Minors. It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of or control of any poolroom or billiard room open to the public to admit into such room any minor whether or not for the purpose of playing billiards or pool. 
(e)  Clear view of premises required. The owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or poolroom in the city shall not permit to be used on such premises any screens, shades, partitions, or other devices of like character which shall have the effect of obstructing the view through the windows or doors of the place where the billiard or pool tables are kept. 
(f)  Doors. The doors of all billiard or poolrooms licensed under this section shall be kept unlocked whenever the tables are in use, or when any person other than the proprietor or his/her agent is present in such place. 
(g)  Gambling. It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any billiard or poolroom open for public use to allow gambling of any kind to occur upon such premises. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-13) 
State Law reference— Regulation of billiards, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2 et seq. 
Sec. 22-117. - Fortunetelling. 
(a)  License required. Each person desiring to engage in the business of fortunetelling, palmistry, crystal ball reading, tea leaf reading, casting of horoscopes, or any other form of fortunetelling shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Public hearing. Upon the filing of an application for a fortunetelling business license, the city clerk shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be published in the official gazette of the county. 
(c)  Zoning and distance requirements. The mayor and council shall consider no application unless the proposed site of the fortunetelling is located in an area zoned B-2 (general commercial). No such activity shall be located within 1,500 feet (measured in direct line) of any area zoned residential, and must be at least 300 feet from any church or school and at least 2,000 feet from another existing fortunetelling business. These distances are to be measured from property line to property line. 
(d)  Contents of application; additional information. In addition to the information to be provided in the application as specified in section 22-19, the applicant shall agree to be fingerprinted and to submit to a criminal records check by the county sheriff's department or other designated law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-14) 
Sec. 22-118. - Health club business. 
(a)  Definitions. 
A health club means a place of business with equipment and facilities for exercising and improving physical fitness. 
A licensed massage therapist means any person who holds a valid, current, unrevoked, and unsuspended State of Georgia license in the practice of massage therapy issued by the Georgia Board of Massage Therapy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1. 
(b)  License required; application. Each person engaging in or carrying on the business of health clubs within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk. Each person carrying out the profession of a licensed massage therapist that is located on the premises of a health club or as a stand-alone business shall apply for a business license. Application for a health club license and massage therapy license shall, in addition to the information specified in section 22-19, contain the following information: 
(1)  A complete list of the names and residences of all licensed massage therapists and other health club employees and the name and residence of the manager or other person principally in charge. Each employee exercising the profession of massage therapy shall be licensed in the practice of massage therapy by the State of Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1, et seq. 
(2)  The following personal information with respect to the applicant and employees of the health club business and/or massage therapy business: 
a.  Name, residence address, and residence telephone number. 
b.  The health club or similar business history and experience, including whether or not such person has had such a license denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason therefor. 
c.  All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the circumstances thereof. 
(c)  Public hearing. Upon the filing of an application for a health club business license or a massage therapy business license, the city clerk shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be published in the official legal organ of the county. 
(d)  Inspection of premises. All premises proposed to be used by licensees must pass inspection by the building inspector, health code inspector, and the fire department inspector for the purpose of assuring that such premises comply with the building, sanitation, and fire prevention requirements. 
(e)  General operating requirements. 
(1)  Each person licensed shall display his/her license or certification, and the State of Georgia license of each and every massage therapist. 
(2)  No person who operates a health club business shall permit any massage therapy to be carried out within any cubicle, room, booth, or other area that is fitted with a door capable of being locked. 
(3)  No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep any alcoholic beverage on the premises. 
(f)  Zoning requirements. The mayor and council shall consider no application unless proposed site of the health club business or massage therapy business is located in an area zoned B-2 (general commercial). 
(g)  Massage therapist's permit required. 
(1)  No person shall practice massage therapy as a massage therapist, unless licensed by the State in the practice of massage therapy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-1, et seq. and licensed by the City of Flemington. The therapy of massage is defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-24A-3. 
(2)  The application for a massage therapist's permit shall include all personal information required of an applicant for a health club business license. 
(3)  Each application for a health club or massage therapist permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee as may be established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(h)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, under the laws of this state, or persons working under the direction of any such establishment, nor shall this section apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-15; Ord. No. 2015-02, 10-13-2015) 
Sec. 22-119. - Tattooing. 
(a)  License required; application. Each person engaging in or carrying on the business of tattooing (i.e., any method of placing permanent designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or any other substance, by the aid of needles or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin, resulting in either the coloration of the skin, or the production of scars or scarring, other than by branding) within the corporate limits of the city shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk. All such businesses are subject to all applicable rules and regulations as contained in Georgia Code title 31, chapter 40, (O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq.) "Tattoo Studios." 
(b)  Restriction on issuance. No license under this section shall be issued to any applicant who has not been permitted by the county board of health, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-40-2. 
(c)  Public hearing. Upon the filing of an application for a tattooing business license, the city clerk shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be published in the official gazette of the county. 
(d)  Zoning and distance requirements. The mayor and council shall consider no application unless the proposed site of the tattoo business is located in an area zoned B-2 (general commercial). No such activity shall be located within 1,500 feet (measured in direct line) of any area zoned residential, and must be at least 300 feet from any church or school and at least 2,000 feet from another existing tattoo business. These distances are to be measured from property line to property line. 
(e)  Contents of application; additional information. In addition to the information to be provided in the application as specified in section 22-19, the applicant shall agree to be fingerprinted and to submit to a criminal records check by the county sheriff's department or other designated law enforcement agency. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-16) 
State Law reference— Municipal authority over tattoo studios, O.C.G.A. § 31-40-9. 
Sec. 22-120. - Wrecker service operations. 
(a)  License required. Any wrecker service which hauls, moves or transfers motor vehicles, operable or inoperable within the city by the request or direction of the city or its employees shall first obtain a license to do so from the city clerk before engaging in such business. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Motor vehicle shall be defined in the manner in which it is defined in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Wrecker service operation means any company, firm, business or individual or group of individuals for hire by the general public which provides by any means the hauling, moving or transferring from one place to another any damaged, disabled, inoperable, operable or impounded motor vehicle. 
(c)  Operating requirements. The following operating requirements shall apply to all wrecker service operators licensed in accordance with the provisions of this section and each and every item hereunder is a condition precedent to obtaining such a license and maintaining such license and the failure to abide by these requirements at all times shall be cause for revocation and/or denial of such license. 
(1)  All such wrecker service operations shall make available to the city on a 24-hour basis, every day of the year said services when and as called upon, at a price not more than the established maximum service fees provided hereinafter. Such wrecker service shall notify the dispatcher in advance when he/she cannot be available for wrecker call for any specific time. He/she shall notify the dispatcher of the time he/she will be out of service and also of the time he/she will return to service. 
(2)  Prior to issuance of the license required by this section and prior to the conduct of any such operations by said wrecker service, such wrecker service shall obtain and cause to be kept in force at all times during the term of any such license granted under this section, liability insurance issued by a company or companies of sound and adequate financial responsibility of the following types and minimum amounts: Public liability insurance; bodily injury $300,000.00 per person/$500,000.00 per occurrence; property damage $300,000.00 per accident; garage keepers legal liability insurance; light duty wrecker $50,000.00; heavy duty wrecker $100,000.00. 
(3)  Said insurance policy or policies shall name the city a certificate holder. Such naming of the city as a certificate holder and such policies of liability insurance shall not thereby cause the city to be deemed a partner or joint venture with the wrecker service operator in its business. 
(4)  Such wrecker service operator shall also carry workers compensation insurance in the amounts and form required by the Workers Compensation Act and insurance laws of the state and shall furnish proof of same to the city prior to granting of any license hereunder and from time to time upon request by the city. 
(5)  Copies of the certificates of all insurance coverage required of the wrecker service shall be filed with the clerk of the city and shall provide therein that the policies of insurance referred to in such certificates shall not be subject to cancellation by the insurer except after delivery of written notice by certified mail to the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the effective date of any such cancellation. 
(6)  Should the wrecker service operator fail or refuse to obtain and keep in full force and effect the insurance required by this article, the city may revoke the license as provided for hereunder. 
(7)  Within the city limits the wrecker service operator shall provide an area for the storage for vehicles which have been moved, hauled or transferred by the wrecker service operator at the request of the city. All impounded motor vehicles hauled or towed by such wrecker service shall be stored in said storage facility. All other vehicles hauled by such wrecker service (those that are not impounded by the city) shall be stored in a storage facility licensed by the city, the county or any municipality within the county. An office shall be maintained at the storage area for the convenience of the public in retrieving their vehicles. Such facility must be maintained properly, clean and presentable at all times and shall be subject to inspection by the city and the city police department. Failure to properly maintain facilities shall be cause for revocation of the license granted hereunder. No impounded automobile hauled, moved, retrieved or transferred from one place to another by the wrecker service operator shall be stored at any place whatsoever other than a storage area which meets the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Such storage area shall meet all city zoning requirements and ordinances pertaining to vehicle storage. 
b.  The storage area and premises shall be kept in a clean and orderly fashion. 
c.  There shall be ample space to store a minimum of 30 automobiles and/or motor vehicles at the same time. The standard size automobile to be used for determining whether such storage facility meets the approval of this requirement is seven feet by 16 feet. The wrecker service operator may utilize the storage facilities of any other firm, person or corporation provided such facilities meet all the requirements of this section and provided said facility meets all zoning laws and regulations now or hereafter adopted by the city. If any such wrecker service cannot provide an area for storage of impounded vehicles, the city at its own discretion shall provide an area for the storage of such vehicles. 
(8)  Services are to be rendered immediately upon request by the city or its employees. The wrecker service operator shall not respond to the scene of an accident unless called to the scene by the city police department. This section recognizes the right of an individual who is the owner of any wrecked or impounded vehicle to select his/her own wrecker service company provided his/her state of sobriety or capacity is assured and provided that said vehicle is not blocking the roadway or otherwise dangerous to the traveling public. 
(9)  The wrecker service operator shall comply with and conform to all federal, state and local laws and/or rules and regulations regarding safety now in effect or as new ones become applicable. The wrecker service owner or owners must submit to a background police and general records check for prior offenses or irregularities to determine suitability, reliability and financial stability in order to properly protect the public against abuse, neglect or malfeasance. No person who has been convicted of a felony or any crime involved in moral turpitude shall be granted a license pursuant to the terms of this section. 
(10)  Prior to the issuance of any license hereunder the wrecker service operator must have and demonstrate his/her ownership of the following types of equipment: Two each light duty wreckers. A light duty wrecker with a least 10,000 pounds minimum gross vehicle weight rating equipped with 8,000 pound power take-off, power winch, per independent boom, and dual rear wheels. One each roll back or car carrier, may be substituted for one light duty wrecker. A light duty car carrier shall be defined as a wrecker with at least 10,000 pound gross vehicle weight with dual wheels, power drive winch with hydraulic wrecker system. 
(11)  Each wrecker provided herein shall be required to carry a full complment of service items such as fire extinguishers, chains, ropes, blocks, dollies, sports car bar, motorcycle bar, stop lights, flashes, flood light, hand tools, lock-out tools, wrecking bars, brooms, and any other tool needed for lifting, extracting, righting and removal of a wrecked or disabled vehicle or other equipment from public thoroughfares by towing or carting. If at any time after the granting of the license required by this section, the wrecker service operator fails to maintain the equipment required by this section such failure shall be cause for revocation of said license. 
(12)  Each wrecker service operator shall demonstrate access to at least one heavy-duty wrecker. A heavy duty wrecker shall be defined as a wrecker with at least 32,000 pounds minimum gross vehicle weight rating equipped with a 16- to 25-ton power takeoff mechanically driven power winch crane and having independent dual booms and with dual rear wheels. 
(d)  Fees. Fee rates shall be conspicuously posted in the wrecker service operator's place of business for the attention and information of the general public and for claimants of vehicles under the wrecker service operator's care. All billings or statements of charges are to be itemized and will have clearly printed on the reverse side, the rate applicable pursuant to this section so they may be verified by the claimant. 
(e)  Telephone and radio communication. The wrecker service operator will provide, at no cost to the city, a designated telephone number and line to be used exclusively by law enforcement for the purpose of notifying a wrecker service operator whenever such wrecker service operator's services are needed. 
(f)  Minimum drivers. The wrecker service operator must maintain and have available at all times at least one qualified wrecker operator with a valid class V state driver's license. The wrecker service operator must submit a list of driver's names, social security numbers, dates of birth, and drivers' license numbers to the city clerk prior to the issuance of any license, and if from time to time wrecker operators are deleted or added to the wrecker service operator's payroll, he/she must furnish an up-to-date list of such operators to the city clerk. 
(g)  List of qualified operators, etc. The city shall compile a list of all wrecker service operators licensed under this section which are qualified to accept calls from the city or its employees for the purposes of hauling or storing vehicles as those terms are defined herein and the city police shall contact and call and request the services only of those wrecker service operators which have been licensed pursuant to the terms of this section which is for the protection of the general public and in furtherance of its police powers. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-17) 
Sec. 22-121. - Vehicle storage facility/community garage. 
(a)  License required. Each person engaged in the business of operating a vehicle storage facility or community garage shall be required to obtain a license from the city clerk in the manner specified in this chapter. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Vehicle storage facility or community garage means a facility, which is operated for the purpose of storing vehicles. A structure or series of structures under one roof, and under one ownership, for the storage of vehicles by three or more owners or occupants of property in the vicinity, where said structure has no public shop or mechanical services in connection therewith. Generally this service will be available to insurance companies, finance companies, individuals, governmental agencies and other related institutions. In no way should a vehicle storage facility be construed as being an automotive salvage facility or junkyard. The following are minimum guidelines which must be adhered to in the operation of a vehicle storage facility: 
(1)  Dismantling of vehicles, in whole or in part, is prohibited. 
(2)  Buying and/or selling of parts or vehicles in any manner are prohibited. 
(3)  Repairs to vehicles on the site, other than emergency repairs, which may be required to get a vehicle cranked and removed, are prohibited. 
(4)  The facility must be fenced, blinded, and landscaped so as to prevent the creation of an unsightly facility. 
(5)  Twenty-four-hour availability will be provided by the operator of the vehicle storage facility. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-18) 
Sec. 22-122. - Transient merchants, peddlers and solicitors. 
(a)  License required. No person shall operate a business as a transient merchant or peddler within the city unless a license for such business has first been granted by the city, and no solicitor for charitable or religious purposes shall solicit within the city unless a permit has been granted by the city in accordance with the provisions of this section. Such permit or license shall be effective for the period stated therein, unless suspended or revoked prior to expiration. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable shall be given its commonly accepted meaning, to include, but not be limited to, patriotic, philanthropic, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
Garage sale (including yard sale, rummage sale, estate sale or other similar sales) is defined as the sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five items of personal property on any portion of a lot in a residential zoning district, whether within or outside any building. Sales of programs and food and beverage items at school athletic events shall not be deemed to constitute garage sales. 
Peddler is defined as any person, who, whether a resident of the city or not, has no permanent, regular place of business within the city, and who engages in the business of selling or offering to sell goods, wares, merchandise, food, drink, or other items or services going from door to door and place to place within the city. Anyone who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this section shall be deemed a peddler. 
Solicitor for charitable or religious purposes means any person acting exclusively to promote a charitable or religious purpose, and not for financial profit, either on the streets of the city or elsewhere, who sells or offers to sell, or exchange or offers to exchange any single good, ware or service of a cost to the purchaser in excess of $10.00. No qualification as a solicitor for charitable or religious purposes shall exist unless the applicant: 
(1)  Is able to demonstrate a current exemption certificate from the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended; or 
(2)  Has maintained in the city a continuous existence as a charitable or religious organization for a period of one year prior to the date of its application pursuant to this section. 
Persons not qualifying as a solicitor for charitable or religious purposes hereunder shall be deemed transient merchants and subject to regulation as such. 
Street means as any street, alley, avenue, court, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, or any other public place within the city. 
Transient merchant means any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee and whether a resident of the city of not, who engages in a business of selling goods, wares, merchandise, food, drink or other items or services occasionally or temporarily within the city and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, shop, apartment, or room in a hotel, motel or lodginghouse, tent, or motor vehicle, or any street or other place within the city, whether fixed or mobile, for the exhibition for sale of such goods, wares, merchandise, food, drink or other items or performance of such services, either privately, publicly or at auction; provided, however, that no merchant shall be considered a transient merchant under this section if: 
(1)  Such person, firm, corporation or other entity is a bona fide commercial traveler selling goods at wholesale by samples; 
(2)  Such person sells produce or other direct farm products from their own lands; 
(3)  Such person sells items at a "garage sale," conducted at his/her residence, not more than three times in any 12-month period and continuing for no more than two consecutive days each such occasion, and such sale is not part of the regular business activity of such person. Such exclusion shall not be available to flea market operators, promoters, performers or other such enterprises or any other business-related operations; or 
(4)  Such person conducts business at any industry or association for the purposes of displaying samples or taking orders for shipment directly from the manufacturer. 
Such transient merchant so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this section by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with or in the name of any local dealer, trade, merchant or auctioneer. 
(c)  Application for license. An application containing the following information, in addition to the information required by section 22-19, shall be completed and filed with the city clerk by each applicant for a license to do business within the city as a transient merchant or peddler. 
(1)  The local address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is a partnership, corporation or other business entity, the name, home address, date of birth, and social security number of the principal representative in the city. 
(3)  The name and home address of all employees who will work in the city. 
(4)  The name of the business represented by the applicant, if different from the applicant. 
(5)  The permanent address of the business represented by the applicant. 
(6)  The name of the agent conducting the sale, if any. 
(7)  The local address and telephone number of the sale agent, if any. 
(8)  The type of merchandise or service to be offered for sale. 
(9)  The dates the applicant is to be in business, and the total number of days the applicant is to be in business. 
(10)  The hours during which business will be conducted. 
(11)  The manner in which business is to be conducted. 
(12)  The state sales tax number or authorization. 
(13)  The state and license tag number of each vehicle to be used in the business. 
(14)  A list of the cities where the applicant has conducted the business within the past 12 months. 
(15)  Where food products are to be sold, a clearance letter issued by the county health department. 
(d)  Review and approval; issuance; nontransferable. The city clerk or his/her designee, to ensure compliance with zoning, safety and health code requirements of the city, shall review any application for a transient merchant or peddler's license. The applicant must be approved by the city clerk, or by his/her designated representative, before a license may be issued; provided, however, that no transient merchant or peddler shall locate and conduct business upon the streets of the city without first obtaining the consent of the mayor and council after furnishing satisfactory proof that the location and conduct of such business will be in compliance with this section and will not otherwise interfere with the rights of the general public to the use of such streets or jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the general public. The city clerk and/or the mayor and council shall issue, for such duration and upon such condition as approved, said license. No license issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable. 
(e)  Permit required; solicitor for charitable or religious purposes. Any solicitor for charitable or religious purposes, as defined herein, shall make application for permit to the city clerk; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any solicitor for charitable or religious purposes if the solicitations by such persons are conducted among the members thereof, voluntarily and without compensation for the making of such solicitations, or the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of such persons. Such applicant shall provide the name and address of the applicant, the name and address of the person or organization represented, the dates during which activities will be conducted within the city, the identity of all persons who will solicit within the city, and such other information as the city clerk or her designee may find necessary to identify the solicitors and define the activities to be conducted. Any such permits shall be reviewed by the mayor and council and may be denied or revoked under any circumstances as shown in subsections (d) and (e) of this section. No fee shall be charged for permits issued hereunder. 
(f)  Operations regulated. The following regulations shall apply to any peddler, transient merchant, or solicitor for charitable or religious purposes doing business within the city and required to obtain a license or permit hereunder: 
(1)  No such person shall be permitted to locate and operate on any street within the city, except with the written permission of the mayor and council. 
(2)  No such person shall locate in or near the entrance to any house or place of business, or in any place so as to disrupt or impede pedestrian or vehicle traffic. 
(3)  No such person shall operate in vehicular traffic lanes of the city or solicit directly from the motoring public. 
(4)  If any law enforcement department should determine that pedestrian or vehicular traffic congestion is such that public hazard or other unsafe conditions may result from such operation in the congested area, such officer shall have authority to require such peddler, transient merchant, or solicitor for charitable or religious purposes to move from the area. 
(5)  No temporary shed, tent, or other temporary structure or covering shall be erected, except as may be approved by the city clerk, or his/her designee. 
(6)  The location of such person's operations on private property shall be with the express written permission of the property owner and merchants, and such operations shall comply with city zoning regulations and all safety and health code requirements of the county and city. 
(7)  No such person shall harass or intimidate the public in any manner. 
(8)  Each such person shall be required to display a valid license or permit issued by the city, or a copy thereof, in a manner which can be clearly observed by members of the public; provided however, that each member or representative of a religious or charitable organization which has been issued a permit to solicit contributions within the city may, in lieu of displaying a copy of the permit, display an identification badge, in a manner which can be clearly observed by any person being solicited. 
(9)  No peddler shall enter a private residence, place of business or other premises within the city under false pretenses for the purpose of peddling goods or services or soliciting orders for the sale of goods or services. No peddler shall remain in or on such premises after the owner, occupant, or other person in charge has requested the peddler to leave. No peddler shall go in or on such premises when the owner, occupant or other person in charge has displayed a "no soliciting" sign or other similar sign on the premises. 
(10)  No such person shall openly display his/her goods for sale so as to be plainly visible to the motoring public from any direction, whether such motorists are traveling along a public thoroughfare or other right-of-way. 
(11)  Such sales shall be permitted only within a B-1 or B-2 zoning district. 
(12)  A display shall not be erected or installed, nor shall any sales of goods and merchandise take place within 50 feet of the curb or paved edge of a public roadway. 
(13)  Such sales shall be permitted only on property where controlled vehicular ingress and egress and adequate off-street parking are provided. 
(g)  Loud noise and amplification devices prohibited. No license or permit holder under this article shall shout, ring bells, blow horns, make loud noises or use any radio or amplifying system upon the streets, alleys, parks or other public places within the city for the purpose of attracting attention to the goods, wares or merchandise which such license or permit holder intends to sell. 
(h)  Registered agent. 
(1)  Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this section, the applicant shall submit evidence with each license application under this section showing that such transient merchant has filed with the clerk of the superior court of the county the name and permanent address of the transient merchant's registered agent as required by O.C.G.A. § 43-46-5. Such registered agent shall be a resident of the city and shall be an agent of such transient merchant upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law to be served upon the transient merchant may be served in the same manner provided by law for the service of summons or complaint. The registered agent shall agree in writing to act as such agent, and a copy of the agreement shall be filed with the license application. 
(2)  Any such registered agent shall act in the same capacity and have the same duties and responsibilities and be subject to the same actions of the superior court as would any agent registered as required by H.B. 1568 of the general assembly of the state adopted in 1980 and known as the Transient Merchant Act (O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.). 
(3)  No applicant which is a corporation and which submits evidence that the corporation is chartered by the state shall be required to secure a registered agent within the city. 
(4)  No applicant who is a corporation chartered outside the state and which submits evidence that the corporation is currently registered with the secretary of state shall be required to secure a registered agent within the city. 
(Ord. of 4-13-2004, § IV-19) 
State Law reference— Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant merchants, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 
Sec. 22-123. - Precious metals dealers. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth below unless otherwise required by context. 
Dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins means: 
(1)  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals, gems, numismatic coins or goods made from precious metals, gems or numismatic coins from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins; or 
(2)  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals, gems or numismatic coins, or goods made from precious metals, gems, or numismatic coins are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Gems means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished, or uncut and unpolished. 
Numismatic coins means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the face value of the coins or the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity, however organized. 
Precious metals means gold, silver or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Precious metals, gems or numismatic coin items means any precious metals, gems or numismatic coins or goods made from precious metals, gems or numismatic coins. 
(b)  Business license required . Any person engaging in business as a dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins must apply for and obtain from the city clerk a license to transact business in the City of Flemington, pursuant to chapter 22, article II of the Code of the City of Flemington. 
(c)  Registration procedure; felony conviction; fee; renewal . 
(1)  No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins until he has registered as a dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins for each separate place of business within the City of Flemington. The registration shall be in writing and shall be sworn to or affirmed by the dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins. 
(2)  The registration shall contain the name, address, and age of the dealer together with the names, addresses, and ages of all other persons having an ownership interest or actually employed in the business other than publicly held corporations. 
(3)  No person shall be eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins if any employee or stockholder, other than stockholders owning less than ten percent of the outstanding shares of a publicly held corporation, has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States. This subsection shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten years have expired from the date of the completion of the felony sentence. 
(4)  All registrations shall contain the address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. Dealers in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins must be exclusively located and operated on property owned or leased (the term of which must be in excess of one year) by the person authorized to conduct such business, as listed on the business license. No such person shall locate in or near the entrance to any house or place of business, or in any place so as to disrupt or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Each dealer shall be required to notify the tax and license coordinator of the City of Flemington or his designee within seven calendar days of any change of address of the dealer or business or any change of ownership in the business. The dealer shall be required to apply for relocation before any change of address of the business to allow for the city to inspect the premises. 
(d)  Permanent records required; content . 
(1)  Every dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins shall maintain a record, in permanent form, in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase by such dealer of precious metals, gems or numismatic items the following: 
a.  The date and time of the purchase; 
b.  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; 
c.  The name, age, date of birth, and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from such seller's driver's license or other similar government-issued identification card containing a photo of the seller; 
d.  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial, model, or other number, and all identifying marks inscribed thereon; 
e.  Clear photograph of purchased goods; 
f.  The price paid by the dealer for the goods purchased; 
g.  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check; and 
h.  The signature of the seller. 
(2)  The permanent record required by this Code section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order and shall be made at the time of the transaction. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The record shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals, gems or numismatic coin items for at least two years. The record shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(3)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and driver's license number as required in paragraph (1)c. of subsection (d) of this section and in lieu of the seller's signature as required in paragraph (1)g. of subsection (d) of this section. 
(e)  Reports of purchases required; time of report; form; preservation; accessibility . 
(1)  Every dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins shall make a report to the chief of police or his designee, on forms approved or prescribed by the chief of police or his designee, of all precious metals, gems or numismatic coin items purchased on the day previous to the date of the report. The report shall contain the information specified in section 22-123(d)(1)a.—e. Such reports shall be in legible English and submitted electronically to the chief of police or his designee within 24 hours after the day on which the transactions occurred. If the day the report is required to be made is a holiday or other day on which the dealer is not doing business, the required report may be made by the close of business on the next business day. 
(2)  All reports shall be maintained in a safe and secure manner under the direct supervision of the chief of police or his designee and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(3)  The chief of police or his designee may, in his discretion, authorize any person who demonstrates theft of precious metals, gems or numismatic coin items by the presenting of an incident report or other similar document to inspect the reports in an effort to locate the stolen property. 
(4)  Upon the request, in writing, of any precious metals dealer to the chief of police or his designee, that the chief of police or his designee inspect any precious metals items, it shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee to inspect such precious metals, gems, or numismatic coin items within three days from the service of such request upon the chief of police or his designee. 
(f)  Unlawful acts; penalty . 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins or any agent or employee of a dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins who makes purchases of precious metals, gems or numismatic coins or of goods made from precious metals, gems or numismatic coins to: 
a.  Make any false statement in the registration provided for in section 22-123(c); 
b.  Fail to maintain and make entries in the permanent record as required by section 22-123(d); 
c.  Make any false entry in such permanent record; 
d.  Falsify, obliterate, destroy, or remove from the place of business such permanent record; 
e.  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such permanent record, or any precious metals, gems or numismatic coin items in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time: 
f.  Sell, exchange or alter the form of, any precious metals, gems or numismatic coins or goods made from precious metals, gems or numismatic coins purchased by remounting, melting, cutting up, or otherwise altering the original form until at least ten calendar days have elapsed from the time of purchase or acquisition; 
g.  Fail to make the report as required in section 22-123(e); or 
h.  Purchase any precious metals or gems from any person under 18 years of age. Responsibility for determining the age of persons selling or exchanging any precious metals, gems or numismatic coin items shall lie with the person taking the precious metals, gem or numismatic coin items in exchange or purchase. 
i.  No precious metals dealers shall open his place of business or conduct any business therein on Sunday. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins without first registering pursuant to section 22-123(c). 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals, gems or numismatic coins. 
(4)  If the chief of police or his designee has probable cause to believe that precious metals, gems or numismatic coins have been stolen, he may give notice in writing to the dealer to retain any precious metals, gems or numismatic coins which the police have probable cause to believe have been stolen for an additional 15 calendar days beyond the initial retention period. It shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of the property unless the notice is revoked in writing within the 15-day period. 
(5)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this section is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by city ordinance. 
(g)  Holding period . Any precious metals dealer or person operating under such license who buys or sells precious metals items, shall hold such precious metals items purchased or sold for at least ten days after the date of purchase, before disposing of the same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise. This provision cannot be waived by contract. 
(h)  Exporting . No precious metals dealer doing business in the city shall ship any precious metals items out of the city without first submitting to the police department a list of the articles to be shipped out of the city. This list shall include a full description of the articles or goods and these articles or goods shall be subject to the same restrictions as described in subsection (g) of this section. 
(i)  Suspension or revocation of license . Any person failing to comply with any provision of this section shall be subject to suspension or revocation of his license to conduct business in the City of Flemington. Such suspension or revocation may result from a conviction for a violation of any provision of this section or any applicable provision of the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2014-01, § I, 2-11-2014) 
Chapter 30 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia election code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.; election where all municipal seats are vacant, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; reapportionment of election districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4.1. 

Sec. 30-1. - Municipal elections conducted by county. 
Authority is hereby granted to the county to conduct any and all elections which would otherwise be held or conducted by the city in accordance with O.C.G.A. title 21, ch. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.) and in that regard the county shall perform all duties as superintendent of elections. 
(Ord. No. 1997-3, § 1, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 1, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 30-2. - Reimbursement to county. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-45(c), the city shall reimburse the county for all costs incurred in performing the functions hereby authorized. 
(Ord. No. 1997-3, § 2, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 2, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 30-3. - Authority to contract. 
The mayor of the city is hereby authorized to enter into such contracts with the county as may be necessary to carry out the intent of sections 30-1—30-3. 
(Ord. No. 1997-3, § 3, 5-27-1997; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 3, 2-13-2001) 
Sec. 30-4. - Election by plurality. 
In any election held to fill the offices of mayor and/or councilmember, election shall be by plurality. The candidate, or in the case of councilmember, candidates, receiving the most votes shall be declared elected. A majority vote shall not be required. 
(Ord. of 8-25-1976, § I; Ord. of 7-30-1984, § I) 
Sec. 30-5. - Election of councilmembers. 
A candidate for council shall not be required to designate the specific council position which he/she is seeking. In a general election the six candidates for council with the highest number of votes shall be declared elected. 
(Ord. of 8-25-1976, § II; Ord. of 7-30-1984, § II) 
Sec. 30-6. - Voter registration. 
A person who is not registered and desires to vote at any special primary or special election, shall make application no later than the close of business on the fifth day after the date of the call for the special primary or special election, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays of the state, except as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-2-224. 
(Ord. of 7-30-1984, § III) 
Sec. 30-7. - Notice of candidacy; filing dates. 
In the case of a general election, the municipal qualifying period shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. In the case of a special election, the municipal qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of the call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. 
(Ord. of 7-30-1984, § IV) 
Sec. 30-8. - Term of office. 
Officers properly elected in the general election shall take office on the first day of January following and continue in office for four years or until their properly elected successors take office. 
(Ord. of 8-25-1976, § IV; Ord. of 7-30-1984, § V) 
Sec. 30-9. - Contesting elections. 
The results of any election may be contested as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 8-25-1976, § III; Ord. of 7-30-1984, § VI) 
State Law reference— Contesting elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-520 et seq. 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES AND EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-1. - National Incident Management System adopted. 
The city council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System (NIMS) as established under HSPD 5 and the United Command System as established under O.C.G.A. § 38-3-57 as its system of preparing for and responding to disaster incidents and directs all incident managers and response organizations in the county to train and exercise and use these systems in their response operations. 
(Ord. of 10-1-2005) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2010-01, adopted July 13, 2010 repealed the former Art. II, §§ 38-19—38-28, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. of 9-14-2004, §§ II—X; Ord. of 7-12-2005, §§ II, V, VI. For a complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 

Sec. 38-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means these include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Coastal marshlands shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Comprehensive construction-sequencing plan means the plan created during the preconstruction stage which describes the sequence of each construction activity and phase. It allows for the coordination of simultaneous operations and planning of the activity sequence while taking the opportunity to consider different equipment and strategies. 
Concrete washout means residue and contaminants from washing down equipment such as concrete trucks, pumps, mixers, chutes, hand tools, and wheelbarrows. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below the original ground surface to the excavated surface. The term "cut" is also known as excavation. 
Department means the state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
Director of inspections is the department head of the building inspections department or his designee. 
District means the coastal soil and water conservation district. 
Division means the environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 38-21(c) of this article. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas), or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual excluding a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hazardous wastes means any solid, liquid, or contained gaseous materials which are no longer used and, if not handled or disposed of properly, could damage or pollute the land, air, or water. They can also cause injury or death to exposed individuals. A waste is hazardous if it exhibits one or more, but is not limited to, the following characteristics: 
(1)  Ignitability. Ignitable vapors can create fires under certain conditions. Examples include liquids, such as solvents that readily catch fire, and friction-sensitive substances. 
(2)  Corrosivity. Corrosive wastes include those that are acidic and those that are capable of corroding metal, such as tanks, containers, drums, and barrels. 
(3)  Reactivity. Reactive wastes are unstable under normal conditions. They can create explosions and/or toxic fumes, gases, and vapors when mixed with water. 
(4)  Toxicity. Toxic wastes are harmful or fatal when ingested or absorbed. When toxic wastes are disposed of on land, contaminated liquid may drain from the waste and pollute groundwater. 
Illicit discharge means the discharge of pollutants or non-stormwater materials to storm sewer systems via overland flow or direct dumping of materials into a catch basin. 
Impaired waters shall mean the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division, integrated 305(b)/303(d) list of streams (or stream segments or other bodies of water) with the assessment identified as "not supporting". 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 38-20(5) of this article. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRP) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Pervious area means an area that is open to passage or entrance; permeable. 
Phase or phased means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Pollution control means preventing the contamination of the environment with materials that interfere with human health, the quality of life, or the natural functioning of ecosystems (living organisms and their physical surroundings). Pollution exists in many forms and affects many different aspects of our environment. Point-source pollution comes from specific, localized, and identifiable sources, such as sewage pipelines or industrial smokestacks. Non-point-source pollution comes from dispersed or uncontained sources, such as contaminated water runoff from urban areas or automobile emissions. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Refueling station means a place where the activity of supplying or taking on fuel is performed. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sanitary waste means general household/lavatory waste that may be disposed of through the sanitary sewer system. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the soil and water conservation district. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and [O.C.G.A.] § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.epd.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 6-12-2018, § I, 6-12-2018) 
Sec. 38-20. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968". 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying. 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 38-21(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-21. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b)and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15) and (16) of this section in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, re-grading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments onsite or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (16), (17) and (18), there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his/her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his/her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970." And the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(18)  There is established along impaired streams and those streams segments identified by the governing authority(s) and as listed in section 38-30 of this article and illustrated on a map maintained by LCPC an additional 25 feet undisturbed vegetative buffer or an additional 15 feet of permanent grass planted in accordance with the manual. These buffers are measured horizontally beginning 25 feet from the point of wrested vegetation and the requirements for buffers as described in (16) and (17) above. 
(19)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within the 100-year floodplain unless compliance with any applicable local floodplain management ordinance is demonstrated or such construction is in compliance with the Federal Emergency Management Agency regulations. 
(20)  Comprehensive construction sequencing plan. A comprehensive construction sequencing plan shall be created during the preconstruction stage. This plan describes the sequence of each construction activity and phase. It allows for the coordination of simultaneous operations and planning of the activity sequence while taking the opportunity to consider different equipment and strategies. A comprehensive construction sequencing plan should address items such as the timing of the installation of sediment basins and installation of erosion control structures and devices. This plan must be submitted prior to the issuance of a land-disturbing activity permit as part of the construction site plan or as a separate document as needed. 
(21)  Prior to obtaining a land-disturbing activity permit, a plan to prevent pollution and manage construction site waste must be prepared and approved by the governing authority. Construction site operators will control waste at the construction site, such as discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste. The plan must include the following items: 
a.  Waste receptacle locations (construction and permanent). 
1.  Used to store unwanted litter, and discarded building materials. 
2.  Dumpster containers for putrescible or leachable waste shall have lids or covers that can be placed over the container prior to rainfall. 
3.  All trash and construction debris from the site will be deposited in the waste receptacle. Waste collection shall occur before the containers overflow. 
4.  The waste disposal company will be a licensed solid waste management company and shall meet all local and any state solid waste management regulations. 
b.  Hazardous waste receptacles. If a land-disturbing activity identifies, contains, proposes or otherwise includes any hazardous waste, the manufacturer's guidance will be followed for the containment of these materials. This hazardous waste must be disposed of on a regular basis and in the appropriate manner according to the guidelines of the manufacturer. Hazardous waste is defined as any solid, liquid, or contained gaseous materials which are no longer used and, if not handled or disposed of properly, could damage or pollute the land, air, or water. They can also cause injury or death to exposed individuals. A waste is hazardous if it exhibits one or more, but not limited to, the following characteristics: 
1.  Ignitability. Ignitable vapors can create fires under certain conditions. Examples include liquids, such as solvents that readily catch fire, and friction sensitive substances. 
2.  Corrosivity. Corrosive wastes include those that are acidic and those that are capable or corroding metal, such as tanks, containers, drums, and barrels. 
3.  Reactivity. Reactive wastes are unstable under normal conditions. They can create explosions and/or toxic fumes, gases, and vapors when mixed with water. 
4.  Toxicity. Toxic wastes are harmful or fatal when ingested or absorbed. When toxic wastes are disposed of on land, contaminated liquid may drain from the waste and pollute ground water. 
c.  On-site construction refueling stations or refueling areas. 
1.  All refueling stations or refueling areas shall comply with Rules of Safety Fire Commissioner, Chapter 120-3-11, Rules and Regulations for Flammable and Combustible Liquids and other applicable codes and regulations. 
2.  A refueling area shall be designated on the plans for refueling any construction equipment. The plan must include precautions and actions that must be implemented to prevent the release of hazardous pollutants into the environment. 
3.  Construction sites will have equipment on-site or on-board maintenance fueling vehicles to contain and clean up petroleum spills. 
4.  If petroleum products are stored on-site, a fuel storage facility must be provided and approved. All on-site fuel storage facilities will be monitored for leaks and receive regular preventative maintenance to reduce the chance of leakage. The plan should identify petroleum storage facilities and address inspections and maintenance. 
5.  All fuel products shall be stored in tightly sealed containers that are clearly labeled. 
6.  Petroleum products will be stored in covered areas, where possible. 
7.  If the on-site refueling station is to be used for a period greater than two years, it will be considered as a permanent fueling station subject to site plan review and approval. 
d.  On-site construction chemical storage. 
1.  Chemicals will be stored in a dry covered area. Chemical storage containers should be located in a retaining (diked) area, not exposed to precipitation or stormwater. 
2.  Each site that has a chemical storage facility where flammable and combustible chemicals are stored must ensure that storage tanks and venting systems are equipped with all necessary safeguards to prevent chemical leaks into the atmosphere or explosion. 
e.  Concrete washout location. Excess residue and contaminants from washing down equipment such as, but not limited to, concrete trucks, pumps, mixers, chutes, hand tools, and wheelbarrows containing or having contained concrete should be contained in an area that prevents contact between these residues and contaminants, and stormwater that will be discharged from the site. After excess concrete and wash water has hardened, they should be disposed of properly. 
f.  On-site construction sanitary waste disposal units. 
1.  All construction sites are required to have on-site sanitary waste disposal units. 
2.  The developer/contractor should ensure servicing of sanitary waste disposal units on a regular basis. 
g.  All on site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be in proper working condition as soon as practicable. On site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be located to avoid impairments to them or contamination from them during the land-disturbing activity. 
(22)  Discharges of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas shall be controlled to the extent that turbidity of the stormwater runoff shall not exceed 50 nephelometric turbidity units higher than the turbidity level of the receiving stream immediately upstream from the stormwater runoff discharge at the time of such discharge, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, the turbidity of the receiving stream downstream of the construction site shall not exceed 60 nephelometric turbidity units higher than the turbidity level of the receiving stream immediately upstream from the construction site. Downstream turbidity measurements shall be taken at points where the entering discharge is fully mixed with the receiving stream flow. Should the division determine that other turbidity limits may be applicable; the issuing authority may accept the same. 
All onsite waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be in proper working condition as soon as practicable. On-site waste disposal systems, storage facilities, washout locations, and refueling stations shall be located to avoid impairments to them or contamination from them during the land-disturbing activity. 
(e)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(f)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 8-11-2015; Ord. of 6-12-2018, § I) 
Sec. 38-22. - Prohibition of illicit discharges and illicit connections. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge to any component of the city storm sewer system or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into such system any matter of any nature excepting only such storm or surface water as herein authorized. 
(1)  The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing performed by a government agency, potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming, fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(2)  In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city storm sewer system of any material or substance other than stormwater runoff, the person concerned shall inform the city engineering within 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps to contain, treat or other actions to minimize effects of the discharge on the city system and receiving streams. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. 
(b)  Illicit connections. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person, company, corporation, etc. to connect any pipe, open channel, any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water which is approved by the city engineering department, based on the exemptions listed in subsection [(a)](1)b., hereinabove, to the city storm sewer system. 
(2)  Improper connections in violation of this Code must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to a sanitary sewer system upon approval by the city engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-23. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of Flemington without first obtaining a permit from the county consolidated planning commission to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county consolidated planning commission and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections [38-21](b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  A fee as published by the county consolidated planning commission shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 38-21, subsections (c)(15), (16), (17) and (18) have been obtained, and all fees paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 38-21(b) and (c); or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 38-21(c)(15) and (16) of this article are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(7)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax commissioner and the city clerk for the city certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010; Ord. of 6-12-2018, § I) 
Sec. 38-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The county consolidated planning commission will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he/she shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The county consolidated planning commission shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(g)  The governmental inspector and the party responsible for the construction/redeveloped site will perform at least one post-construction inspection at least once a year on all newly developed and redeveloped areas. An inventory of structural BMPs will be developed during these inspections. The inspector will ensure that the control structures such as retention basins, detention basins, porous pavements, concrete grid pavements, oil/water separators, catch basins, vegetative buffers, curbs and gutter, and grate inlets are functioning properly. If these control structures are not functioning properly, the governmental inspector shall issue a notice of violation describing the violation and stating a reasonable time in which the party responsible for the site must repair or alter the control structure in order for it to function properly. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
(3)  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his/her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his/her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he/she shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his/her performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 38-23(b)(7) of this article. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of city ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under city ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-26. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-27. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his/her administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-28. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 13th day of July, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved there under or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-29. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 38-30. - Impaired streams map. 

(Ord. of 6-12-2018, § I) 
Secs. 38-31—38-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WETLANDS 

Sec. 38-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the county, as indicated on the wetlands map; provided, however, that the wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
Wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Liberty County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2000) 
Sec. 38-61. - U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination. 
An U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required prior to the issuance of a permit for any regulated activity within the wetland protection district. If the Corps determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, no permit for the regulated activity will be issued until the Corps has issued the section 404 permit or letter of permission. If the Corps determines that there are no wetlands present on the proposed development site, the county may proceed with its normal permitting procedures. 
(Ord. of 1-11-2000) 
Secs. 38-62—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRAINAGE CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-81. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for". 
Accidental discharge means a discharge prohibited by this article into the city storm sewer system which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the county's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
Clean Water Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.). 
Cooling water means water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus. 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development or changed use, including particularly any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure. 
Conveyance means stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, etc. 
Detention facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during a storm. This facility only contains water during the storage period. 
Developer means any person who acts in his/her own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. This definition shall not apply to individual single-family dwelling unit construction or to alteration, modification or additions to single-family dwelling units except for, in either case, individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots as are located within the intermediate regional floodplain. For the purpose of this section, only the alterations of the drainage system shall be deemed to be development on individual single-family lots. 
Discharge means the release of treated or untreated water to the city storm sewer system. 
Drainage means a general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared by a professional engineer using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. Also referred to as stormwater management plan. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities, retention facilities, all parts of the storm sewer system and easements in which the facilities are contained. 
Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice and or gravity. 
Flemington city council means the councilmembers of the City of Flemington. 
Flood means a temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams, drainageways and lakes which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Hydrology means the science that treats the occurrence, circulation, distribution, and properties of the waters of the earth, and their reaction with the environment. 
Illicit connection means a connection to a storm sewer system which results in discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the city storm sewer system). 
Intermediate floodplain (100-year floodplain) means the land areas within the intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours as defined on the flood hazard map. 
Intermediate regional flood (100-year flood) means a 100-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every 100 years or having a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
Land-disturbing activity means any land change which may result in soil erosion from water, wind or ice and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land. 
Live retention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
Maintenance means any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this article or to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
Maintenance of retention facility means preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment of the retention facility in good condition; insuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from sediment; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
Mayor means the mayor of the City of Flemington, Georgia. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, the proprietor; this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under his/her lease for the maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant including a developer. 
Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial and includes any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
Pollution means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Private means property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by county, city, state, or federal government. 
Procedure means a procedure adopted by the city, by and through the Flemington city council, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this Code or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of City of Flemington or other agencies. 
Reach means the length of a drainage channel uniform with respect to discharge, depth, area, and slope. 
Record drawing means amended site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
Regulation means any regulation, rule or requirement prepared by the engineering department and adopted by City of Flemington pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
Retention facility means a facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. This facility normally contains water at all times. 
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
Sanitary sewerage system means a complete sanitary sewerage system which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
Sedimentation means the processes that operate at or near the surface of the ground to deposit earth, debris and other materials either on other ground surfaces or in water channels. 
Sedimentation facility means a retention or detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process which may be constructed as part of or separately from a retention facility. 
Site means any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land. 
Site plan means that plan required to obtain a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the developer will conform with applicable provisions of this and other applicable ordinances. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover which may be in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, city streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, other stormwater facilities) which is owned or maintained by the city; designated or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; not a combined sewer; and, not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW)). 
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this article and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
Stormwater management facilities means constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to, pipes, swales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catchbasins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
Stormwater runoff means the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following the precipitation. 
Stream means natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
Variance means the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
Water quality means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
Water quantity means those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 5, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-82. - Statutory authorization. 
By Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, III(a)(6), local governmental units are given the authority and responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry and specifically with regard to water drainage, collection and disposal. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 1, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-83. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting conditions or stop work order shall be liable for a civil penalty of not less than $100.00 per day or more than $500.00 per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 60 days in jail, or both fine and jail. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 47, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-84. - Legal status provisions. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all development activity within the city. The provisions shall not, however, be construed as repealing or modifying any condition attached to the issuance of any development permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Further, this article shall not be construed so as to require any department of the city government to amend any development permit issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. However, the standards set forth in this article shall apply to all development, as defined herein, subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 48, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-85. - Cooperation with other governments. 
The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purpose of this article. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative monitoring and cooperative management of stormwater system and management programs. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 49, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-86. - Property owner liability; supplemental charges. 
Any person in violation of any portion of this article shall pay for all city costs associated with the violation, including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death, legal and other costs. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 50, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-87. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The city is subject to periodic inundation which could result in loss of life or property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by occupancy in flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods or hazardous to other lands which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise protected from flood damages. 
(c)  Increased velocities and quantities of water draining off developed land causes erosion, sedimentation and maintenance problems resulting in significant damages. 
(d)  Uncontrolled stormwater drainage can increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods which occur, endangering roads, other public and private property and human life. 
(e)  Altered land surfaces can change the rate and volume of runoff. 
(f)  Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater management. 
(g)  Every parcel of real property, both public and private, either uses or benefits from the maintenance of a storm sewer system. 
(h)  Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 2, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-88. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote, protect, maintain and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion, flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damages at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, wetlands, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Comply with state (DNR) and federal (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act. These requirements include: 
a.  Control the contribution of pollutants to the storm sewer system by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and industrial activity; 
b.  Prohibit illicit connections to storm sewers; 
c.  Control discharge to storm sewers of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; and 
d.  Control, through intergovernmental agreements, contribution of pollutants from one city system to another. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 3, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-89. - Scope. 
This article supplements the following: 
(1)  Liberty County subdivision regulations. 
(2)  Liberty County zoning ordinance. 
(3)  Buildings, construction and related activities. 
(4)  Erosion and sediment control ordinance. 
(5)  Flood control ordinance. 
(6)  Any other ordinance relating to the regulation and control of surface and or floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 4, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-90. - Statement of policy objectives. 
The enactment and enforcement of this article is intended to address the following policy objectives: 
(1)  To recognize the necessity of and to encourage joint action and a full exchange of information by the city and the development industry in resolution of existing drainage problems, the prevention of their worsening or recurrence and the implementation of these objectives; 
(2)  To work in a cooperative relationship with the development industry to accomplish the objective stated in subsection (1) of this section by encouraging through this article and other public actions the development of on-site self-maintaining retention/detention facilities and for off-site centrally located regional retention/detention facilities; 
(3)  To maintain, where feasible, the natural environment of city streams through reduction of flow quantities resulting from new development and, where feasible, restore the floodplain to its natural functional purpose to resolve existing flooding problems, but recognize the necessity of using urban streams for stormwater runoff in those situations where maintenance of the natural stream environment would result in continuation or worsening of flooding conditions; 
(4)  To incrementally assume maintenance responsibility for the public drainage system; 
(5)  To require of the development industry the responsibility to maintain the functioning of the storm drainage system; 
(6)  To encourage the construction of joint retention/detention ponds serving several properties which can be accepted for maintenance by the city upon completion of project development. The city encourages (where engineering judgment so warrants) the location of these retention facilities off the site of the property under development and may participate in the construction of major retention facilities which would serve not only the needs of the property under development, but would assist in resolving existing flooding problems; 
(7)  To encourage innovative design solutions to the effective retention and reduction of runoff. Drainage control measures to retain, reduce and regulate the rate of stormwater discharge which shall be acceptable shall include, but need not be limited to, retention/detention ponds, percolation facilities, parking lots, open space areas, and oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. In addition, the city encourages the development of retention facilities in such a manner that they will become aesthetically and recreationally beneficial to the community in which they are located; and 
(8)  To require any development to retain any runoff which exceeds an allowable increase of one cubic foot per second per acre caused by the development and to utilize the parking area or privately owned retention/detention facility. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 6, 1-28-1997) 
Secs. 38-91—38-108. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 38-109. - Administration. 
The liberty consolidated planning commission will administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(1)  The liberty consolidated planning commission shall: 
a.  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
b.  Advise permittee when additional federal or state permits may be required; and, if specific federal or state permits are known to be required, ensure that copies of such permits are provided and maintained on file with the development permit; 
c.  Notify adjacent communities, the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
d.  Administer, coordinate and oversee acquisition, design, construction, and operations and maintenance (O&M) of municipal/county stormwater facilities and conveyances; 
e.  Establish or oversee establishment of development standards and guidelines; 
f.  Determine the manner in which stormwater facilities should be operated; 
g.  Inspect private systems which discharge to the county and city storm sewer systems; 
h.  Advise the city and other departments on issues related to stormwater; 
i.  Protect facilities and properties controlled by the city and prescribe how they are used by others; 
j.  Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to comply with the terms of this article; 
k.  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the city storm sewer system. 
(2)  The liberty consolidated planning commission or his/her representative shall administer and enforce those provisions of this article which apply to developed and occupied areas and to undeveloped areas which affect the city's responsibility for maintenance of the storm drainage system. The liberty consolidated planning commission shall ensure that any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained so that flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 40, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-110. - Flood hazard map preparation. 
The liberty consolidated planning commission shall prepare and maintain the flood hazard map using the most current flood insurance study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency with accompanying maps or, by using engineering studies prepared under the supervision of a currently licensed state registered professional engineer using common and appropriate engineering procedures, shall deem such studies accurate and acceptable for floodplain definition. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 41, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-111. - Inspection and right-of-way. 
(a)  Upon presentation of identification to the developer, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, employees of the city may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development and construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Designees of the county engineer may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All drainage facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the city or not, shall be accessible at all times for city inspection. Where drainage facilities are accepted by the city for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. Where an easement does not exist for the drainage system, the permission of the owner shall be obtained before entrance; however, in the event of emergency maintenance requirements, permission of the owner shall not be mandatory. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 42, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-112. - Ownership, maintenance, and inspections. 
(a)  Any stormwater management facility which services a single lot or commercial and industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows for access for maintenance. 
(b)  All other stormwater management control facilities shall be publicly owned and/or maintained only if accepted for maintenance by city. 
(c)  The liberty consolidated planning commission may require dedication of privately owned stormwater facilities which discharge to the city storm sewer system. 
(d)  The liberty consolidated planning commission shall determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  An initial inspection prior to drainage plan approval; 
(2)  A bury inspection prior to burial of any underground drainage structure; 
(3)  Erosion control inspections as necessary to ensure effective control of erosion and sedimentation; and 
(4)  A final inspection when all work, including installation of drainage facilities, has been completed. 
(e)  The county engineer or his/her designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, in accordance with state and federal law, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The county engineer or his/her designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(f)  The county engineer or designated employee of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, in accordance with state and federal law, all properties for which the city holds a negotiated easement for repairs, maintenance and other purposes related to any portion of the stormwater management facilities lying within said easement. The county engineer or his/her designee shall duly notify the owner of said property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(g)  If, after inspection, the condition of a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have right, but not duty to take action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. 
(h)  The liberty consolidated planning commission shall inspect the work and shall either approve it or notify the applicant in writing in what respects there has been failure to comply with the requirements of the approved drainage plan. Any portion of the work which does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the applicant, or said applicant shall be subject to a penalty. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 43, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-113. - Emergency maintenance. 
(a)  The city may conduct emergency maintenance operation on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the county engineer or his/her representative, create a condition potentially injurious to life, property and the public road system. 
(b)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 44, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-114. - Notice of violation/stop work order. 
Whenever the county engineer or his/her representative determines that activity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plans, he/she may issue a notice of violation and/or a stop work order. Whenever the county engineer determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, he/she may issue a notice of violation and/or a stop work order. A stop work order or notice of violation of the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall be directed to the owner of the property or his/her agent and shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the property sufficient to identify where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  State that, if repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector, summons shall be issued for the owner to appear in court. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. However, in the judgment of the county engineer, where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this article or constitutes a public health and safety hazard, he/she may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 45, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-115. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the liberty consolidated planning commission (including any decision with reference to the granting or denial of a variance from the terms of this article) may appeal same by filing a written notice of appeal with the county engineer within 15 days of the issuance of said decision by the county engineer. 
(b)  The county engineer can then reverse his/her decision or send this notice to the liberty consolidated planning commission. A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the decision of the county engineer is alleged to be in error, and the county engineer shall prepare and send to the liberty consolidated planning commission and appellant a written response to said notice of appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(c)  The liberty consolidated planning commission will then make a recommendation to the city with regards to the appeal. The city will make the final decision regarding the appeal. 
(d)  All appeals shall be heard by the city council in accordance with city bylaws. The hearing shall be held within 60 days after receipt of notice of appeal or a date mutually agreed upon in writing by the appellant and the chairperson of the city council. The city council shall then make its findings within 30 days of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the city council shall be based on guidelines for appeals established by the city council and amended from time to time, with guidelines published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(e)  If the appellant is dissatisfied with the city council decision, he/she can appeal said decision to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 46, 1-28-1997) 
Secs. 38-116—38-143. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLAN SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 38-144. - Standards. 
(a)  All persons proposing development or construction shall, prior to beginning any construction activity, submit to the liberty consolidated planning commission site plans prepared in accordance with this article illustrating the means by which conformance with this article is to be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
(b)  Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the 100-year floodplain shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this and other applicable code provisions. 
(c)  The grading and drainage portion of a site plan shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently licensed state registered professional engineer. The plan shall include site location map of the project area indicating the location of the project in relation to rivers and streams, topographic map showing existing and proposed contours at one-foot intervals, proposed drainageways and drainage structures in addition to the requirements established in other ordinances. 
(d)  When the hydraulic/hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles of flood routing, super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies or other advanced hydraulic/hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently licensed state registered professional engineer proficient in hydraulics/hydrology. 
(e)  The liberty consolidated planning commission may grant a variance from the requirements of this article if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence to article provisions will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of the article. 
(f)  The liberty consolidated planning commission may grant a variance from requirements of this article if the proposed development will not: 
(1)  Change the rate or volume of runoff significantly; 
(2)  Have a significant, negative impact on any wetland, watercourse or water body; or 
(3)  Contribute to degradation of water quality. 
(g)  Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with the requirements of this article shall be submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations and shall include: 
(1)  Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this article for grading and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the one-foot interval; golf courses and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement but general grading plans shall be submitted. Related plans shall show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits and proposed alterations to the existing site or facilities; 
(2)  A hydrologic engineering analysis of stormwater runoff under existing and proposed developed site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross section area required to carry the affected stream at the 25- and 100-year flood stage level. The requirements for a complete hydrologic study may be waived by the county engineer for any development where the site plan submitted illustrates existing or proposed improvements sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this article; 
(3)  Delineation of the boundaries and contour elevations of the 100-year floodplain as represented on the county's flood hazard maps prepared by FEMA. The actual building site in relation to the 100-year floodplain boundaries shall be shown. Any structure located in the 100-year floodplain shall show the finished floor elevation of the first floor. The same information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of such property so affected. The elevation contours representing the intermediate regional flood conditions shall be shown when they are located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining 100-year flood elevations shall be established and shown on the plan; 
(4)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading and drainage plans as related to other major items of construction; and 
(5)  Upon development/project completion, location, size and invert elevations of pipe segments of the storm drainage system, of control weirs, and maximum water surface elevations in retention ponds shall be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on a final plat for other developments which shall be submitted to the county engineer. The professional engineer reviewing the construction shall provide a certification that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans for the project. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 20, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-145. - Plan approval process. 
(a)  Unless granted an exemption, any person planning a development shall submit to the liberty consolidated planning commission four copies of a drainage plan, prepared in accordance with this article for review and approval. 
(b)  The county engineer or his/her designee shall review the plan. 
(1)  The county engineer shall issue a decision approving, rejecting or conditionally approving the plan with modification. 
(2)  The county engineer's decision will be based on conformance with requirements included in the city's drainage ordinance. No plan shall be approved unless it conforms with the requirements included in this article. The county engineer may require such additional documents or other items necessary to make this determination. 
(3)  If rejected, changes, additional analysis or other information needed to approve the next submittal of the plan shall be identified. 
(c)  If the drainage plan involves any stormwater management facilities or land to be dedicated to public use, the drainage plan shall be submitted to the engineering department for review and approval. 
(d)  Approved plans shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. 
(1)  Extensions or renewals of plan approvals shall be granted by the liberty consolidated planning commission upon written request by the person responsible for the development activity. 
(2)  A stormwater management plan shall not be considered approved without the inclusion of an approval stamp with a signature and date on the plans from the liberty consolidated planning commission. The stamp of approval on the plans is solely an acknowledgement of satisfactory compliance with the requirements of these regulations. The approval stamp does not constitute a representation or warranty to the applicant or any other person concerning the safety, appropriateness or effectiveness of any provision, or omission from the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 21, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-146. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Any development-related (subdivision/utility/other) permit may be suspended or revoked if one or more of the following violations are committed: 
(1)  Violations of conditions of drainage plan approval; 
(2)  Construction is not in strict accordance with the intent of approved plans; 
(3)  Noncompliance with any correction notices or stop work orders; or 
(4)  Existence of immediate danger in the downstream area, as judged by the liberty consolidated planning commission. 
(b)  If one or more of the violations listed in subsection (a) of this section are found, a written notice of violations shall be served upon the owner or his/her authorized representative, and an immediate stop work order may be issued. 
(1)  The written notice shall set forth measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan, and 
(2)  Correction of the violations must be started immediately, or the owner shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 22, 1-28-1997) 
Secs. 38-147—38-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRAINAGE 

Sec. 38-176. - Standards. 
(a)  Water quality goals and objectives contained in the latest edition of the Coastal Stormwater Supplement to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (CSS), and any relevant local addenda, will be followed in design of stormwater systems. 
(1)  CSS compatibility with other regulations: This subsection (a) is not intended to interfere with, modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(b)  All engineering design items for storm drainage and erosion control and sedimentation control and delineation of the 100-year floodplains shall meet the applicable minimum requirements available from the liberty consolidated planning commission. Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic computations shall not be less than shown by applicable rainfall curves published by the National Weather Service for the affected area. 
(c)  A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all development and construction which will increase the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one cubic foot per second per acre for a 25-year frequency (type II) storm. This shall not apply to individual single-family lots of less than two acres. 
(d)  The release rate of stormwater from all developments where detention is required shall: 
(1)  Not exceed the peak stormwater runoff rate from the area in its existing state for all intensities up to and including the 25-year frequency for all durations of rainfall; or 
(2)  Not be greater than that calculated for a 25-year (type II) frequency storm with a runoff coefficient of 0.20, 0.25 and 0.35 for land with an average slope of up to two percent. 
(e)  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a (type II) storm of 25-year design frequency except for areas considered to be major drainage canals. The major drainage canals shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 100-year frequency. 
(f)  Land uses within the 100-year floodplain shall not diminish or restrict the capacity of the channels or floodplains of the stream, its tributaries, drainage ditches or any other drainage facilities or systems and shall not increase the 100-year elevation or velocity or concentration of flow in downstream areas. If the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the 100-year floodplain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the development permit shall be denied unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the 100-year floodplain. Altered sections of the 100-year floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt build-up. 
(g)  The live retention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 25-year frequency rainfall as published by the National Weather Service for the affected areas. The retention system required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of a 25-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the proposed development, with a release rate that does not exceed the pre-development runoff. Retention control structures and other drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. Retention/detention control structures shall be sized for the release rate as presented in previous sections and will have provisions for overflow of the 100-year storm without damage to the structure. 
(h)  When the developer requests and the liberty consolidated planning commission determines that development and construction projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined retention or other drainage facilities more practical, the city may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two or more properties by two or more developers. This authorization shall be granted by the liberty consolidated planning commission upon application for approval being submitted through the planning commission. Where joint retention facilities serving two or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention facility, except upon approval of the liberty consolidated planning commission. 
(i)  When adequacy of existing drainage structures is being considered in association with proposed development, the overall capacity of the structure will be evaluated and divided among upstream properties. The available capacity will be divided among property owners based on acreage in the basin. Under no condition will the available capacity of the structure be exceeded. Should the developer desire to replace the structure in lieu of retention/detention, all downstream structures should be evaluated and deemed adequate. The developer will be responsible for providing calculations and studies needed to evaluate downstream structures. If an existing structure not being modified by the development is found to be inadequate to handle the pre-development flows, the developer shall provide calculations to show the structure size required to handle the pre-development flows of the entire basin area. The city at that time will evaluate its ability to modify that structure. This evaluation will take into consideration available funds, required permits, capabilities of downstream structures and current work loads. Based on the counties findings, the developer will be notified within 45 days of the county's intentions for modification and any schedule required for modification of structures. 
(j)  The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all retention, detention and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff. 
(1)  Permanent chainlink fencing at least six feet in height shall be required around all these facilities. This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment (if intended) into the facility. The fence shall include a lockable gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities (12 feet minimum). Different fencing material may be substituted for chain link upon approval of the liberty consolidated planning commission. Requirements for fencing may be waived if deemed necessary by the city council. 
(2)  These facilities shall be located on tracts of land designated for this use on the recorded plat, with sufficient area around the perimeter to provide access for maintenance purposes and shall be immediately adjacent to or be provided with an access easement to a public street. The access easement shall provide at least 20 feet of width outside of aboveground obstructions including trees, utility poles, fences, buildings, headwalls, weirs, settling basins, top of slope or other drainage structures. 
(3)  Perforated standpipes or a french drain, as approved by the county engineer, or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing of water and/or inadequate drainage shall be installed within all these facilities. 
(4)  Except as provided in subsection (i)(5) of this section, the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of these retention facilities during grading, construction and following final approval of the completed project. This maintenance obligation shall be binding on future owners, successors and assigns of the property. 
(5)  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after the date of adoption of this article, the city shall assume maintenance responsibility two years after the release of subdivision streets. A special drainage district as authorized by Georgia Laws 1972, p. 1552 will be established for property in a single-family residential subdivision at the time the plat is finally recorded and will be so noted on the plat. Upon completion of developer maintenance all detention ponds shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(6)  These facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed under permits issued prior to the adoption of this article will not be accepted for city maintenance unless individually approved and accepted by the city council and suitable access easements are provided. At the time the city council accepts a retention facility for city maintenance, a special drainage district may be established that includes all properties for which the retention facility is designed. 
(7)  Pursuant to the creation of special drainage districts by the city as authorized by Georgia Laws 1972, p. 1552, revenues to fund city maintenance of retention facilities may be obtained by an ad valorem tax on all properties for which the retention facilities are designed. Such ad valorem millage rates may be set annually by the board of commissioners when other ad valorem millage rates are set. No assessment will be made in a special drainage district in the calendar year in which it is established. 
(k)  Items required to be included in the drainage plan: 
(1)  A vicinity map with an indicating north arrow, scale, boundary lines of site, the land lot and district numbers, and other information necessary to locate the development site. 
(2)  Existing and proposed topography of the development site. 
(3)  A description of all watercourses, waterbodies, and wetlands on or adjacent to the site or into which stormwater flows. 
(4)  Physical improvements on the site, including present development and proposed development. 
(5)  Proposed dimensions, elevations, and characteristics of all stormwater management facilities. 
(6)  Location of BMPs for water quality control, including temporary and permanent vegetative and structural measures, processes, procedures, prohibitions on practices and other management practices that prevent or reduce discharge of pollutants in stormwater runoff. 
(7)  Identify all areas within the site which will be included in land-disturbing activities and the expected date final stabilization will be completed. 
(8)  The anticipated starting and completion dates of various stages of land-disturbing activities and the expected date final stabilization will be completed. 
(9)  A determination that no occupied first floor elevation of any structure is below the 100-year flood elevation. 
(10)  Designation of all easements needed for inspection and maintenance of the drainage system and stormwater management facilities and BMPs. 
(11)  All engineering calculations needed to design the system and associated structures, including: 
a.  Predevelopment and postdevelopment runoff flow velocities; 
b.  Peak rates of discharge; and 
c.  Inflow and outflow hydrograph of runoff at all existing and proposed points of discharge from the site. 
(12)  Description of site conditions around all points of surface water discharge. This description shall include, but not be limited to: 
a.  Vegetation; and 
b.  The method of flow conveyance from any land-disturbing activity. 
(13)  Construction and design details for structural controls. 
(14)  An assessment of activities, materials, and physical features of the proposed development that have a reasonable potential to contribute significant amounts of pollutants to stormwater. Any such activities, materials, or features must be addressed by the measures and controls subsequently described in other portions of the stormwater management plan. 
(15)  Include in the hydrologic-hydraulic study an analysis of all stormwater management facilities and all major portions of the conveyance system through the proposed development for design conditions and operating conditions reasonably expected during the life of that facility. 
(16)  If the plan and/or design report indicates there may be a drainage or flooding problem at the exit to the proposed development, the liberty consolidated planning commission may require the following: 
a.  Water surface profiles of pre- and post-development conditions for design storms; and 
b.  Elevations of all structures potentially damaged by design year flows. 
(17)  Certification by the person responsible for the land-disturbing activity that the activity will be accomplished pursuant to the approved plan, and responsible personnel will be assigned to the project. 
(18)  The name, address and telephone number of the developer/owner. 
(19)  The name, address and telephone number of a 24-hour, local contact responsible for stormwater runoff controls. 
(20)  Maintenance statement: 
"Stormwater runoff control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional stormwater runoff control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection." 
(21)  All maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a professional engineer. 
(l)  All buildings located adjacent to or in the 100-year floodplain shall be constructed in accordance with the Liberty County Flood Damage Prevention Code. 
(m)  Special drainage system maintenance requirements: 
(1)  No impoundment of water which retains in excess of 0.5 acre feet of runoff shall be removed without first obtaining a development permit, which shall only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the developer show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties. 
(2)  Trash, garbage, construction materials, construction by-products or other debris shall not be deposited in any part of the drainage system. 
(3)  No restrictions or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage system without first obtaining a development permit. When on or off-site debris has accumulated within a floodplain in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties adjacent to the floodplain, the city shall require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water. 
(n)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system. 
(o)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the system into floodwaters. 
(p)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(q)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 30, 1-28-1997; Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 8-11-2015) 
Sec. 38-177. - Off-site drainage facilities. 
(a)  The liberty consolidated planning commission may allow stormwater runoff that otherwise is of unacceptable quality or which would be discharged in volumes or at rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by this article, to be discharged into drainage facilities off site of the development, provided the applicant has demonstrated: 
(1)  Off-site drainage facilities and channels leading to them are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with requirements of this article; 
(2)  Adequate provision is made for sharing of construction, maintenance and operating costs of facilities. The developer may be required to pay a portion of the cost of constructing facilities as a condition to receiving approval of the drainage plan; and 
(3)  It is not feasible to completely manage runoff on site in a manner that meets the design and performance standards found in this article. 
(b)  A request to use off-site drainage facilities and all information related to proposed off-site facilities should be made a part of the developer's drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 31, 1-28-1997) 
Sec. 38-178. - Prohibition and illicit connections. 
(a)  Prohibition. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person to throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge to any component of the city storm sewer system or to cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into such system any matter of any nature excepting only such storm or surface water as herein authorized. 
(2)  The liberty consolidated planning commission may exempt the following from the prohibition provision in subsection (a)(1) of this section: 
a.  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, diverted stream flows, rising groundwaters, and unpolluted groundwater infiltration. 
b.  Unpolluted pumped groundwater. 
c.  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from wetlands, and street wash water. 
d.  Discharges or flows from firefighting. 
e.  Other unpolluted water. 
(3)  In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the city storm sewer system of any material or substance other than stormwater runoff, the person concerned shall inform the liberty consolidated planning commission within 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps to contain, treat or otherwise to minimize effects of the discharge on the city system and receiving streams. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. 
(b)  Illicit connections. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person, company, corporation, etc. to connect any pipe, open channel, any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water which is approved by the liberty consolidated planning commission, based on the exemptions listed in section 38-177(a)(2), to the city storm sewer system. 
(2)  Improper connections in violation of this code must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to a sanitary sewer system upon approval by the liberty consolidated planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 97-1, § 32, 1-28-1997) 
Secs. 38-179—38-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LANDSCAPE AND TREE PROTECTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of May 9, 2017, amended the Code by adding new §§ 38-62—38-80. In order to facilitate the organization of the chapter, the provisions have been renumbered as art. V, §§ 38-191—38-207 at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 38-191. - Title. 
This article shall be known and cited as the "Landscape and Tree Protection Ordinance for the City of Flemington." 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-192. - Jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all lands within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-193. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect and maintain the urban forest by managing the impact of development. 
(2)  Preserve the environment and aesthetic assets of the community by requiring tree planting and landscaping for development. 
(3)  Provide protection from removal for all trees without a permit within the areas covered by this ordinance unless exempted. 
(4)  Maintain where possible a minimum 50 percent canopy tree cover across the city. 
(5)  Preserve mature live oak trees to the maximum extent possible. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-194. - Exemptions. 
The following developments are exempted from compliance with the permitting requirements of this article: 
(1)  Utility easements for power lines, pipelines, or similar facilities, except where such utilities cross tree easements, set-asides, or natural buffers. 
(2)  Those portions of airports and heliports which require clear areas for safety purposes, including runways and taxiways, approach and departure clear zones. 
(3)  Land currently zoned and used for agricultural or other rural residential zoned purposes for the duration of such use provided that such lands are not located within the jurisdiction of the city. If property is located within the city limits, a 30-foot dense vegetative buffer shall remain around the perimeter of the site to retain the character of the surrounding areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-195. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain words or terms shall be defined as follows. Words not defined in this section shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give these regulations their most reasonable application. Words used in the singular shall include the plural and the plural the singular; words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," and "occupied for." 
Administrator is the director of the liberty consolidated planning commission or designee. 
Buffer is any visual and physical separation between two parcels of land. 
Caliper is the diameter or thickness of the main stem of a young tree or sapling as measured at six inches above ground level. This measurement is used for nursery-grown trees having a diameter of four inches or less. 
Canopy trees are large preferred trees which provide canopy over streets and sidewalks and other paved areas. Upon reaching maturity, a canopy tree will achieve a canopy spread of in excess of 40 feet in diameter. Using a radius of 20 feet for calculation purposes, the canopy cover area for one mature tree will be equal to 3.1416 × 20 2 or 1,257 square feet. Total canopy coverage for one acre of land would be equal to 43,560 divided by 1,257 which equals 35 large canopy trees. 
Critical root zone is the minimum area surrounding a tree that is considered essential to support the viability of the tree and is for purposes of this article equal to the diameter at breast height in inches (DBH) converted into the radius of the circular area in feet around a preserved tree. 
Development is the act, process, or state of erecting buildings or structures, or making improvements to a parcel or tract of land. 
Developable acre(s) is/are the land area(s) that can potentially be developed, i.e. this area does not include environmentally sensitive areas including but not limited to wetlands, stream buffers, marshlands, etc. 
Diameter breast height (DBH) is the diameter or width of the main stem of a tree as measured 4.5 feet above the natural grade at its base. Whenever a branch, limb, defect, or abnormal swelling of the trunk occurs at this height, the DBH shall be measured at the nearest point above or below 4.5 feet at which a normal diameter occurs. 
Exceptional tree is any tree designated, as provided for in this chapter, to be of notable historic interest, aesthetic value, or of unique character because of species, type, age or size. 
Fifty percent canopy cover is a canopy expected to be achieved over a 30-year period by the planting of large, preferred trees or the retention of existing canopied trees which result in a minimum of 50 percent cover across the city. Fifty percent canopy cover will be approximately 18 large preferred trees per acre quantified as 1,600 tree quality points per acre. 
Greenspace is any area retained as permeable unpaved ground and dedicated on the site plan to supporting vegetation. 
Greenspace plan is a map and/or supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where vegetation (greenspace) is to be retained or planted in compliance with these regulations. The greenspace plan shall include a tree survey, tree establishment plan, and/or a tree protection plan, and a landscape plan. 
Landscape plan is a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where vegetation is to be retained or provided in compliance with the requirements of this article. The landscape plan shall include any required buffer elements. 
Landscape quality point is a unit of measurement which quantifies the relative value of small trees, shrubs, and ground cover which are planted or retained on a given site. 
Native tree is any tree species which occurs naturally and is indigenous within the region. 
Plot plan is a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where the building(s), driveway, utility corridors, and easements are to be located and where greenspace is to be retained or planted in compliance with these regulations. 
Preliminary plan is a plan which shows the proposed design for a commercial project or subdivision as specified in the subdivision regulations. 
Quality points factor is a decimal fraction that is assigned to each tree species in the tree lists and is used as a multiplier in calculating the tree quality points for any tree retained on a site. 
Set-asides are lands dedicated to open space by the developer or owner. Examples of set-asides include parklands, recreation areas, medians of boulevards, etc. 
Sketch plan is a conceptual layout for a subdivision as specified in the subdivision regulations. 
Species diversity is a planting or retention of diverse tree species on a site or within the community to prevent dominance by any single type of tree. The purpose of this diversity is to prevent the destruction of the entire urban forest in the event of disease or pestilence. For any site of one acre or larger, no more than 45 percent of trees and shrubs planted shall be of the same species. 
Tree easement is an easement not less than ten feet in width and not in conflict with any other planning requirements under the zoning and subdivision regulations for public planting and/or maintenance of canopy street trees exclusive of utility, drainage, or other easements. Administrative approval is required for easements greater than ten feet in width. 
Tree establishment plan is a map and supporting documentation which describes for a particular site where existing trees are to be planted in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the types of trees and their corresponding tree quality points. 
Tree fund is the tree protection escrow fund established to receive funds paid in lieu of required tree quality points or for compensation for damage or removal of trees owned by the governing authority. 
Tree protection plan is a map and surrounding documentation which describes for a particular site where existing trees are to be retained in compliance with the requirements of these regulations, the types of trees, and their corresponding tree quality points. 
Tree protection zone is the area surrounding a preserved or planted tree that is essential to that tree's health and survival, and is protected within the guidelines of these regulations. The minimum tree protection zone required for retained trees is the tree diameter's inches (DBH) converted into feet of radius around the tree. For planted trees, see table. 
Tree quality point (TQP) is a unit of measurement which quantifies the relative value of trees that are planted or retained on a given site. Tree quality points quantitatively express the desirable qualities of the species with regards to size for each tree that is retained on a site. For planted trees, tree quality points are an expression of species desirability and the expected mature size of each tree. 
Tree Survey is a map or site plan prepared and sealed by a registered land surveyor within two years of the date of application. The survey shall be at the same scale as the required site development plan and shall include the following information: 
The location of all trees 16 inches or greater within the limits of disturbance and 25 feet beyond in each direction or to the property line whichever is less. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-196. - General provisions. 
(a)  Article administration. The director of the liberty consolidated planning commission shall administer the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit required for clearing. Except as provided in this chapter, a property owner shall not clear or permit the clearing of property or the removal of any tree without first obtaining a clearing permit as provided for in section 38-201. 
(c)  Protected trees. The following trees are protected within the jurisdiction of the governing authority and shall not be removed unless a permit has been approved or the requirement waived: 
(1)  On undeveloped property, any tree greater than two inches DBH. 
(2)  On developed property, any tree equal to or greater than two inches DBH except for single family residential lots within a common development (subdivision) and exemptions defined in section 38-65 above. 
a.  Any tree retained for the purpose of tree quality points or greenspace requirements. 
b.  Any tree planted for the purpose of tree quality points. 
c.  Any tree in a wetland, except as defined in the exemptions in section 38-65 above. 
d.  Any tree designated as an "exceptional tree." 
(d)  Tree/landscape quality points required. 
(1)  A total of not less than 1,600 tree quality points per developable acre is required for any parcel of land being developed (with the exception of single family residential lots) and may include existing trees retained and new trees planted. 
(2)  A total of 400 landscape quality points per developable acre is required for commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily developments. 
(3)  A total of 1,200 tree quality points per acre is required for any parking area included in a commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily development. 
(4)  Any previously developed site that is proposed for redevelopment, building addition or other improvements requiring submittal of a site plan shall comply with the tree quality and landscape quality points requirements for that portion of the site affected by the redevelopment, addition, or improvement. 
(e)  Landscape and tree ordinance manual. The landscape and tree ordinance manual and implementation guide are hereby adopted by reference. All land clearing, tree protection, tree establishment, and landscaping shall be done in a manner consistent with the provisions contained in said manual. 
(f)  Establishment of a tree fund. There is hereby created a tree protection escrow fund for the purpose of receiving money paid to the governing authority in lieu of required tree quality points, or for compensation for damage or removal of trees owned by the governing authority. The fund will be used by the governing authority to plant trees or landscaping on public rights-of-way, easements, or other public property. 
(g)  Designation of an exceptional tree. All live oak trees (Quercus virginiana) 24 inches or larger in diameter breast height (DBH) are designated as exceptional trees in the city for purposes of this ordinance. Otherwise, a tree may be designated as an "exceptional tree" and will thereafter be considered a public landmark and shall not be destroyed or endangered. 
(1)  Procedure. A tree may be nominated by written request to the administrator or may be nominated by the administrator. The nomination will be reviewed by the planning commission and a recommendation made to the governing authority. 
(2)  Criteria. The designation of an exceptional tree shall be based upon evaluation of the tree in relation to one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  The tree is demonstrated to have an association with a documented historical event, or is located on a historic site. 
b.  The tree has unusually high aesthetic value. 
c.  The tree is of unique character because of its age, species, variety, location, or because of the size and development of its crown, trunk, or main stem. 
d.  The designation of an exceptional tree shall also meet all of the following criteria: 
1.  The tree is free of disease, pests, and other serious injury; 
2.  The tree has a life expectancy of more than ten years; 
3.  The tree is free from structural defects which would present a hazard to the public. 
(h)  After designation. Any tree designated as an "exceptional tree" shall be protected from removal or encroachment on the critical root zone, and may be credited toward tree quality points required by this article based on quality point's factor of 2.5. Removal of an exceptional tree may be authorized by the governing authority in special instances only upon determination that there are no viable alternatives to removal and that preservation of the tree will be detrimental to the city's economic development. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-197. - Tree protection requirements and tree establishment. 
(a)  Protection of preserved or planted trees. Tree protection zones shall be established and maintained on the site for all trees, preserved or planted for which tree quality points are to be claimed. The following provisions apply to such zones and the trees within them: 
(1)  A tree protection plan and details shall accompany all applications for the land-clearing and/or land-disturbing activities identifying where and how existing trees are to be protected during clearing and construction of the project. Such plan and details shall be approved by the administrator upon a finding that the plan adequately addresses the criteria set forth in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(2)  The minimum dimension of the tree protection zone shall be the area of the critical root zone (see definition). The tree protection zone shall be surrounded at a minimum by four-foot temporary chain link fencing as illustrated in the specifications and standards in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(3)  If a determination is made by the administrator that 75 percent of the tree quality points for a site are to be provided by one or more mature trees of greater than 30-inch DBH, a contingency planting plan shall be required. The contingency plan will include locations where trees can be planted for TQP credits in the event of the loss of retained trees. 
(4)  The area within any tree protection zone must remain open and unpaved. The use of perforated pavers or other surface allowing water infiltration may be allowed subject to the approval of the administrator. 
(5)  No root raking shall be allowed within any tree protection zone at any time during clearing, grading, or construction of the project. 
(6)  No trenching shall be allowed within any tree protection zone at any time during clearing, grading or construction of the project. 
(7)  No vehicle shall be parked, or construction material stored or substances poured or disposed of or placed within any tree protection zone at any time during clearing, grading or construction of the project. 
(8)  No change in grade within the tree protection zone shall be allowed around existing trees except for a maximum addition of two inches of mulch unless approved by the administrator. 
To the extent possible, all site work shall be planned and conducted in a manner that will minimize damage to protected trees from environmental changes such as lowered water table, altered site drainage, or any other land disturbance within or immediately adjacent to the critical root zone of the trees. Tree wells or tree walls (islands) shall be constructed as needed to protect preserved trees from grade changes which result in changes of water supply to the tree protection zone. Adequate means for drainage of excess moisture from the tree protection zone shall be provided if tree wells or tree walls are constructed. 
(b)  Minimum tree protection zone. For planted trees, the following tree protection standards and requirements shall apply: 

 
(c)  Planting restrictions. 
(1)  No tree shall be planted closer to a building foundation, underground utility line, or storm drain than as follows: 
a.  Five feet for a small trees. 
b.  Ten feet for a mature medium tree. 
c.  Ten feet for a large tree; however, the distance from building foundations shall be 15 feet. 
(2)  No large or medium tree species shall be planted within any power or utility easements or under overhead utility distribution lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. 
(d)  Irrigation requirements. Except as provided for herein, irrigation shall be provided for tree protection zones in the following manner: 
(1)  All trees and landscaped areas shall be provided with a means for delivery of water in a quantity that is sufficient to establish and maintain the viability of the plants. A permanent water source shall be installed not less than 100 feet from each tree protection zone, but shall not encroach more than 12 inches into any tree protection zone. The minimum permanent water source permissible under these provisions shall be a hose bib capable of delivering a minimum of three gallons/minute. 
(2)  In-ground irrigation systems installed which supply water to all newly planted trees and plant material shall result in a 20 percent reduction of the landscape establishment bond. 
(3)  A water supply is not required for areas of established trees and other vegetation that are retained for greenspace requirements or tree quality points, provided that site grading or development activities will not result in damage to said areas. 
(e)  Protection of public trees adjacent to land-development activities. 
(1)  A property owner responsible for any land-disturbing activity within proximity to the critical root zone of a tree located on city/county property shall provide for the protection of such tree to the standards described in these regulations. All work on rights-of-way requires a permit. 
(2)  A property owner responsible for a land-disturbing activity that causes damage to a tree which affects the health or growth of such tree, or requires removal of a tree, shall compensate the governing authority for such tree loss or damage as set forth below: 
(3)  The administrator shall establish the tree quality points for the removed or damaged tree. The property owner responsible for the land-disturbing activity which caused the removal or damage to such tree shall compensate the governing authority for such tree loss or damage under the following options, subject to the approval of the administrator. 
a.  Plant or preserve additional trees on the development site that equal or exceed the value of tree quality points that were assessed for the removed or damaged tree. 
b.  Plant trees on adjacent rights-of-way to equal or exceed the value of tree quality points that were assessed for the removed or damaged tree. 
c.  Make payment to the tree fund that equals or exceeds the value of the tree quality points that were assessed for the removed or damaged tree. 
d.  Meet any equivalent combination of the above as approved. 
e.  Upon approval by the administrator of the method for compensating the governing authority for the subject tree loss, the owner shall submit a revised tree protection and tree establishment plan which incorporated the approved tree compensation plan to the administrator for approval. 
(f)  General protection of trees on city rights-of-way. 
(1)  Unless otherwise permitted by an applicable permit or license, no person shall trim, prune, or remove any tree on public property without procuring the written approval of the administrator. 
(2)  No person shall plant any tree or shrub on the right-of-way without written approval or without meeting the requirements for such planting published by the administrator. 
(3)  No person shall cause damage to trees on rights-of-way or other public property. Damage is defined as cutting, carving, attaching any rope, wires, nails, signs or other object to any such tree or allowing any harmful gas, liquid, or solid substance to contact any tree or to set fire or permit any fire to burn which may injure any portion of any tree or causing unnecessary harm to tree roots through construction activities, vehicle parking, or material storage. 
(4)  Any removal or damage to trees on rights-of-way is subject to compensation as provided in subsection (2)(b). 
(g)  Standards, specifications, and calculation of tree quality points. 
(1)  All large trees, except for conifers, must be at least two and one-half-inch caliper to qualify for tree quality points when planted on the site. 
(2)  All coniferous trees and all medium trees must be a minimum of two-inch caliper to qualify for tree/landscape quality points when planted on the site. 
(3)  All small trees must be a minimum of one-inch caliper to quality for tree quality points when planted on the site. 
(4)  For palms, two tree quality points will be assigned per foot of stem height up to ten feet, regardless of whether the tree is preserved or planted on the site. 
(5)  All planting of new trees shall be done in accordance with ANSI A-300-1995 or most recent edition. 
(6)  All trees and plant materials shall conform to the most recent edition of the American Standard for Nursery Stock by the American Association of Nurserymen. 
(7)  A detailed list of qualifying species and their points is provided in landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(h)  Retained trees. 
(1)  All individual preserved trees must be at least four inches DBH, and have a form and structure that will support a viable mature tree to qualify for tree quality points. The TQP credit will at a minimum be equal to the points for a planted tree of the same species. 
(2)  Quality points from trees retained on the site are directly related to the tree species quality and tree protection zone that must be provided for the tree. Tree quality points are calculated by the formula: (DBH) 2 × (retention points factor) = tree quality points. 
(3)  The retention factor for each tree species can be found in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(4)  Trees located on public rights-of-way which have a significant portion of canopy extending over a commercial property can be applied toward TQP as follows: TQP value of public trees × percentage of canopy encroachment = point value. 
(5)  Tree quality points and landscape quality points for retained stands of trees: the preservation of mature native stands of trees and understory vegetation may have the value of 1,600 tree quality points/acre and 400 landscape quality points/acre of preserved area. 
a.  The area proposed for preservation must be approved by the administrator and must have sufficient quantity, size, and quality of mature trees to warrant preservation. 
b.  All existing vegetation shall be left within the preserved stand with the exception of hazardous trees. Thinning of tree stands will be allowed pursuant to an approved plan created under the supervision of a registered forester or certified arborist. No mechanical clearing of underbrush shall be allowed unless authorized by the administrator. 
c.  The area shall be protected during the construction period using the same standards and specifications as required for a tree protection zone. 
d.  The tree retention area shall be considered a set-aside and shall be shown within a permanent recorded tree conservation easement. 
(i)  Landscape material. 
(1)  Woody ornamental or native shrubs shall be a minimum of three-gallon container size, fully rooted, and appropriately sized to the container. Vines and ground cover material may be full one-gallon size. 
(2)  Small trees used for LQP shall be a minimum of one-inch caliper. Qualified species and LQP values are listed in the landscape and tree ordinance manual. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-198. - Timber harvesting requirements for property zoned for single-family residential use. 
(a)  Applicability. All properties for single-family residential use, other than those zoned and used for agricultural activities, which propose timber harvesting or clear cutting shall comply with the following provisions unless excepted by O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
(b)  Provisions. 
(1)  Permits required for timber harvest. A land clearing permit is required prior to the timber harvest. 
(2)  Plans required for timber harvest. A plan for development of the land and a harvest plan shall be reviewed and approved by the liberty consolidated planning commission (LCPC) prior to the issuance of a timber harvesting/land clearing permit. 
(c)  Reforestation and tree protection standards. A minimum of 1,600 tree quality points per developable acre shall remain on the parcel after the timber harvest utilizing one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Residual stands of trees. Tree quality points may be given to residual stands of trees which are existing on the site and are protected during the harvesting process. 
(2)  Buffer areas. Tree quality points may be given to trees located within buffer areas. 
(3)  Reforestation areas. Where the site is to be used for continual timber growth or silviculture, such land shall be considered a reforestation area. In order to comply with the provisions of this section, a tree establishment plan shall be submitted. This shall consist of the establishment of native tree seedlings using traditional forestry methods and best management practices. A minimum of 600 seedlings per acre shall be planted on the site by the end of the first planting season following the timber harvest. A minimum survival rate of 350 trees per acre will be maintained after the first complete growing season. 
(4)  Tree establishment plan. If an insufficient number of tree quality points are left on the site following the timber harvest, a tree establishment plan shall be submitted to the administrator showing the location of the trees to be planted, their species, size, and tree quality point listing. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-199. - Underbrushing procedures. 
The administrator may approve underbrushing and removal of trees or other vegetation up to two inches in diameter upon finding that: sufficient tree cover exists such that the removal of such trees will not limit or prevent compliance with other requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-200. - Design requirements for commercial, industrial, institutional, and multi-family development. 
(a)  A greenspace plan shall be submitted for all commercial, industrial, or multifamily development. Such plans shall conform to the standards and requirements of these regulations. 
(1)  A minimum of 20 percent of the total land area of the development shall be devoted to greenspace. 
(2)  Sidewalks, curbing, or any other paved or impermeable surfaces within the greenspace shall not count towards the 20 percent minimum greenspace requirement. 
(3)  For all sites of one acre or larger, no more than 45 percent of trees planted shall be of the same species in order to increase species diversity. 
(4)  Existing groups of trees shall be retained wherever possible. 
(b)  Locations for planting/preserving trees and landscaping. Street trees may be preserved within the front yard development setback; provided, they can be placed within a tree easement established pursuant to the subdivision regulations, and such tree does not conflict with any existing utility, drainage or other easements. Understory and canopy trees may also be preserved and/or planted in the front yard development setback area. 
(c)  Parking areas. 
(1)  A minimum of 1,200 tree quality points per acre of the parking area in canopy trees shall be planted and/or preserved within landscaped islands and medians located between parking bays. Landscape quality points may also be planted in these areas. 
(2)  Canopy trees planted in parking islands shall have 400 square feet of unpaved soil for root development. The standard tree island shall be 20 feet by 20 feet; provided, however, that where the islands are an extension of a ten-foot wide landscape median, the islands may be reduced in width to 16 feet. Islands shall not be separated by more than 12 parking spaces, including the landscaped ends of the drive aisles. Islands shall be designated so as to minimize foot traffic across them. 
(3)  The parking island requirement may be altered to minimize conflicts with lighting or to accommodate innovative design provided that total area of unpaved area and number of trees is maintained. 
(d)  Buffers. Existing and/or planted canopy, understory trees, and planted evergreen shrubs may be incorporated into buffer areas. Such planting shall be credited for quality points provided that other standards and requirements of the chapter are met. 
(e)  Landscaping standards. 
(1)  Landscape quality points requirement. The required 400 landscape quality points per acre shall be provided through the planting of small/medium trees, shrubs, vines, and/or groundcover. 
(2)  Locations for landscape quality points. Such plantings may be located in the following areas: 
a.  Front yard development setback. 
b.  Parking areas, islands, and medians. 
c.  Buffers. 
d.  Areas adjacent to buildings. 
(f)  Special cases. 
(1)  Insufficient space for trees on site. If the required tree quality points cannot be met on site due to lot size and allowable building setback, trees shall be planted off site or payment made to the tree fund. Off-site planting location or payment must be approved by the administrator. 
(2)  Insufficient space for landscaping on site. If the required landscape quality points cannot be met on site due to lot size and allowable building setback, payment shall be made to the tree fund. 
(3)  Car/boat/trailer sales lots. The requirement of canopy cover in the outdoor display, sales and storage areas may be waived for such uses only if the requirements have been met elsewhere on the site. The required 400 landscape quality points per acre, however, shall be provided in this area to break up large expanses of pavement. 
a.  Employee and customer parking areas shall be clearly delineated to separate them from outdoor display, sales and storage areas. Such parking areas shall provide 1,200 tree quality points per acre in canopy trees and 400 landscape quality points per acre in landscaping. 
b.  Porous paving may be used within outdoor display, sales and parking areas to provide root growth area for new and existing trees. 
(4)  Cellular phone towers. Due to the size and location of many cellular tower sites, it is often impractical to plant the required landscaping on the site; therefore, the administrator may approve any of the following three alternatives: 
a.  Planting large canopy trees within the front yard setback along the roadways if there are no conflicting utility locations. The required tree and landscape quality points may be combined together to provide tree quality points for the site; 
b.  When utilities or site constraints do not allow planting within the front yard setback, plantings may be approved off-site at other locations within the immediate neighborhood. Trees may be planted either in the street right-of-way where there are no utilities or in street tree easements on private property; or 
c.  When there are no viable locations either on site or within the immediate vicinity, a contribution may be made to the tree fund. 
(5)  Storm water detention areas. Where planting within a storm water detention area will help it function more efficiently and help make the detention area more visually attractive, such plantings are permitted subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The centerline of the swale of a storm drainage easement shall remain free of debris and plantings with the exception of grasses or ground cover material which stabilizes the bare soil. This area shall be maintained so that the flow of water is not impeded. Plantings of shrubbery and trees shall be maintained at a distance of a minimum of ten feet or as approved by the administrator from the centerline of the swale so as to keep the area clear for water flow; 
b.  The area immediately surrounding drainage structures including but not limited to grates, inlets, and weirs shall be kept free from plantings and mulch to keep debris from clogging the structures and impeding the flow of water. All trees and shrubs shall be maintained at a distance of a minimum of ten feet from such structures; 
c.  All trees in the immediately surrounding area of a storm water detention area shall be kept a minimum distance of ten feet from the centerline of the basin, or one-third the width of the basin floor, whichever is greater; 
d.  Shrubbery shall be excluded from the basin floor and banks. Shrubs may be planted at the top of the basin where there is no likelihood of the root balls lifting out of the ground when the basin is filled with water; 
e.  Species of vegetation to be planted in or near detention basins and drainage ways are to be reviewed and approved by the administrator. 
(g)  Design requirements for single-family residential subdivisions. 
(1)  Planted street trees and 1,600 TQPs in retained and/or planted trees in common areas; trees required. Canopy street trees shall be planted within the right-of-way or in tree easements if sufficient right-of-way space is not available. Such trees shall be no less than two and one-half inches in caliper at time of installation. Trees shall be planted an average of 50 feet apart, along all street frontages within the subdivision. Each planted street tree shall have a value of 90 tree quality points. For new arterial and collector streets that are within the overall development but do not have residential lots abut onto them, a plan must be submitted providing for the planting of canopy trees on both sides of the street spaced at an average of 75 feet. 
a.  The tree species for each street must be approved by the administrator. 
b.  1,600 tree quality points per developable acreage shall also be planted or retained in all areas outside of the street right-of-way that are not developed as lots (e.g. storm water detention/retention areas, recreational areas, parks, other set-asides, etc.). 
c.  Upon approval, the developer may pay to the tree fund an amount equal to the cost of purchase and installation of the required trees and the trees will be planted by the governing authority after completion of the subdivision or enter into a contract to plant the trees secured by an appropriate bond. 
(2)  Requirements for utilities crossing in the tree easement. Utilities crossing the tree easement shall be located outside of the critical root zone of trees unless otherwise approved by the administrator. Utility locations shall allow for the unobstructed planting of street trees at an average of 50 feet apart (ranging between 40 to 60 feet apart). 
(3)  Planting of trees. Upon approval, the developer may pay to the tree fund an amount equal to the cost of purchase and installation of required trees and the trees will be planted by the governing authority after completion of the subdivision or enter into a contract to plant the trees secured by an appropriate bond. 
(4)  Existing trees. Existing trees for which tree quality points are sought shall be protected (and may be counted towards tree quality points), within set-aside areas, in common areas, in buffers, or elsewhere as approved by the administrator provided that they be protected prior to clearing. 
(5)  Trees within set aside areas. Existing and/or planted trees within set-aside areas as defined by this article may count towards the 1,600 tree quality points/developable acreage requirement if they meet all other requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-201. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  Application/or land-clearing activities permits; submission requirements. 
(1)  Application. Applications for permits for land-clearing activities shall be submitted by the landowner or an authorized agent on a form provided for this purpose which includes all required information. Such application shall be submitted to the LCPC along with all required attachments. Each land-clearing activity permit application shall include general notes, data items, plans, and other documents as long as clarity is maintained. Complete applications shall be transmitted to the administrator for review and approval. 
(2)  Project description and plans. Such description shall include: 
a.  Purpose of the requested permit; 
b.  Plan showing existing and proposed land uses, buildings, parking, and other pertinent elements of development; 
c.  A boundary survey which shall include the location of all easements, building setback lines, nearby zoning district boundaries; 
d.  Anticipated starting and completion dates for each phase of the project; 
e.  A location map at a scale of one inch equals 1,500 feet or larger, showing the location of the property within the governing authority. 
(3)  Phasing of a project. If a tract is to be developed in phases, a separate permit shall be required for each phase as appropriate. Requirements for TQP and LQP must be met for each phase. 
(4)  Time limit on approval. A permit shall be valid for 12 months. In the event that the permittee has not begun the permitted work within 12 months, the permit shall lapse and a new permit must be obtained before work can begin. Once work has begun under a valid permit, the permittee may continue the permitted work until the work is completed. Any permit, including grandfathered projects, will automatically lapse after 12 months of inactivity, unless the developer has obtained an extension from the administrator. 
(5)  Denial of a permit. If a permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant in writing. 
(6)  Waivers. The administrator may waive the requirement for one or more of the plans listed in subsection (a) upon finding that three or fewer trees are being proposed for removal, no grading is to occur, and such removal will not be contrary to the purpose of these regulations. 
(b)  Procedures for land-clearing permit for commercial, industrial, institutional, or multifamily development. 
(1)  A predevelopment site visit shall be scheduled between the owner/agent and the administrator. This meeting may be waived by the administrator at the request of the owner. 
(2)  The owner or developer shall submit a tree survey, the tree protection, tree establishment, and the landscape plans together with other required drawings for review by the administrator. 
(3)  All landscape and tree planting plans for sites over one acre shall be prepared by professionals with competency in landscape design. 
(4)  The preparer of the landscape, tree establishment and tree protection plans, and the land clearing permit applicant shall show evidence of having attended a workshop to review the provisions of these regulations if one is available. 
(5)  The owner/developer shall coordinate the location of utilities with the utility companies and the administrator prior to the issuance of a land clearing permit. If there is a potential tree and utility conflict, a new tree establishment plan and/or tree protection plan shall be submitted to the administrator, showing the new proposed utility locations or tree locations. 
(6)  A preconstruction meeting shall be scheduled among the owner, agent, contractors, appropriate LCPC staff, and the administrator prior to issuance of land clearing permits. This meeting shall establish the location of temporary buildings or trailers, temporary utilities, installation of tree protection and erosion control devices, storage of materials, etc. Forty-eight hours' notice shall be given to schedule the site visit. 
(7)  Tree protection shall be installed by the owner/agent and inspected by the administrator prior to issuance of a land clearing permit. 
(c)  Procedures for land-clearing permit for street rights-of-way, utility and drainage easements, and lots in new single family residential subdivision developments. 
(1)  A land-clearing permit is required as a prerequisite for clearing rights-of-way, lots, common areas, and drainage and utility easements in a new residential development. In order to obtain a land clearing permit for lots, rights-of-way, and easements, a greenspace plan, incl. a tree survey for all common areas (e.g. park areas, detention areas, etc.) shall accompany each preliminary plan for review. Such plan shall conform to the standards and requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  A predevelopment site visit shall be scheduled between the owner/agent, and the administrator. This meeting may be waived by the administrator. 
(3)  The developer shall submit a tree survey for all common and set-aside areas, including storm water detention/retention ponds and a tree protection plan. In addition, the developer must show how the required amount of 1,600 tree quality points/developable acreage is to be met for the common areas of the subdivision or phase of subdivision (i.e. areas not subdivided into lots and not part of the street rights-of-way) for which the land clearing permit is sought. This may be shown on a separate greenspace plan or on one of the other construction drawings and shall be submitted to the administrator for review. The greenspace plan shall show the total amount of street trees, and how the amount of tree quality points for set-asides, park areas, storm water detention/retention area, and other common areas are to be met. 
(4)  Tree protection for set-asides and for trees proposed to be preserved in common areas and for any other tree proposed to be preserved, where clearing is to occur shall be installed by the developer and inspected by the administrator prior to issuance of a land clearing permit. 
(d)  Procedures for obtaining land-clearing permits for lots —Reserved. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-202. - Visual buffers, screening, and fences. 
(a)  Generally. Buffers shall be provided as set forth herein to effectively protect all property from the adverse effects of adjacent land use activity of a more intensive (dissimilar) nature where such activity may result in nuisance, including visual blight, threat to safety, or noise or odor encroachment to an adjacent parcel or one located across a public right-of-way. 
(b)  Buffer plan required. A buffer plan shall be submitted with all applications for building permits, occupancy permits, or site plan approvals for development of a site for which a buffer element is required hereunder. The buffer plan shall show in detail the layout of the proposed development, including the arrangement of buildings, parking areas, and permanent open spaces. The plan shall also show the location of proposed buffers, including a detailed description or sketch of such buffer materials to be used, including a provision for a water source within 50 feet of the buffer and landscaping areas. 
(c)  Required buffers. Buffers shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  One-family buffer requirements. Buffers shall be provided as described below to protect one family detached residential property (including one-family developed and undeveloped property zoned for residential use). The buffer types indicated for each circumstance are described in section "Buffer Types". 
a.  A type "A" buffer shall be required where one-family detached residential property is adjoined by multifamily residential or by semidetached or end row dwellings or manufactured homes. 
b.  A type "B" buffer shall be required where one-family detached residential property is adjoined by institutional or nonretail commercial activity, including religious facilities, hospitals, care homes, public and private schools, day cares and kindergartens, banks, professional offices, and other uses of a like nature as determined by the administrator. 
c.  A type "C" buffer shall be required where one-family detached residential property is adjoined by lodging facilities or convenience or general retail commercial activity not accompanied by outside storage of goods or products or the service/ repair of vehicles. Examples of uses within this category include motels, clothing stores, specialty shops, restaurants, food and drug stores, laundromats, furniture stores, department stores, auto parts stores, auto filling, and other uses of like nature as determined by the administrator. 
d.  A type "D" buffer shall be required where one-family detached residential property is adjoined by uses such as auto repair and paint shops, motorcycle sales and service, auto upholstery shops, sale or rental of autos, trucks, boats or trailers, mini-warehouses, drive-in restaurants, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, package stores and uses of a like nature. 
(2)  Multifamily buffer requirements. Buffers shall be provided as described below to protect multifamily residential property (including multifamily developed and undeveloped property zoned for multifamily residential use). The buffer types indicated for each circumstance are described in section, "buffer types." 
a.  A type "B" buffer shall be required where multifamily residential property is adjoined by institutional or nonretail commercial activity, including religious facilities, hospital and care homes, and public and private schools, day cares, and kindergartens, banks and professional offices, and activities of a like nature as determined by the administrator. 
b.  A type "C" buffer shall be required where multifamily residential property is adjoined by lodging facilities or convenience/ general retail commercial activity not accompanied by outdoor storage of goods, products, or the service or repair of vehicles. Examples of uses within this category include motels, clothing stores, specialty shops, restaurants, food and drug stores, laundromats, furniture stores, department stores, auto parts stores, auto filling stations, and other uses of a like nature. 
c.  A type "D" buffer shall be required where multifamily residential property is adjoined by uses such as auto repair and paint shops, motorcycle sales and service, auto upholstery shops, sale or rental of autos, trucks, boats, or trailers, mini-warehouses, drive-in restaurants, cocktail lounges, nightclubs, package stores, and other uses of a like nature. 
(3)  Nonresidential service and storage area buffer requirements. A type "E" buffer shall be provided where outdoor storage and salvage yards, outdoor vehicle repair and service areas, wrecker storage compounds, and uses of a similar nature, both principal and accessory, adjoin other properties with a dissimilar land use classification or where such uses abut a public right-of-way. Trees planted with a type "E" buffer shall be staggered to achieve a degree of opacity that prevents clear recognition of the use. All trees and shrubs within the buffer shall be of evergreen variety. Supplemental planting of evergreen vegetation may be required within preserved buffers so that the use is not clearly distinguishable through the buffer. 
(4)  Manufacturing and industrial buffer requirements. A type "F" buffer shall be required where any type of manufacturing or industrial use adjoins other properties with a dissimilar land use classification or where such use abuts a public road right-of-way. Trees planted within a type "F" buffer shall be staggered to achieve a degree of opacity that prevents clear recognition of the use. All trees and shrubs within the buffer shall be of the evergreen variety. Supplemental planting of evergreen vegetation may be required within preserved buffers so that the use is not clearly distinguishable through the buffer. 
(5)  Off-street parking lot buffer requirements. A type "G" buffer shall be required where a parking lot containing four or more parking spaces adjoins other properties or where a parking lot abuts a public or private road right-of-way. 
(d)  Buffer types. 
(1)  Minimum design standards. The following table contains the minimum standards for the various buffer types. Under each major type are options available to a developer. Some options include more than one element (e.g. according to the table below a type "A" buffer may be a six-foot high fence with a five-foot planted buffer or a six-foot high hedge in a ten-foot wide planted buffer or a 20-foot wide preserved buffer. 

 
(2)  Fences and walls in buffers. The design of a fence or wall shall be a similar architectural style and materials as the principal building or buildings on the lot. 
Except where otherwise allowed by these regulations, any fence or wall shall be opaque so as to prevent the passage of light and debris, and shall be constructed of textured or split-faced block, brick, stone, and stucco over concrete block, architectural tile, decay-resistant wood, or similar opaque materials. Decay-resistant wood includes wood that is naturally decay resistant (e.g., cedar, cypress, redwood) or wood that has been chemically and/or mechanically treated (e.g., chromate copper arsenate (CCAJ) to a retention rate such that the manufacturer provides a guarantee against decay for 40 years. 
Unfinished concrete block shall not be permitted. Chain-link or wire fences shall be permitted within nonresidential zoning districts to buffer similar uses provided that plant material is planted immediately behind or in front of the fence. 
The height of a fence or wall shall not exceed eight feet. Fences and walls shall be interrupted at intervals not exceeding 25 feet by architectural features such as pilasters or columns or by various species of plants that are at least as tall as the fence or wall or taller. 
The fence or wall shall be set back not less than five feet from the property line unless otherwise approved by the LCPC. The height of a fence or wall shall be measured from the finished grade at the base of the fence or wall to the top of the fence or wall, but shall not include columns or posts. 
(3)  Hedges. For newly established hedges, plants shall be a minimum of three feet in height. The area between the property line and the hedge shall be grassed and well maintained. 
(4)  Vegetative buffers. In general, the purpose of a vegetative buffer is to achieve a degree of opacity that prevents clear recognition of the use being buffered. There shall be no encroachment of structures or paving within the area designated as a buffer. 
a.  Trees. Trees shall be planted in conformance with requirements of this article. Standards for the size, planting, protection, and care of trees planted within a required buffer shall conform to the requirements of this article regardless of whether tree quality points are requested for the trees. 
b.  Shrubs. Shrubs shall be planted in conformance with the requirements of the landscape and tree protection article. Standards for the size, planting, protection, and care of shrubs planted within a required buffer shall conform to the requirements of this article or the landscape and tree ordinance manual regardless of whether landscape quality points are requested for the shrubs. 
(5)  Preserved stands of vegetation within buffers. Preserved stands of mature trees within buffers shall also conform to the requirements of this article. The acceptability of mature stands of trees as a buffer shall be determined by the administrator in conformance with the provisions of said ordinance regardless of whether tree or landscape quality points are requested for the stands. Provided however; that selective hand clearing of underbrushing may be permitted if approved. 
(6)  Other fences. In general, a wall or fence shall not exceed six feet unless specifically permitted or unless specifically requested by this Code. Under no circumstances shall a fence in the front yard be located parallel to the right-of-way that is higher than four feet. 
(e)  Buffer and landscape/tree requirements. This is also addressed in section 6.14 and 6.14.2.3 as part of the OC-1 (commercial overlay district). In case of conflict or omission, the more stringent and/or more specific requirement shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-203. - Requirements for certificate of occupancy, maintenance, and perpetual compliance and continuing obligation for maintenance. 
(a)  Final inspection. The administrator shall make a final inspection of trees and landscaping for completeness prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The total required tree quality points and landscape quality points shall match the approved plan. Any changes must be shown on an as-built plan. 
(b)  Temporary tree and landscape bond. 
(1)  The owner shall post a temporary tree and landscape bond for tree and/or landscape installation which cannot be planted because of continued construction, weather, plant availability, or other approved delay. The bond shall be posted. At the same time, a deadline for the completion of work shall be scheduled with the administrator. 
(2)  The administrator shall make a final inspection of the trees and landscaping at the scheduled completion of work. If work has been completed, the temporary tree and landscape bond shall be refunded. If the landscaping is not complete at the scheduled deadline, the temporary tree and landscape bond shall be withheld based on the amount of work incomplete. 
(c)  Two-year tree and landscape establishment bond. 
(1)  A two-year tree and landscape establishment bond equal to the value of 50 percent of the tree quality points shall be posted with LCPC after the administrator gives an approval of the trees and landscaping at the final inspection and prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Two years after the date of the bond, the administrator will inspect the site and make a determination of whether the required trees and landscaping are viable, in which case the bond will be released. If deficiencies are found, the owner of the property shall be notified to correct the deficiencies within 90 days. If the deficiencies are not corrected in 90 days, the city shall use the bond to the extent necessary to bring the property into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Continuing obligation for maintenance. All trees and landscaping credited toward tree quality points or landscaping quality points shall be maintained according to industry standards. 
(1)  Any damage or injury occurring to a preserved tree by determination of the administrator sufficient to cause the tree to die within five years or develop into an irreparable hazard tree shall be removed and shall lose tree quality points. Any tree so removed from the site shall be replaced with a tree(s) of equal or greater tree quality points. 
(2)  Damage not considered to be fatal to a preserved tree by the administrator but considered hazardous to the public shall immediately be repaired and shall result in a proportional decrease in tree quality points where applicable. Assessment of damage and repair shall be made by the administrator. 
(3)  The property owner shall be solely responsible for watering and fertilizing trees and landscaping to maintain plants health and vigor. Failure to maintain the required points on the property shall be a violation of this article. 
(e)  Perpetual compliance. All sites are required to remain in compliance with the total TQP and LQP required for development and are subject to inspection by the city for this purpose. If deficiencies are found, the owner of the property shall be notified to correct the deficiencies within 90 days. If the deficiencies are not corrected in 90 days, the city will seek administrative or judicial relief as appropriate. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 39-204. - Variance and appeal procedure. 
(a)  Appeals from decisions of the administrator or requests for variances from the provisions of this article shall be made to the LCPC. They shall formulate a recommendation to the governing authority. 
(b)  A variance shall only be granted only upon a determination that the request is the minimum necessary to afford relief, that the overall intent and purpose of this article will not be adversely impacted and upon showing of good and sufficient cause. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-205. - Notice of violation; remediation and stop work. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever it is determined that a violation of this article has occurred, the administrator shall immediately issue a written or oral notice to the person in violation identifying the nature and location of the violation and specifying the remedial action that is necessary to bring the violation into compliance. The person in violation shall immediately commence remedial action and shall have seven calendar days after the receipt of the notice or such longer time as may be specified in the notice to complete the remedial actions required to bring the activity into compliance with this order. 
(b)  Stop-work order. The administrator shall have the authority to immediately issue a stop-work order in any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When clearing or other development of land is being implemented without an approved permit. 
(2)  When ongoing non-complying work is not immediately and permanently stopped upon receipt of a written or oral notice of violation. 
(3)  When tree protection measures have not been implemented or maintained and danger to protected trees exists or appears imminent. 
(4)  When remedial work required by notice of violation is not completed within the time period specified. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-206. - Penalties for violation. 
Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance shall constitute a violation of this article. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished in accordance with the Code of the governing authority and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the governing authority from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Sec. 38-207. - Abrogation and greater restrictions; severability. 
(a)  This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(b)  If any provision of this ordinance is declared to be invalid, such declaration shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remaining provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-9-2017) 
Chapter 42 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The Flood Damage Ordinance adopted Aug. 12, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 42, Art. I; Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 42-19—42-30; Div. 2, §§ 49-19—42-52; Div. 3, §§ 42-78—42-82 and enacted a new Ch. 42 as set out herein. The former Ch. 42 pertained to floods and derived from Ord. of 2-23-1987(1), art. 1, §§ B—D; art. 2; art. 3, §§ A—H; art. 4, §§ A—D; and art. 5, §§ A—E. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 42-1. - Statutory authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 1, § A); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 1, § B); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-3. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 1, § c); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-4. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 1, § D); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-5. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 42-22. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building. See "Structure." 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines; 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, or piers, or adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before September 30, 1988. [The effective date of the initial FIRM for that community.] 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 23, 1987. [The effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.] 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge and culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after September 30, 1988 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after February 23, 1987 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after February 23, 1987. [The effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.] 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
b.  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 6); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Secs. 42-6—42-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 42-21. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of Flemington, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § A); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-22. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated February 23, 1987, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for Liberty County, dated March 3, 1987, are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 
Liberty County Building and Licensing and LCPC (Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission). 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § B); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-23. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § C); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-24. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § D); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-25. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § E); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-26. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § F); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-27. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § G); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-28. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § H); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-29. - Severability. 
If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 2, § I); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Secs. 42-30—42-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 42-41. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The county building official and the director of LCPC are hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 3, § A); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-42. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the county building and licensing department or the director of LCPC on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be flood proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsections 42-62(2) and 42-64(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazard areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The county building official and/or director of LCPC shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 3, § B); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-43. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the county building official and/or the director of LCPC shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, and the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-22, then the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article IV. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 42-42(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsections 42-62(2) and 42-64(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 42-42(1)c, subsection 42-62(2), or subsection 42-64(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(13)  If a portion of the structure is located in a SFHA, the entire structure shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(14)  If a structure is located in multiple flood zones and/or BFEs, the entire structure shall comply with the most restrictive requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 3, § C); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Secs. 42-44—42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 42-61. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. Any additions to the manufactured home have to be similarly anchored. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 4, § A); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-62. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-61(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 42-43(6). 
An operations and maintenance plan shall be prepared to assure the continued viability of floodproofing measures. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 48 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. See subsection 42-61(6). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a and (3)c of this section. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-22, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article IV. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 4, § B); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-63. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-22, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-22, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article IV. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 42-61(4). 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 4, § C); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-64. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations and without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-22, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures and substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 42-62. 
(Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-65. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-62 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least one foot above the flood depth number specified (in feet) on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsections 42-61(4). The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 42-42(1)c and subsection 42-42(2). An operations and maintenance plan shall be submitted to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 4, § E); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-66. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  For any subdivision and/or development including manufactured home parks within a floodplain, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 4, § F); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Sec. 42-67. - Standard for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(c)  Hazardous materials shall not be stored in the SFHA. The following materials are prohibited in the SFHA: acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, prussic, magnesium, nitric acid, oxides of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sodium and sulfur. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 4, § G); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Secs. 42-68—42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 42-81. - Variances. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Requests for appeals or variance from the requirement of this chapter shall first be heard by the board of the LCPC. The LCPC board shall then forward their recommendations for approval or denial of the appeal or variance to the mayor and city council for final decision. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and city council of Flemington may appeal such decision to the county superior court as provided in the General Planning and Enabling Act of 1957. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and city council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-12-2008(art. 5, § A); Ord. No. 2014-02, 4-18-2014; Ord. of 11-13-2018(2), § 1) 
Secs. 42-82—42-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 46 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— County's and municipality's power to control air quality, Ga. Const. art. IX, § 2, 3(a)(13); The Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1; Prohibition against public littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43 et seq.; no limitation on municipal authority to declare nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-30.9; adoption of ordinances to enforce nuisance provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9; municipal authority to impose restrictions on tire disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; conditions under which sound from motor vehicle that are audible at a distance of 100 feet or more prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; authority to provide for removal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; Disposition of Unclaimed Property Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-190 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience, or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
Nuisance per se means an act, occupation or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
Private nuisance means a nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one or a few individuals. 
Public nuisance means a nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 1) 
Sec. 46-2. - Proceedings to abate generally. 
Any nuisances existing within the corporate limits of this city, except for a nuisance hereinafter excepted, may be abated in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Initiation. Proceedings to abate a nuisance, whether public or private, may be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the city clerk, which complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person injured by the nuisance; in the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a city official or by a citizen specially injured by the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice of hearing. Upon the filing of a complaint as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall investigate the matter or cause the same to be investigated, and if he/she deems further proceedings necessary, he/she shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the same be a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause before the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the city clerk, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed. Such notice shall be served at least two days prior to the date set for the hearing by a law enforcement representative of the city, and shall be made either personally or by leaving a copy at the party's usual place of abode, with some person of suitable age and discretion then residing therein. A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant. 
(3)  Order of abatement. If after hearing all the evidence the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction should decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, said judge shall issue an order directed to the law enforcement representative of the city having jurisdiction over said nuisance, commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the parties maintaining the nuisance. 
(4)  Effect of noncompliance. In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement, the person maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for contempt and/or violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 2) 
Sec. 46-3. - Summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in section 46-2 shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 3) 
Sec. 46-4. - Nuisances designated. 
Within the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on his/her property or property occupied by him/her, or to allow a nuisance to remain on his/her property or property occupied by him/her. Dead animals, stagnant water, decayed vegetables or fruits, filthy outdoor toilets or unkept stables, or anything having an offensive odor, or anything that causes injury or damage to the health or life of any other person, are declared nuisances. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 4) 
Sec. 46-5. - Prohibited conditions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of property within the city to allow garbage, trash, debris, weeds, vines, grass or other vegetation, whether cut or growing, to accumulate thereon, which would be likely to become a breeding place for snakes, rodents, flies, gnats, mosquitoes or other harmful or dangerous creatures or insects, or likely to cause personal injury or property damage by human illness or fire, or which may become a health hazard for any other reason, or may become a hazard to traffic on the public streets of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any property within the city to allow any house, building, establishment, lot, yard or ground owned or occupied by him, to contain or have thereon any filth, carrion or impure or unwholesome matter or obnoxious odors of any nature whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 5) 
Sec. 46-6. - Trash and weeds; duty of person responsible. 
(a)  Within the city it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain his/her premises, including vacant lots or land, in such a way as to allow trash, garbage or miscellaneous refuse to accumulate if the condition of the property causes a nuisance, or causes injury to the health or welfare of residents in the vicinity, or causes injury to neighboring property. Drive-in restaurants and other food establishments that permit carryout food service shall maintain at all times on their premises sufficient receptacles for the disposal of trash, garbage and miscellaneous refuse. 
(b)  Within the city it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, cause or permit uncut grass or weeds on any property under such circumstances that the grass or weeds becomes a breeding place for insects, rodents or reptiles or constitutes a fire hazard. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 6) 
Sec. 46-7. - Emissions of gases, vapors, odors. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, or allow any emissions of gases, vapors or odors beyond the property line from which such emissions occur to be in sufficient quantities and of such characteristics and duration as are or are likely to be injurious to the public welfare; to the health of human, plant or animal life; or to property; or which interfere with the enjoyment of life and property. 
(b)  Detectable odors emitted from the following sources of emission are hereby declared to be objectionable per se: 
(1)  Ammonia, bleaching powder, or chlorine manufacture; 
(2)  Asphalt manufacture or refining; 
(3)  Blood processing; 
(4)  Bag cleaning; 
(5)  Celluloid manufacture; 
(6)  Coal tar products manufacture; 
(7)  Compost heaps; 
(8)  Crematory; 
(9)  Creosote treatment of manufacture; 
(10)  Disinfectants manufacture; 
(11)  Distillation of bones, coal, or wood; 
(12)  Dyestuff manufacture; 
(13)  Fat rendering; 
(14)  Fertilizer manufacture and bone grinding; 
(15)  Glue or gelatin manufacture; 
(16)  Incinerator or reduction of garbage, dead animals, offal, or refuse; 
(17)  Oiled rubber or leather goods manufacture; 
(18)  Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, or varnish manufacture; 
(19)  Paper and pulp manufacture; 
(20)  Rubber or gutta percha manufacture; 
(21)  Sauerkraut manufacture; 
(22)  Shoe-blackening manufacture; 
(23)  Soap manufacture; 
(24)  Stockyards; 
(25)  Sulphuric, nitric, or hydrochloric acid manufacture; 
(26)  Tanning, curing, or storage of hides or skins; 
(27)  Tar distillation or manufacture; 
(28)  Tar roofing or waterproofing manufacture; 
(29)  Any other air contaminant discharged into open air of a character and in a quantity which is detrimental to or endangers the public health. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 7) 
Sec. 46-8. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  Property. All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  Sweeping into sidewalks or street. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 37) 
Secs. 46-9—46-32. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED PROPERTY 

Sec. 46-33. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 26) 
Sec. 46-34. - Abandonment of objects on public property; removal and storage. 
Any object abandoned on the streets or on other public property within the city may be removed by, or at the direction of, the law enforcement representative of the city and placed in storage, in order to preserve the safety of travel on the streets and the unobstructed use of public property. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 27) 
Sec. 46-35. - Abandonment of vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon any vehicle within the city, or to leave any vehicle at any place within the city for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 32) 
State Law reference— Abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 46-36. - Presumption of abandonment. 
Any vehicle that shall remain parked continuously in the same location on a street in the city for a period of at least five days or more shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded by the police department. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 33) 
Sec. 46-37. - Leaving wrecked, nonoperating, etc., vehicle on street. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked or junked vehicle on any street or highway within the city. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 34) 
Sec. 46-38. - Leaving wrecked, nonoperating, etc., vehicle on private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, to allow any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 72 hours, and it shall be unlawful for any person to leave any such vehicle on any property within the city for a longer time than 72 hours; except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 35) 
Sec. 46-39. - Impounding vehicles. 
The law enforcement representative of the city or any law enforcement officer designated by the mayor is authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article or lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with this article. This shall not preclude prosecution of the offending person as for any other offense against the city. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 36) 
Secs. 46-40—46-72. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 46-73. - Anti-noise regulation generally. 
Subject to the provisions of this section, the creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or in disturbance of the public peace and welfare is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 50) 
Sec. 46-74. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm means any fire, burglary, motor vehicle or civil defense alarm, whistle or similar stationary emergency audible signaling device. 
Commercial area means any real property which contains a building or other structure used for business purposes, provided that such building or structure is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for commercial use in accordance with the terms and maps of the zoning ordinance of the city, unless otherwise provided in this article. 
Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities, or similar property. 
Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
Emergency work means any work for the purpose of preventing, alleviating, or resolving an emergency. 
Industrial area means any real property which contains various types of industrial, manufacturing, or warehousing operations, provided that such building or structure is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for such industrial use in accordance with the terms and maps of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Motor vehicle means any motor-operated vehicle requiring a license for use on the public highways, but does not include a motorcycle. 
Motorcycle means any motor vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on typically not more than three wheels in contact with the ground. Without limiting the foregoing, the term "motorcycle" shall include motorized bicycles, motor scooters, and all-terrain vehicles (including those with more than three wheels). 
Noise control officer means the city clerk or law enforcement representative of the city or such other person designated by the city having responsibility for the administration of this article. 
Noise-sensitive area means an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, church, court or public library is located. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, or other legal entity. 
Plainly audible means any sound which is unambiguously communicated to the listener, such as, but not limited to, understandable spoken speech, comprehension of whether voice is raised or normal, or comprehensible musical rhythms. 
Powered model vehicle means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
Public space means any real property or structures thereon owned by a governmental entity and normally accessible to the public, including but not limited to parks and other public recreational areas. 
Real property line means any line along the surfaces, and its vertical plane extension, which separates the real property owned, rented, leased or otherwise lawfully occupied by one person from that owned, rented, leased, or occupied by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property division. 
Receiving land means the property which receives the transmission of sound as hereinafter defined. 
Residential area means any real property which contains a structure or building in which one or more persons reside and/or sleep, provided that such structure or building is properly zoned, or is legally nonconforming, for residential use in accordance with the terms and maps of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 51) 
Sec. 46-75. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the geographical limits of the city and outside the city limits, within all territory to which the jurisdiction of the city extends. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 52) 
Sec. 46-76. - Excessive noise. 
Subject to the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued, except as permitted herein, any loud, disturbing or excessive noise which unreasonably interferes with the comfort, repose, health or safety of others within the jurisdiction of the city, or which is otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. For the purposes of this chapter, any noise in excess of the sound level limits established in section 46-77, or which is otherwise plainly audible, as herein defined, shall be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 53) 
Sec. 46-77. - General sound level limits. 
(a)  Maximum permissible sound levels. Unless otherwise provided in this article, Table I sets forth the general maximum permissible sound levels allowed at or within the real property boundary of a receiving land. Any activity or use that produces a sound in excess of such noise levels, or that is otherwise plainly audible, as herein provided, for a receiving land shall be in violation of this article. 
(b)  Measurement of sound. The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter maintained in good working order by the city police department and designated for such purposes. A calibration check shall be made of the sound level meter at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. Traffic, aircraft and other transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be considered in taking measurements except where such background noise interferes with the primary noise being measured. The measurement of all sound levels shall be made as close to the property line of the receiving land as is practical. The measurement period shall not be less than eight minutes, and the sound levels measured shall not exceed the sound levels set forth in Table I by more than ten percent for any measurement period. 
TABLE I. SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND 

 
*Unless otherwise stated in this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 54) 
Sec. 46-78. - Specific prohibitions. 
In addition to the general prohibition set forth in section 46-76, the following specific acts are declared to be loud, disturbing or excessive in violation of this article, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive. The acts, uses and sounds prohibited in this section need not exceed the sound level limits established in section 46-77 to be in violation of this article. 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device of a motor vehicle on any public right-of-way or public place within the jurisdiction of the city continuously or intermittently for a period in excess of 60 seconds, except as a danger or emergency warning. 
(2)  Radios, televisions, musical instruments and similar devices. 
a.  The operation or playing of any radio, stereo, sound system, television, phonograph, amplifier, loudspeaker, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound in a manner as to be plainly audible within a noise-sensitive area, or across any real property line in a residential or commercial area. Bars, taverns, lounges, nightclubs, dance halls, game rooms and similar activities which produce sounds that are plainly audible beyond the premises and respective real property line shall be deemed a noise disturbance in violation of this article. 
b.  The operation or playing of any radio, stereo, sound system, television, phonograph, amplifier, loudspeaker, musical instrument, or similar device which produces or reproduces sound on the public right-of-way in such a manner as to be plainly audible to any person other than the player or operator of the device. 
(3)  Street sales. The offering for sale by shouting or outcry within any residential, commercial or noise-sensitive area, public rights-of-way or public space except by permit issued by the city. 
(4)  Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal, domestic or otherwise, which frequently or continuously howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which are plainly audible and which are of such character, intensity and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. For the purposes of this article, a barking dog shall include a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continuously for a period of ten minutes, or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more at any time of day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a barking dog for purposes of this regulation, if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated. 
(5)  Construction and demolition. The operating of any equipment used in construction work in or within 1,500 feet of any residential or noise-sensitive area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays, except for emergency work; and the piledriving, jackhammering, and blasting on weekends and holidays, and for all other days between 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(6)  Powered model vehicles. The operation of or permitting the operation of powered model vehicles between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekdays, weekends and holidays within or adjacent to residential or noise-sensitive areas, public rights-of-way or public spaces such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible across the real property line of the source. 
(7)  Alarms and similar emergency signaling devices. 
a.  Except in case of an emergency, the intentional sounding of any alarm or similar signaling devices between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
b.  The testing of any alarm or similar emergency signaling device for a period in excess of 60 seconds at any time. 
c.  The testing of a complete alarm or emergency signaling system, including the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, more than once in each calendar month, and the sounding of the alarm or emergency signaling system for a period in excess of 15 minutes. 
(8)  Motor vehicles. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other device in good working order so as to effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(9)  Blowers, engines, machinery, etc. The operation by any person of any noise-creating power blower, power fan, power tool, air compressor, internal-combustion engine (except trains, motor vehicles or motorcycles), or other similar equipment or machinery which cause noise due to its operation, within 1,500 feet of any residential or noise-sensitive area, unless the blower, fan, tool, compressor, engine or other machine is equipped with a functional muffler device or is contained or housed within a structure sufficient to deaden the noise to the point that it is not plainly audible to a person of normal hearing ability in the residential or noise-sensitive area nearest the source of such noise, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays. 
(10)  Commercial garbage collection. The servicing of a private, commercial garbage dumpster by any person using garbage collection vehicles and equipment within 1,500 feet of any residential area or noise-sensitive area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on weekends and holidays; however, this shall not apply to the collection of garbage from any establishment which has a plastic lid on its dumpster and where it has been determined by the noise control officer or designee that the collection of garbage during the establishment's hours of operation would be a safety hazard, or to the collection of garbage by employees or agents of the city or the county. 
(11)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or other similar behavior on a public right-of-way or public place, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any persons in any noise-sensitive, commercial or residential area. 
(12)  Loading and unloading. No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to be plainly audible across a residential real property line or within a noise-sensitive area. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 55) 
Sec. 46-79. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; 
(2)  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
(3)  Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles; 
(4)  Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes; 
(5)  Noise originating from regularly scheduled school-sponsored or civic events; 
(6)  Noise emitted during daylight hours from city public works construction projects that have been authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 56) 
Sec. 46-80. - Special permits. 
(a)  Generally. Any person desiring relief from the provisions of this article shall apply for a special permit to cause or create noise which would otherwise be in violation of this article at least 21 days prior to the date for which the relief is requested. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the noise control officer, or his/her designee, on forms provided for that purpose. The noise control officer may grant such special permit upon a showing by the applicant of the following: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply with the provisions of this article; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this article; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(b)  Conditions. Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which the permit has been granted, including but not limited to the effective date, time of day, location and equipment limitation. No special permit shall be issued for a period in excess of 15 consecutive days. Any special permit granted pursuant to this section may be renewed upon application to the noise control officer upon a showing that the reasons for which the permit was granted still exist. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 57) 
Sec. 46-81. - Administration and appeals. 
(a)  The noise control officer, or his/her designee, shall implement, administer and enforce the provisions of this article and shall issue orders requiring the abatement of all violations and the revocation of permits issued. 
(b)  Any decision or determination made by the noise control officer in the granting or denying of a special permit under section 46-80 may be appealed directly to the mayor and city council. Such appeal must be in writing and must state the basis of the appeal and the error alleged to have been committed and it must be filed within 30 days after the noise control officer has rendered the decision appealed. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order rendered by the mayor and city council, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 58) 
Sec. 46-82. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this article, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every violation of any of the provisions of this article committed or continued, and shall, upon conviction of any such violation be punishable as provided by section 1-10. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 59) 
Secs. 46-83—46-107. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - REMOVAL OR REPAIR OF UNSAFE OR DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS 

Sec. 46-108. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of the property and all individuals, associations and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located or in a dwelling, building or structure located on said property; said persons include but are not limited to executors, administrators, guardians and trustees. 
Public authority means any housing authority or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, city or state relating to health, fire or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the mayor, city clerk, law enforcement representative of the city or his/her designee (e.g., building inspector, code enforcement officer, etc.) who shall exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 60) 
Sec. 46-109. - Application of article to unsafe or unsanitary conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance. 
(a)  All of the provisions of this article, including those pertaining to method and procedure, shall also be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions create a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing or traveling in the vicinity thereof except: 
(1)  That portion of section 46-114 requiring the governing authority to order the public officer to effectuate those orders issued pursuant to this article with respect to any particular property; and 
(2)  That portion of section 46-120 establishing an administrative fee of $600.00. 
(b)  As for the effectuation of orders issued pursuant to this section, no such order shall be carried out without the written approval of the mayor and the city clerk. As for the administrative fee due for a lien created as a result of the city's removal of weeds, trash, junk or rubbish from private property, or the city's remedying unsanitary or unsafe conditions constituting a general nuisance (or the contracting by the city for such removal or remedying), it shall be $200.00. 
(c)  A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that any property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that the property is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 61) 
Sec. 46-110. - Article cumulative. 
This article shall be cumulative of other ordinances and Code provisions applicable to property and improvements in the city and shall not repeal other ordinances and Code provisions not in conflict herewith. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 62) 
Sec. 46-111. - Inspection and notice of hearing. 
Whenever a written request for inspection is filed with the city by a public authority, by at least five residents of the city or by the public officer administering this article charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit in its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant and dilapidated, or whenever it otherwise appears to the public officer (on his/her own motion) that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant or dilapidated, the public officer shall, if preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charge, issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest of such dwelling, building, or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing shall be held before the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction. The complaint shall state the conditions which exist and specify the violations of this article or any other provision of this Code, including, but not limited to, the building code, housing code and other provisions pertaining to the conditions of buildings, dwellings and structures, and shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the judge of a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to section 46-113. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 63) 
Sec. 46-112. - Right to enter and inspect. 
(a)  The public officer and any person authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition thereof and determine the fitness and condition of said structure pursuant to section 46-111 hereof. If such entry is refused, such official may obtain an order ex parte from a court pursuant to an affidavit setting forth: 
(1)  The name and address of the property owner and any party in interest, and the person refusing entry; 
(2)  The date and time entry was attempted; 
(3)  The reason why entry was not effected; 
(4)  The means by which and by whom entry is proposed; and 
(5)  The reason why entry and inspection are necessary. 
(b)  The order shall specify a date and time for a hearing before the court to determine whether entry shall be permitted, unless the affidavit sets forth sufficient cause to justify immediate entry and inspection, whereupon such authority may then be granted. The order with a copy of the affidavit shall be served pursuant to the provisions applicable to service of subpoenas issued from the court or the provisions of section 46-121. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 64) 
Sec. 46-113. - Hearing. 
(a)  The hearing pursuant to section 46-111 will be held with a court of competent jurisdiction as designated in the complaint on a day and time certain which shall not be less than ten nor more than 45 days after the service of this notice. 
(b)  The public officer shall be the supervisor and custodian of the records with respect to each property against which a complaint is issued and any hearing held. Such records shall be public records and made available to any party in interest and copies thereof provided upon the payment of such reasonable cost as may be incurred in duplicating or otherwise providing them. The records shall be preserved for not less than four years after the proceedings and action, if any, regarding the property are concluded. 
(c)  Upon conclusion of the proceeding, it may be determined that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, such conditions may include the following: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 65) 
Sec. 46-114. - Orders for corrective action. 
(a)  If, after the hearing, it is determined that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant and dilapidated, a party may seek an order providing: 
(1)  A determination that the dwelling, building or structure can be repaired, improved or altered either at a cost of one-half or less of the value of the dwelling, building or structure exclusive of foundation and lot after the improvements have been made, or at a cost of more than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of the foundation and lot after improvements have been made. If the cost to repair, improve or alter such structure is more than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of foundation and lot after the improvements have been made, the order may find that such structure be vacated and removed or demolished within a specified time frame. If the dwelling, building or structure can be repaired, altered, or improved at a cost that is less than one-half of the value of such structure or structures exclusive of foundation and lot after improvements have been made, the order may find either that the structure be rendered fit for human habitation or current commercial, industrial or business use within a specified time or shall be vacated and closed and secured against entry. 
(2)  An enumeration of conditions which render the dwelling, building or structure unfit for human habitation or other uses and an enumeration of remedial action necessary to correct each of the conditions. 
(3)  That if the owner and/or parties in interest elect to undertake the necessary remedial action, the judge of municipal court shall establish: 
a.  A specific period of time, reasonably established in relationship to the remedial action, during which such action must be commenced, including, if necessary, separate commencement dates as to separate defects or work; 
b.  A specific period of time after the required commencement date of such remedial action, reasonably established in relationship to the necessary undertakings, within which such action shall be completed, including, if necessary, separate reasonable deadlines as to separate defects or work. 
(4)  That if the owner and/or the parties in interest do not notify the public officer of the intent to comply within 15 days of service of publication of the order for corrective action for a building, dwelling or structure which can be repaired at one-half or less of its value, the public officer shall subsequently commence and complete the vacating and closing of the dwelling, building or structure; or in case of a building or dwelling which cannot be repaired at one-half or less of the value, to commence and complete the vacating and removal or demolition of the building, dwelling or structure. 
(5)  A statement that failure to comply with the order within the required time set forth in this section is in violation of this article and shall subject the parties and property to the remedies of this article. 
(b)  Where a condition exists regarding any property which constitutes an immediate danger to persons or adjacent property, the public officer and/or a judge of a court of competent jurisdiction may shorten the time periods specified in this section. 
(c)  Prior to the effectuation of orders issued pursuant to this section, the public officer shall submit such orders to the city council, and such orders shall not be carried out without the written approval of the same. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 66) 
Sec. 46-115. - Placarding. 
(a)  When the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure, and the public officer causes such dwelling, building or structure and premises to be vacated and closed, the public officer shall cause to be posted, on the main entrance of any dwelling or building or structure to be closed, a placard with the following words: 
This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or other use. The use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or other use is prohibited and unlawful. 
(b)  The placard shall bear the date posted, street number of the building involved, and the signature of the public officer. It shall thereafter be unlawful for such placard to be mutilated or removed or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 67) 
Sec. 46-116. - Filing of complaints and orders in real estate records. 
A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in court with lis pendens notices, and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. Any such complaint or orders or an appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the clerk of court. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 68) 
Sec. 46-117. - Failure to comply with order. 
Should the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to remove or demolish or vacate a dwelling, building or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building or structure to be vacated, demolished, removed or repaired; provided, however, that such duty shall not be exercised until the city, by resolution containing an appropriate legal description, has ordered the public officer to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to the particular property. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 69) 
Sec. 46-118. - Demolition. 
No person shall begin demolition until a city permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish and foundation exposed above the ground level; fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 70) 
Sec. 46-119. - Lien on property. 
The cost of vacating, removing, closing, repairing, demolition, and/or the taking of any other action authorized hereunder by the city shall be a lien for such amount against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of action against the property by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the public officer in the office of the clerk of court on a lien docket maintained by said clerk for such purposes. If the dwelling or building is demolished under a contract which results in payment by a contractor to the city, the proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited by the public officer in the superior court of the county and shall be secured and disbursed in such manner as may be ordered by such court. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 71) 
Sec. 46-120. - Collection of amount due on lien. 
The city shall enforce the collection of any amount due on a lien arising under this article in the following manner: 
(1)  Amount. The amount of the lien shall be established as follows: There shall be an administrative fee of $600.00 assessed against all liened properties, together with the costs of serving all notices required by this article. The amount of the lien shall also include the cost of vacating, removal, closing, repairing, or demolition which shall be the cost paid or incurred by the city in effecting action against any property. 
(2)  Notice of lien. The owner and/or parties in interest, if they possess a recorded interest in the property, shall be served with a copy of the lien and shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money not less than 25 percent of the total due on such lien, and by further paying the remaining balance due, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this section. 
(3)  Transfer of property. Should such property be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner and/or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year payment period, the entire balance due on such lien, with earned interest, shall be due and payable to the city. 
(4)  Nonsatisfaction. Should the amount due on the lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after it is due, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided by statutes. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 72) 
Sec. 46-121. - Service of notices and orders. 
Service of complaints shall be effected as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
(1)  Costs. The costs of service pursuant to this section shall be included in the sums otherwise due under this article. 
(2)  Service. Such person as designated by the city who is of legal age may be authorized to perform the service of all documents pursuant to this article in the manner usually performed by sheriff deputies, provided they follow the procedures established by statute for those officials, and a fee may be assessed against the property so long as it does not exceed the fee currently imposed by the sheriff of the county for that activity. Any notice pursuant to section 46-112, any order issued pursuant to section 46-114, or any other post-hearing action affecting the property may be served upon the owner and parties in interest by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address specified in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12, as applicable, and to the address of the property if it is occupied on the date of inspection, care of "occupant." If any party has specified to the public officer prior to or at the hearing an address for notice, that address shall be used for notices. 
(3)  Failure to answer complaint. If neither the owner nor the parties in interest file an answer to the complaint nor appear at the hearing, and a decision is rendered which affects the property, an advertisement shall be published in the newspaper utilized for legal sales for two consecutive weeks that a hearing was conducted, a summary of the general findings of the hearing, the action required as pertaining to the property, and the consequences which may result from noncompliance with the Code or notice. A notice may identify more than one property which was the subject of a hearing. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 73) 
Sec. 46-122. - Eminent domain. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the owner by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state, or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures under this article shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 74) 
Secs. 46-123—46-142. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - JUNKED AND INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 46-143. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junked or inoperable vehicle means a motor vehicle which cannot be operated lawfully on a public street or highway within the state for any reason other than the lack of current vehicle registration, or which cannot be moved under its own power; and shall include, without limitation,motor vehicles, or parts thereof, which are discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped or otherwise in a state of disrepair. For the purposes of this article, "junked or inoperable vehicles" shall also include motor vehicles, or parts thereof, stored or kept on private property for the purposes of repairing and/or refurbishing the same, whether or not such vehicles are completely inoperable. Such junked or inoperable vehicles shall constitute a public nuisance. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers, and trailers. 
Owner means any person, firm or corporation, or other entity which is named as owning a vehicle and/or having any security interest therein according to any certificate of title for such vehicle issued by any department or agency of a state having authority to issue certificates; provided that if no such certificate has been issued by a state or if none is available or can be obtained, the information indicating ownership as provided on the vehicle license registration shall be sufficient, and provided further that if with reasonable diligence the information contained on the title certificate and the vehicle license registration cannot be obtained, the owner of a vehicle shall be considered unknown. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization, or legal entity of any kind. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
Public property means any street or highway which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 75) 
Sec. 46-144. - Authority of mayor and city council. 
The mayor and city council are hereby authorized to designate such city employees as are necessary to identify junked or inoperable motor vehicles and cause the removal and disposal of the same, to supervise any contract with a third party to provide for the removal and disposal of such vehicles, and to otherwise cause the implementation of and compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 76) 
Sec. 46-145. - Public nuisance; storing, parking prohibited; exceptions. 
The location or presence of any junked or inoperable vehicle on any lot, tract, parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city shall be deemed a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such junked or inoperable vehicles on the property of another or to suffer, permit or allow the same to be placed, located, or maintained or to exist upon his/her or their own real property because such vehicles constitute an unsightly nuisance and are otherwise injurious to the public health and safety; provided, that this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
(2)  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with any junkyard complying with the laws of this state relating to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards; or 
(3)  Vehicles stored on private property which are fully screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery, or other appropriate means. 
(Ord. of 4-16-1998, § I; Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 77) 
Sec. 46-146. - Removal—Notice served. 
(a)  Whenever such public nuisance exists on private property within the city in violation of this article, the law enforcement representative of the city and/or the individuals who shall administer this article, or their respective duly authorized agents, shall give not less than ten days' notice to the owner of the vehicle, if known, as well as to the owner and/or occupant of the real property whereon such public nuisance exists, to abate or remove the same, stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be removed and abated within ten days and, further, that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of such ten-day period by the aggrieved person, such notice to be personally hand-delivered or mailed, by certified or registered mail, with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner of the vehicle, as well as to the owner and/or occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists. If the mailed notice is returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, official action to abate such nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return. Notice shall also be given by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the private property where the vehicle is located. 
(b)  Whenever such public nuisance exists on public property in the city in violation hereof, the law enforcement representative of the city and/or the individuals who shall administer this article, or their respective duly authorized agents, shall give not less than a ten-day notice to the owner of the vehicle, if known, as well as to the owner and/or occupant of the private property adjacent to the public property or right-of-way whereupon the vehicle is located, stating the nature of the public nuisance on the public property or right-of-way and that it must be removed and abated within ten days and, further, that a request for a hearing must be made before the expiration of such ten-day period, such notice to be personally hand-delivered or mailed, by certified or registered mail, with a five-day return receipt requested, to the owner of the vehicle, if known, as well as to the owner and/or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public property or right-of-way whereupon such public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, official action to abate such nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return. Notice shall also be given by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the private property adjacent to the public property or right-of-way whereupon the vehicle is located. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 78) 
Sec. 46-147. - Same—Responsibility of owner. 
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the junked or inoperable vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located shall be jointly and severally responsible for its removal. In the event of removal and disposition by the city, such individuals shall jointly and severally be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 79) 
Sec. 46-148. - Same—Content of notice. 
The notice required hereunder shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this article, and the notice shall advise that, upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the city or its designee shall undertake such removal, with the cost of removal to be levied against the registered owner of the motor vehicle, together with the owner or occupant of the property whereon the vehicle is located. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 80) 
Sec. 46-149. - Hearing—Written request. 
The person to whom the notices are directed, or their duly authorized agents, may file a written request for hearing before a court of competent jurisdiction within the ten-day period of compliance prescribed hereinabove for the purpose of defending the charges by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 81) 
Sec. 46-150. - Same—Procedure. 
The hearing shall be held as soon as practicable after the filing of the request and the persons to whom the notices are directed shall be advised of the time and place of such hearing at least seven days in advance thereof. At any such hearing, the city and the persons to whom the notices have been directed may introduce such witnesses and evidence as either party deems necessary. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 82) 
Sec. 46-151. - Removal by city. 
If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the ten-day period of compliance, or, in the event that a notice requesting a hearing is timely filed, a hearing is had and the existence of the violation is confirmed by said court, the city or its designee shall have the right to take possession of the junked or inoperable motor vehicle and remove it from the premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow such person to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of this article. Once removed from the private or public property, as the case may be, the vehicles shall be processed and disposed of in accordance with the procedures outlined in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq., for abandoned motor vehicles. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 83) 
Sec. 46-152. - Lien upon failure of owner/occupant to pay removal expenses incurred by city. 
Upon the failure of the owner of the motor vehicle and the owner and/or occupant of the private property on which a vehicle has been removed to pay the unrecovered expenses incurred by the city in such removal, a lien shall be placed upon the private property for the amount of such expense. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 84) 
Sec. 46-153. - Compliance by giving written permission to remove. 
If, within ten days after receipt of notice from the law enforcement representative for the city/or the individuals who shall administer the article, or their respective duly authorized agents, together with any party with whom the city contracts to remove and dispose of vehicles, to abate the nuisance as herein provided, the owner or occupant of the premises shall give his/her written permission for removal of the junked or inoperable motor vehicle from the premises, the giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of section 46-146 hereof. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 85) 
Sec. 46-154. - Right to enter upon private property. 
The law enforcement representative of the city and/or the individuals who shall administer this chapter, or their respective duly authorized agents, together with any party with whom the city contracts to remove and dispose of vehicles, or his/her agent, may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles, and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 86) 
Sec. 46-155. - Recordkeeping. 
The mayor and city council shall cause records to be made and maintained which reasonably specify the identity of each vehicle, its owner, its location prior to removal, its date of removal, the party removing and impounding the same, the date and manner of its disposal, procedures to notify the owner, and a copy of any notices given pursuant to this article. Such records shall be preserved for not less than two years from the date of impounding of any junked or inoperable motor vehicle and shall be made available for examination by any owner of such vehicle which has been removed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 87) 
Sec. 46-156. - Independent contractors. 
Any party with whom the city may contract or perform services pursuant to this article shall not be deemed to be any agent, employee, or other representative of the city, and, in the performance of any act as authorized by this article, shall be considered to act in the name of such party and as an independent contractor. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 88) 
Sec. 46-157. - Nonapplicability to vehicles obstructing traffic. 
Nothing in this article shall affect ordinances or other laws that permit the immediate removal of a vehicle left on public property which constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(1), § 89) 
Secs. 46-158—46-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SMOKING REGULATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Sept. 11, 2007 did not specify manner of inclusion in Code; Hence inclusion as Art. VI is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 46-171. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases whenever used in this article shall be construed as defined in this section: 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Business means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, professional corporation, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, joint venture, or other entity, whether for profit or nonprofit. 
Employee means an individual who is employed by a business in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means an individual or a business that employs one or more individuals. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling. Such term also means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all but one side by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, homes for the chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. This definition shall not include long-term care facilities as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 31-8-81. 
Infiltrate means to permeate an enclosed area by passing through its walls, ceilings, floors, windows, or ventilation systems to the extent that an individual can smell secondhand smoke. 
Local governing authority means a county or municipal corporation of the state. 
Place of employment means an enclosed area under the control of an employer that employees utilize during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, and hallways. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility. This term shall not include vehicles used in the course of employment. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, health care facilities, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a licensed childcare, adult day-care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term shall include a bar area within any restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Secondhand smoke means smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering, or burning tobacco when the person smoking is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff drawing, and smoke exhaled by the person smoking. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted tobacco product including cigarettes, cigars, and pipe tobacco. 
Smoking area means a separately designated enclosed room which need not be entered by an employee in order to conduct business that is designated as a smoking area and, when so designated as a smoking area, shall not be construed as to deprive employees of a nonsmoking lounge, waiting area, or break room. 
Sports arena means enclosed stadiums and enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, and other similar places where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 46-172. - Smoking prohibited in city facilities. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities of, including buildings owned, leased, or operated by the city. Smoking shall be prohibited within the boundaries of any park, youth sports complex, or recreation area owned, leased, or operated by the city, including any open area within such park, youth sports complex, or recreation area. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 2) 
Sec. 46-173. - Regulation of smoking in public places. 
Except as otherwise specifically authorized in this article, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places in the city. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 3) 
Sec. 46-174. - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment in the city, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  Such prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all current employees and to each prospective employee upon such employee's application for employment. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 4) 
Sec. 46-175. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections [46-172 through 46-174] herein: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a licensed child care, adult day-care, or health care facility; 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than 20 percent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated; 
(3)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Private and semiprivate rooms in health care facilities licensed under [O.C.G.A.] tit. 31 that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom have written authorization by their treating physician to smoke; 
(5)  Smoking areas designated by an employer when such rooms are being used for private functions which shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The smoking area shall be located in a nonwork area where no employee, as part of his or her work responsibilities, shall be required to enter, except such work responsibilities shall not include custodial or maintenance work carried out in the smoking area when it is unoccupied; and 
b.  Air handling systems from the smoking area shall be independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the smoking area shall be exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size and capacity for the smoking area and no air from the smoking area shall be recirculated through or infiltrate other parts of the building; and 
c.  The smoking area shall be for the use of employees only. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to restaurants and bars. 
(6)  Private clubs. Provided, however, that smoking is prohibited at any event at a private club in which the general public is permitted to attend. 
(7)  Bars and restaurants, as follows: 
a.  All bars and restaurants to which access is denied to any person under the age of 18 and that do not employ any individual under the age of 18; or 
b.  Private rooms in restaurants and bars if such rooms are enclosed and have an air handling system independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the private room is exhausted directly to the outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size. 
(8)  Smoking areas designated by an employer which shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The smoking area shall be located in a nonwork area where no employee, as part of his or her work responsibilities, shall be required to enter, except such work responsibilities shall not include custodial or maintenance work carried out in the smoking area when it is unoccupied; and 
b.  Air handling systems from the smoking area shall be independent from the main air handling system that serves all other areas of the building and all air within the smoking area shall be exhausted directly outside by an exhaust fan of sufficient size and capacity for the smoking area and no air from the smoking area shall be recirculated or infiltrate other parts of the building; and 
c.  The smoking area shall be for the use of employees only. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall not apply to restaurants and bars. 
(9)  Common work areas, conference and meeting rooms, private offices in private places of employment, other than medical facilities, that are open to the general public by appointment only; except that smoking shall be prohibited in any public reception area of such place of employment. 
(b)  In order to qualify for exempt status under subsection (a) of this Code section, any area described in subsection (a) of this Code section, except for areas described in paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of this Code section, shall post conspicuously at every entrance a sign indicating that smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 5) 
Sec. 46-176. - Declaration of nonsmoking places. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions within this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 46-177(a) is posted. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 6) 
Sec. 46-177. - Responsibility of owner/manager. 
(a)  "No smoking" signs or the international "No smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control in every public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(b)  All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of the area, unless such ashtray is permanently affixed to an existing structure. 
(c)  The following described sign shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article: 
"The  City of Flemington prohibits smoking in this establishment at all times. To report violations, call 912.877.3223." 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code, the holder of a city alcoholic beverages license shall not be subject to a civil fine, administrative hearing for suspension, revocation, probation or other administrative or judicial action with respect to such license based upon violations of this article occurring in the premises of such holder until no fewer than three convictions for violation of the provisions of this article have occurred on such licensed premises within the preceding 12 months. 
(e)  The city attorney shall be authorized to bring an action to abate a public nuisance or to obtain appropriate equitable relief to protect the public health, safety and welfare in cases where repeated violations of this article occur in a public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited, and the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of such place has failed after notice to take action to prevent such violations. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 7) 
Sec. 46-178. - Violation and penalty. 
A person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense punishable by a fine, upon conviction, of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Ord. of 9-11-2007, § 8) 
Chapter 50 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 50-1. - Cargo shipping containers. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cargo shipping containers means those containers, commonly rectangular in shape, enclosed on all sides, including top and bottom, usually with one or two side hinged doors or one uplift (garage-type) door on one or both ends, built in various sizes ranging from approximately eight feet wide, nine feet in height, and from eight to 60 feet in length, designed for and commonly used for containment of goods, articles or things while being moved or shipped by sea, air, rail and/or motor vehicle. 
(b)  Restriction of use. 
(1)  Metal, wood or any other of type shipping containers, such as those designed for and used for sea, air, rail and truck cargo shipments, shall not be used as a principal or accessory building, as defined in the city's zoning ordinance, in any zoning district within the city limits. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or agent to locate, place or maintain or to allow anyone to locate, place or maintain shipping containers designed for sea, air, rail or truck cargo shipments on any property, i.e., lot (commercial or residential), shopping center complex, apartment complex, mobile home park, etc., in the city regardless of the zoning district classification, for the purpose of using it for any purpose other than loading it with cargo goods for prompt and immediate shipment out of the city. 
(3)  A cargo shipping container may be used in any construction area. In such situations where the cargo shipping containers are not being used for prompt and immediate shipment out of the city, a permit must be obtained through the mayor or city clerk for utilizing a cargo shipping container. As used in this section, the term "prompt and immediate" shall be defined to be within a reasonable period of time allowing for the loading and securing of shipment cargo, but in no event shall such time period exceed one week. Within the permit, to be submitted to the city clerk, the applicant shall state the intended use and duration of use of all such shipping containers. The permit fee shall be $100.00. If the permit is refused, the city clerk shall give the applicant a written explanation of the reason for refusal. The permit shall allow for utilization of the cargo shipping container for, at most, 60 days from the issuance date of said permit. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2006(2), §§ 1, 2) 
Chapter 54 - PLANNING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Adoption of land use plan. 
There is hereby adopted by the city for the purpose of an orderly expansion of buildings and facilities the land use plan prepared on a base map of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1974-5, § I, 10-31-1974) 
Secs. 54-2—54-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LIBERTY CONSOLIDATED PLANNING COMMISSION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, adopted June 9, 2009, deleted the former Art. II, §§ 54-21—54-32, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission and derived from Ord. of 12-14-2004, §§ 1—12. 

Sec. 54-21. - Abolishment of prior commission. 
Subject to the provisions of section 54-23 herein below, the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission, as established by joint ordinance or other action of Liberty County, City of Allenhurst, City of Midway, City of Walthourville, City of Gum Branch, City of Riceboro, and City of Flemington, is hereby abolished. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-22. - Creation of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
Effective January 1, 2005, there is created and established, the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the "commission", to succeed to the general powers, duties and responsibilities of the former Liberty County Joint Planning Commission and the former City of Hinesville Planning and Zoning Commission, as hereinafter more fully set forth. Thereafter, the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission shall accept no new applications or petitions or otherwise undertake or consider any new business with respect to matters formerly within its jurisdiction. All acts, decisions, determinations and findings heretofore made by said Liberty County Joint Planning Commission are hereby ratified and affirmed, and shall remain in force and effect until superseded by formal action of the commission or the respective governing authority having jurisdiction over such matters, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-23. - Unfinished business of the county joint planning commission. 
Notwithstanding the creation of the commission, any applications, petitions, or other business currently pending before the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission, including any scheduled hearings or hearings in progress shall be completed by said Liberty County Joint Planning Commission to the fullest extent practicable on or before February 28, 2005, and any recommendations made or other actions taken by said Liberty County Joint Planning Commission in connection with such pending matters shall be deemed lawful and valid in all respects. Any business of the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission, which remains unfinished as of March 1, 2005, shall be assumed, continued and carried out by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-24. - Creation of governing board; chairman; powers; meetings. 
There is hereby created and established the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission Governing Board, hereinafter referred to as the governing board, which is vested with the authority to and responsibility for appointing the members of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission, approving the budget of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission, and for supervising certain personnel matters relating to the said Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. The governing board shall consist of the following persons or their designees: Chairperson of the county board of commissioners, the Mayor of the City of Hinesville, the Mayor of the City of Allenhurst, the Mayor of the City of Midway, the Mayor of the City of Gum Branch, the Mayor of the City of Walthourville, the Mayor of the City of Riceboro, and the Mayor of the City of Flemington. The chairman and the vice-chairman of the commission shall be ex-officio members of the governing board and shall be permitted to deliberate on all actions of the governing board (excluding his or her appointment), but shall not be a voting member of the governing board and shall not be counted to establish the quorum required to take action. The governing board shall elect from its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, each to serve for a term of one calendar year and until a successor is elected, and who shall be eligible for re-election to such office. The Executive Director of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (or other person designated by the governing board) shall serve as secretary of the governing board, and shall perform such duties in connection with said office as may be designated by the governing board from time to time. The governing board shall meet biannually at the call of the chairperson of the governing board, and at such other times as the chairperson of the governing board or a majority of governing board members shall determine. 
Subject to the protections of sovereign and official immunity (and other doctrines and laws of the State of Georgia), the commission shall be solely liable and responsible for its actions and those of the personnel retained to discharge its obligations and services under this article. In this connection, the commission shall employ an executive director and such other employees as the executive director may recommend and be approved by the governing board. More specifically, the executive director shall have the responsibility of retaining, disciplining, evaluating, discharging, and otherwise managing the personnel of the commission; provided that all such decisions shall be reviewable by the governing board as provided in any subsequently enacted personnel policies that may be established by the executive director and approved by the governing board. Notwithstanding that the executive director shall be deemed employed by the commission, he or she shall be retained, disciplined, evaluated, discharged and otherwise supervised by the governing board. In particular, and not by way of limitation, any personnel action pertaining to the executive director shall require a majority vote of the entire governing board, as well as the affirmative vote of each representative of a member jurisdiction having a funding obligation of 20 percent or more (as determined pursuant to Paragraph 4 of the Intergovernmental Agreement). For purposes of this article and all other circumstances, the governing board shall be deemed a component and part of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (but not subject to its control), and shall have supervisory powers over its personnel as generally set forth herein and in [this article]. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the governing board shall have no involvement in or influence over the recommendations made or other functions performed by the commission unless specifically authorized herein; provided that all decisions regarding the personnel of the commission shall be determined and managed by the governing board and the executive director as generally set forth above or as provided in any subsequently enacted personnel policies that may be established by the executive director and approved by the governing board. 
To assist the governing board in budget and personnel decisions, a standing executive committee of the governing board shall be established that consists of the representative of each member jurisdiction having a funding obligation of 20 percent or more (as determined pursuant to Paragraph 4 of the Intergovernmental Agreement), one representative of a member jurisdiction having a funding obligation of less than 20 percent (as determined pursuant to Paragraph 4 of the Intergovernmental Agreement), the chairman of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission, and the vice-chairman of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. The chairman and the vice-chairman of the commission shall be ex-officio members of the executive committee and shall be permitted to deliberate on all actions of the governing board (excluding any appointments or personnel actions relating to the executive director), but shall not be a voting member of the executive committee and shall not be counted to establish the quorum required to take action. The governing board shall elect from the members of the executive committee a chairman and a vice-chairman of the executive committee, each to serve for a term of one calendar year and until a successor is elected, and who shall be eligible for re-election to such office. The executive director of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (or other person designated by the governing board) shall serve as secretary of the executive committee, and shall perform such duties in connection with said office as may be designated by the executive committee from time to time. The executive committee shall meet at the call of the chairperson of the executive committee, and at such other times as the chairperson of the executive committee or a majority of members shall determine. 
This executive committee shall review all budgets proposed by the executive director and make recommendations to the governing board, who shall approve the final budget and any modifications. The executive committee shall evaluate the performance of the executive director, screen candidates for the executive director when the position is vacant, and recommend any personnel actions relating to the executive director to the governing board for approval. In particular, and not by way of limitation, any personnel action recommended by the committee pertaining to the executive director, or any other personnel, shall require a majority vote of the entire executive committee, as well as the affirmative vote of each representative of a member jurisdiction having a funding obligation of 20 percent or more (as determined pursuant to Paragraph 4 of the Intergovernmental Agreement). 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-25. - Commission membership. 
The commission shall consist of nine members who shall be residents of the county and who shall be appointed by the governing board as provided in this article. The governing board shall appoint no more than four residents of any one municipality within the county, and no more than four residents of the unincorporated areas of the county, to serve as members of the commission. No member of the commission shall be an employee or elected official of any participating local government. All members shall serve until their successors are appointed. 
(a)  Member professional backgrounds. At all times, the governing board shall endeavor to appoint to the commission at least one member who has a professional background in the field of real estate development, at least one member who has a professional background in the field of building and construction, at least one member who has a professional background in business management, at least one member who has a professional background in general industry or industrial management, at least one member who has a professional background in the field of natural resources or environmental protection; provided that the governing board is not strictly obligated to appoint members from the aforementioned fields, but shall in all instances appoint members it determines to be the most qualified and appropriate, taking into consideration the desirability of having members from the various fields enumerated above. The governing board, in its sole discretion, shall determine what the professional background of any member is and whether a member satisfies any requirements set forth in this subsection. 
(b)  Original appointments; current appointments. Original appointments to the commission shall be made by the governing board or its predecessor on or before December 20, 2004, and shall initially include three members who shall serve for a term of one year, three members who shall serve for a term of two years, and three members who shall serve for a term of three years. All regular appointments thereafter shall be for a term of three years; provided that any member may be appointed to successive terms. Those members of the commission appointed by the governing board and serving as of the adoption of this article shall continue for the term of their office and until their successors are appointed. 
(c)  Quorum; voting. With respect to both the governing board and the commission, an affirmative vote of a majority of the members of each such body, entitled to vote, and present shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business; provided, however, that in the event such affirmative majority vote of the membership of such body is made impossible due to either (i) temporary vacancy on the board, or (ii) refusal of any member due to a conflict of interest as determined by such member, an affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining members of such body not otherwise unable to participate as set forth in clauses (i) and (ii) hereinabove shall be sufficient to permit the conduct of all business. 
(d)  Vacancies. Any vacancy in the membership of the commission arising at any time and from any cause, including, without limitation, the authorization of an increase in the number of members, or the death, resignation, incapacity, or removal of any incumbent member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing board. 
(e)  Removal. The governing board may remove any member of the commission for due cause after written notice and a public hearing. Without limiting the foregoing, the governing board may consider for removal any member of the commission who is absent from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission or more than one-third of the commission's meetings, regular or special, that occur within a calendar year. The governing board may elect not to remove a member on the grounds of excessive absence if that member demonstrates that their absence was for good cause as determined by the governing board of if such absence is otherwise excused by the laws of the State of Georgia. The findings and determinations of the governing board with respect to such matters shall be conclusive and absolute. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-26. - Compensation. 
All members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-27. - Officers. 
The commission shall elect from its members a chairman and a vice-chairman, each to serve for a term of one calendar year and until a successor is elected, and who shall be eligible for re-election to such office. The executive director or such other person designated by the commission shall serve as the secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-28. - Planning staff. 
Subject to the approval of the budget by the governing board, the executive director may retain such employees and contract with such consultants, and provide for their compensation and duties, as the executive director deems necessary for the work of the commission, within the budget provided for the operation of the commission by the participating local governments, or other funds lawfully available to it. The initial planning staff shall consist of a planning director and a junior planner, who shall be those persons holding equivalent positions within the Hinesville Area Metropolitan Planning Organization as of January 1, 2005; a zoning administrator and planning and zoning technician, who shall be those persons holding equivalent positions within the City of Hinesville Planning and Zoning Commission as of January 1, 2005; and an administrative assistant, who shall be that person holding an equivalent position within the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission as of January 1, 2005; all as determined by the respective entities presently employing such persons; or such other persons and positions as are currently employed by the commission as of the date of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-29. - Meetings and records. 
Meetings of the commission shall be held at such times and locations within the county as the chairman or majority of commission members shall determine; provided that regular meetings of the commission shall be held at least once each month on the third Tuesday in the county commissioners' hearing room (or such other location as designated by the commission and consented to by the county board of commissioners), Subject to the provisions of this article and the laws of the State of Georgia, the commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of its meetings and the transaction of its business, and shall keep records of its resolutions, motions, transactions, findings, determinations, and recommendations. All meetings and records of the commission shall be open and available to the public in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq., and the Georgia Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. This section shall not be construed as requiring the commission to meet on a legal holiday or when a meeting is made impossible due to circumstances beyond the control of the commission. In such cases, the commission shall meet as soon as practicable following its regular meeting date, but in no event later than three business days from such date. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-30. - Finances; fiscal agent. 
The commission is authorized to make such expenditures as its deems necessary for its operation, which, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts budgeted by the commission and approved and appropriated for such purpose by the participating local governments. Subject to the provisions of the intergovernmental agreement, the City of Hinesville, or other designated entity, shall be the fiscal agent for the commission, and shall pay for the operation and maintenance of the commission and all of its staff and activities as authorized in the intergovernmental agreement. In accordance with such intergovernmental agreement, every participating local government shall reimburse the City of Hinesville, or other designated entity, on a periodic basis for its pro-rata share of the commission's expenses. Subject to the provisions of this article and the aforementioned intergovernmental agreement, all checks or orders of the commission for the withdrawal of money from banking institutions shall be signed in accordance with the commission's duly adopted operating procedures. The fiscal budget period for the commission shall be the 12-month period beginning on July 1 on each calendar year and ending on June 30 of the following calendar year. The executive director shall submit a recommended budget to the governing board for their consideration and approval no later than April 1 of each calendar year. For those governments that operate on fiscal periods different from that of the commission, the executive director may provide those governments estimates of the funding expected from them for their specific fiscal budget period. The governing board shall approve a budget for the commission no later than June 1 of each year. The executive director shall submit to the executive committee on or before the tenth day of the month following each calendar quarter (or at such other times as may be specified by the executive committee) a summary of the expenditures of the commission for the previous period. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-31. - Powers, duties, and responsibilities. 
Subject to the direction and control of the participating local governments, the commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(a)  Conduct careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and prepare and recommend to the participating local governments such plans for the physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, and/or general welfare, including efficiency and economy in the development of its jurisdiction. 
(b)  Prepare and maintain a comprehensive plan or parts thereof, or cause to be prepared such plan or parts thereof, for the development of or all any each of the participating local jurisdictions, and make recommendations on any amendments thereto. 
(c)  Prepare and recommend to participating local governments the adoption of any zoning ordinance, or resolution, or amendments or revisions to any local use or land development regulations, including zoning ordinances and maps, subdivision regulations, special ordinances, and the like, which shall be subject to the approval of the affected jurisdiction in accordance with the laws of the State of Georgia and the ordinances and resolutions of said jurisdiction. 
(d)  Administer zoning and other land use regulations in whatever role is delegated to it by any participating local government. To this end, the commission may review applications for zoning map amendments or applications for land use approval and provide a recommendation to the participating local government. However, the commission shall not be delegated any legislative authority such as the final approval of zoning map amendments or conditional or special uses. 
(e)  Review and approve subdivision plats; provided, however, that if the commission is given authority to grant approval of final plats, said approval shall not constitute acceptance of public improvements which is a power reserved by the participating local governments. 
(f)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to any participating local government, a plat or plats, or a corridor map or maps, showing the location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets and linear open spaces and recreational areas, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within the local jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof. 
(g)  Make, publish, and distribute maps, plans and reports and recommendations relating to the planning and development of any local jurisdiction to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations and citizens. 
(h)  Conduct all hearings, and prepare all notices and advertisements, in connection with any zoning and other land use matters delegated to the commission hereunder, to include, without limitation, such hearings, notices and related procedural matters minimally required by the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. with respect to any such matters. 
(i)  Cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from, federal, state, or local, public or semi-public agencies or private individuals or corporations, and expend such funds and carry out cooperative undertakings with said agencies, individuals, or corporations in furtherance of the public purposes enumerated herein. 
(j)  Perform such additional functions and services in connection with planning and zoning matters as may be required or called for from time to time by the participating local governments, and exercise, in general, such other powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes of this article. 
The authorization to undertake these functions shall not be considered a mandate for the commission to perform all of these functions, nor shall it prohibit the discretion of any participating local government, by law or resolution, from assigning one or more of these functions to a staff member of that government, or to another agency or commission. The powers and duties enumerated above shall be liberally construed to effectuate the intent and purpose of this article and the commission. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-32. - Incorporation in zoning ordinance. 
To the extent required by the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq., this article shall be deemed a part of the city zoning ordinance for all purposes; provided, however, that this article may be published and appear elsewhere within this Code and its inclusion in such other Code section shall in no way invalidate the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Sec. 54-33. - No further review or recommendation. 
Notwithstanding any provision in this Code or any appendix thereto or related ordinance or resolution, this article and the actions taken in accordance herewith shall not require the review, recommendation or other action on the part of the Liberty County Joint Planning Commission or any other body or agency. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § I, 6-9-2009) 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of municipalities to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); municipal authority to own, operate, maintain water/sewage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; local solid waste management plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20; creation of municipal solid waste management authority, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-53; prohibition against public littering, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-43 et seq., O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 58-1—58-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS AND YARD VEGETATION 

Sec. 58-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels, and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term "municipal solid waste" includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final disposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § I, 9-24-1996) 
Sec. 58-20. - Placement and disposal of yard trimmings; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § II, 9-24-1996) 
Sec. 58-21. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
(a)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting or other handling. 
(b)  Yard trimmings must be: 
(1)  Sorted and stockpiled; 
(2)  Chipped; 
(3)  Composted; 
(4)  Used as mulch; or 
(5)  Otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
(Ord. No. 96-2, § III, 9-24-1996) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— An ordinance of April 11, 2017, amended the Code by repealing former art. II, §§ 62-19—62-22, and adding a new art. II. Former art. II pertained to the lodging tax, and derived from an ordinance of November 28, 1983. 
State Law reference— Excise tax on rooms, lodging and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 62-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this ordinance and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City. The City of Flemington and, variously, the incorporated territory of Flemington wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-50, et seq. 
City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk of the city or his/her designee. 
Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period. The calendar month of any year. 
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this ordinance, as provided for by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-50 et seq., specifically 48-13-51. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-20. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 4. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-21. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 4. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or causes to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this sub-section. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-22. - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, no tax shall be collected from an occupant upon the fees charged for any rooms, lodging, or accommodations. 
(1)  No tax shall be levied for the use of meeting rooms; 
(2)  After the occupant has become a permanent resident of the hotel; 
(3)  From an occupant who certifies in writing that he or she is staying in such accommodations as a result of his or her residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; 
(4)  From the United States, Georgia or any instrumentality thereof; 
(5)  From any official or employee of the state, its units or local government or any instrumentality of the state, when travelling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; 
(6)  From a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State; 
(7)  When occupancy is provided without charge in money or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-23. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register no later than 30 days after the date that this ordinance becomes effective. 
Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. 
The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. 
The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-24. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month succeeding each respective monthly period in which such tax was collected. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof until paid in full. 
(c)  Rate of interest on past due taxes. Except as otherwise expressly provided by law, taxes owed the state or any local taxing jurisdiction shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the board of governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H.15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H.15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. For the purposes of this Code section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. This Code section shall also apply to alcoholic beverage taxes. 
State Law reference— Rate of interest on past due taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
(d)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(e)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the state commissioner of revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(f)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-25. - Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file. 
On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-26. - Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for more than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(b)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-27. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he/she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his/her possession or that may come into his/her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made for the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 62-24(b). 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-28. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 62-27(c). 
(b)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate as provided in section 62-24 from and after the twentieth day of the month succeeding the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax, penalties and interest. 
(c)  Notice of determination, service of. Promptly after making his/her determination, the city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his/her determination, which notice may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed in section 62-27(c). 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-29. - Collection of tax by the city. 
Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(1)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this ordinance sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(2)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this ordinance sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(3)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(4)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-30. - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this ordinance, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Sec. 62-31. - Violations. 
Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 62-21 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 62-24, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. 
Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. of 4-11-2017) 
Chapter 66 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Communications Act, 47 U.S.C.A. 151 et seq.; power to grant franchise, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); theft of telecommunications services, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS 

Sec. 66-19. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to impose certain permitting requirements for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennas; to encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; to minimize the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the city and surrounding areas; to encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; to locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; to encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and to enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.1), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-20. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
(a)  Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. The word "erected" includes the words "constructed," "located" or "relocated." The word "map" or "zoning map" means the zoning maps of the city. The word "parcel" includes the word "plot" or "lot." The word "person" includes the words "individuals," "firms," "partnerships," "corporations," "associations," "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. The word "used" or "occupied" includes the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(b)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the zoning administrator of the city or the administrator's designee as provided by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
Alternative tower structure means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, on-premises signs, outdoor advertising signs, water storage tanks, and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Collocation means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need (as informed by industry standards). 
Governing authority means the city council of the City of Flemington. 
Height , when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower structure or appurtenance. 
Preexisting towers and antennas means structures as set forth in section 66-21(d). 
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified by the city council from time to time. 
Telecommunications facility means any tower, alternative tower structure, antenna, or other similar structure, facility or appurtenance governed by this article. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures. 
Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.2), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-21. - Applicability. 
(a)  Generally. Except as set forth in section 66-21(c), the provisions, requirements and limitations of this article shall govern the location of all wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave, radio, or similar transmission towers or antennas installed within the jurisdiction of the city council. The provisions, requirements and limitations of this article shall only apply to wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave, radio, or similar transmission towers or antennas installed within the jurisdiction of the city council. In addition, any provisions, requirements or limitations contained elsewhere within the zoning ordinance of the city, set forth in appendix A to this Code, which directly conflict with the administration of this article or the provisions, requirements or limitations hereof, shall be inapplicable to this article. 
(b)  Governmental exemption. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article, the provisions of this article shall not apply to the city council's properties, facilities or structures. Private facilities and structures placed upon the city council's property shall be governed by a lease agreement or similar instrument between the city council and the provider. 
(c)  Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 75 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna; provided, however, only one such tower or antenna per residence shall be excluded from this article. 
(d)  Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this article, other than section 66-22(i)—(k) and section 66-27, and the requirements of section 66-22(d) (except subsection (d)(6)), (f) and (g)) within six months from the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas;" provided, however, that the placement of antennas on any nonconforming structure shall not create a vested right for the continued use of the structures should the nonconforming use cease. If an additional antenna is collocated upon a preexisting tower after adoption of this article, then the requirements of section 66-22(d) (except subsection (d)(6)), (f) and (g)) shall be met as part of the permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.3), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-22. - General provisions. 
(a)  Principal or accessory use. A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structure. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including but not limited to setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use of structure. 
(b)  Collocation; design requirements. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all towers, except amateur radio towers, shall be designed to accommodate the collocation of cellular telecommunication antennas according to the following: 
(1)  For towers up to 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater; 
(2)  For towers greater than 150 feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Collocation; availability of suitable existing structures. No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the administrator and/or city council (as the case may be) that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of the following: 
(1)  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area which will allow for the effective operation of the proposed antenna (as informed by industry standards); 
(2)  That existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to allow for the effective operation of the proposed antenna (as informed by industry standards); 
(3)  That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment (as informed by industry standards); 
(4)  That the applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antennas on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna, and such interference cannot be effectively remedied; 
(5)  That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing substantially exceed the cost and requirements of new tower development and are otherwise entirely unreasonable; 
(6)  That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable, other than economic reasons. 
(d)  Aesthetics. The guidelines set forth in this subsection shall govern the design and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this article. 
(1)  Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. Any equipment or cabinet that supports telecommunication facilities must be concealed from public view and made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be concealed from public view by using landscaping and materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(3)  For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. The lighting shall be dimmed or changed to red lights from sunset to sunrise. 
(5)  No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower or alternative tower structure within the city. 
(6)  To the extent practical, telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the city council or by any state or federal law or agency. 
(7)  Access to the tower site shall be restricted so as to minimize visibility of the access. Where possible, existing roads shall be used. Where no roads exist, access shall follow the existing contours of the land so as to minimize the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. 
(8)  Such other additional requirements as the administrator and/or city council, as the case may be, shall reasonably require to minimize the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. 
(e)  Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers: 
(1)  Towers shall be set back a minimum distance equal to the height of the tower from its base to any public right-of-way or occupied structure, or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower unless the owner of the adjoining property whose property is within the fall zone otherwise consents in writing. 
(2)  Guy wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements. 
(3)  Towers shall not be located closer than 5,280 feet from any existing tower; provided, however, that the administrator or city council may waive this requirement when it is determined that the placement of another tower within said 5,280 feet is technologically required or visually preferable. This requirement shall not apply to amateur radio towers. 
(f)  Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chainlink, wood or other approved alternative. 
(g)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all towers: 
(1)  Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and eight feet in height at planting and located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. 
(2)  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
(3)  Landscaping shall be maintained by the provider and shall be subject to periodic review by the administrator to ensure proper maintenance. Failure to maintain landscaping shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
Amateur radio towers and antennas or receive-only antennas shall not be subject to this subsection unless specifically required by the city council by virtue of other provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(h)  Maintenance impact. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street, utilizing existing access to the property on which such facility is to be located, where possible. 
(i)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the permittee, owner or the lessee of the tower and/or antenna governed by this article shall bring such tower and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring such tower and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall be deemed to be a declaration of abandonment of the tower and/or antenna and constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's, permittee's, or lessee's expense. Any such removal by the city council shall be in the manner provided by section 5-84 of the Code of Ordinances of Liberty County, Georgia, governing unsafe or abandoned structures. 
(j)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the administrator concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, said party shall have 15 days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within 15 days shall be deemed a declaration of abandonment of the tower and constitute grounds for removal of the tower as provided in section 5-84 of the Code of Ordinances of Liberty County, Georgia, governing unsafe or abandoned structures. Prior to the removal of any tower, the administrator may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the compliance period referenced in this subsection. 
(k)  Change of ownership notification. Upon the transfer of an ownership interest in any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the administrator of the transaction in writing within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.4), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-23. - Application procedures. 
(a)  General application requirements. Application for a permit for any telecommunications facility shall be made to the administrator by the person, company, organization, or duly authorized agent thereof, that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The administrator is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. Except for a collocation information submittal under subsection (b) of this section, the following information shall be submitted when applying for any permit required by this article and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)  A site plan to scale specifying the location of the telecommunications facility, transmission building and/or other accessory use, access, parking, fence, landscaped area, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and, if requested by the administrator, a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software utilized by Flemington, Georgia. 
(2)  A landscaped plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 66-22(g). 
(3)  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
(4)  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(5)  Report from a professional qualified engineer licensed in the state, or other appropriate qualified industry expert, documenting the following: 
a.  Tower or antenna type, height, and design; 
b.  Engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
c.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including numbers and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
d.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower or alternative tower structure; 
e.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; and 
f.  Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC. 
(6)  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network, a description of the distance between the telecommunications facility sites, and a description of how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network (i.e., whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity). 
(7)  If the proposed site is zoned R-1 through R-4, B-1, B-2, or PUD, applicants must describe why an alternate site zoned A-1, AR-1 or I-1 was not proposed by identifying: 
a.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure such an alternate site and why such efforts were unsuccessful; 
b.  Why such an alternate site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible; and 
c.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area. 
The administrator will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease or similar agreement. The administrator shall carefully weight such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
(8)  A utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power line easements impacting the proposed tower site. 
(9)  Any other information which may be requested by the administrator to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(b)  Tower collocation information submittals. Any person or entity collocating an antenna or antennas which will add no more than ten feet to the height of the tower and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a tower for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following information only: 
(1)  The name of the person or entity collocating the antenna. 
(2)  The name of the owner of the tower. 
(3)  The tower's permit number. 
(4)  The location of the tower. 
(5)  The remaining structural capacity of the tower. 
(6)  Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC. 
(7)  Such other information identified in subsection (a) of this section as may reasonably be required by the administrator. 
(c)  Inventory of existing sites. To facilitate the collocation of antennas, each applicant seeking to locate a new tower, alternative tower structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure shall provide to the administrator an inventory of its existing towers or alternative tower structures. The inventory shall include all such structures that are within the jurisdiction of the city council; and shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, tower type and general suitability for antenna collocation of each tower, and other pertinent information as may be required by the administrator. The administrator may make such information available to members of the public, to include, without limitation, other organizations seeking to locate towers or antennas within the city, and in such form and manner as the administrator deems appropriate; provided, however, that the administrator is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or otherwise suitable. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.5), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-24. - Administrative approvals. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The administrator may administratively approve the uses set forth in section 66-23 as provided by this section. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this article and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
(2)  The administrator shall respond to each application within 45 days of its receipt by either approving, approving with conditions, or denying the application. One 45-day extension of this review period may be exercised by the administrator if such additional time is deemed necessary to adequately assess the request. If the administrator fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of 90 days, the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
(3)  As part of any administrative approval, the administrator may administratively reduce setback requirements by up to ten percent to compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels. 
(4)  Any decision by the administrator that results in the denial of a request to place, construct, or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection (d) of this section for uses allowed by administrative approval, the administrator shall consider the applicable factors set forth in this article, to include section 66-25(e), in acting upon an application for administrative approval. 
(b)  Application; contents; fee. All applications for administrative approval of a permit shall be submitted to the administrator. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 66-23. An application for administrative approval of a permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in section 66-23. An application fee shall be charged by the administrator in an amount stated in section 66-28. 
(c)  Collocation of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a tower or placement of an antenna shall be required to collocate upon an existing tower or alternative tower structure. An exception to collocation shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for collocation does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 66-22(c). 
(d)  Uses allowed by administrative approval. The following uses may be approved by the administrator after conducting an administrative review: 
(1)  If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna collocation, as required in subsection (c) of this section, is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, construction of a new tower up to a height of 300 feet, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, may be permitted in the following zoning districts: 
a.  Agricultural (A-1); 
b.  Agricultural-residential (AR-1); and 
c.  Industrial (I-1); 
provided, however, that all structures shall meet the setback, screening and buffer requirements contained herein, together with such additional conditions which may be reasonably imposed by the administrator to minimize the adverse effects of such placement on surrounding properties. 
(2)  So long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten feet to the height of the existing alternative tower structure: 
a.  Installation of an antenna on an existing alternative tower structure in any zoning district, and further including the placement of additional structures or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, provided that if such installation is proposed on an existing alternative tower structure located in zoning districts R-1 through R-4, the applicant shall be required to: 
1.  Place all additional structures or other supporting equipment within the existing tower compound; and 
2.  Meet such additional conditions which may be reasonably imposed by the administrator to minimize the adverse effects of such placement on surrounding properties; or 
b.  Installation of an antenna on an existing county-owned alternative tower structure in any zoning district, provided a lease or similar agreement authorizing the antenna has been approved by the city council. 
(3)  So long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten feet to the height of the existing tower: 
a.  Installation of an antenna on an existing tower of any height in any zoning district, and further including the placement of additional structures or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, provided that if such installation is proposed on an existing tower located in zoning districts R-1 through R-4, the applicant shall be required to: 
1.  Place all additional structures or other supporting equipment within the existing tower compound; and 
2.  Meet such additional conditions which may be reasonably imposed by the administrator to minimize the adverse effects of such placement on surrounding properties; or 
b.  Installation of an antenna on an existing tower located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the county in any zoning district, and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, provided a lease or similar agreement authorizing the tower has been approved by the city council. 
(4)  Construction of a new tower up to a height of 300 feet, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, if placed upon property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the county in any zoning district except R-1 through R-4, providing a lease or similar agreement authorizing the tower has been approved by the city council. 
(e)  Public notice/appeal. 
(1)  At least 15 days prior to the issuance of a permit for the construction of a tower or antenna as an administratively approved use, except for collocation permits, the administrator shall cause a sign to be conspicuously posted on the property and the publication of a public notice in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements appear. Said public notice shall state the nature of the application, height of the proposed structure, street address of the proposed location, or other identifying information necessary to inform the public of the proposed location. The expense of the public notice shall be borne by the applicant. 
(2)  If during the public notice period a written objection to the permit application is filed, the validity of the application and all pertinent documentation shall be determined by the city council. Said objection must make reference to the specific section of the article which the objector contends is not met and provide supporting documentation therefor. The objection shall be placed on the first available agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council following the expiration of the 15-day appeal period. The city council shall dispense with the objection by either: 
a.  A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this article, which shall result in the issuance of a permit as set forth herein. 
b.  A determination that the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria of this article. Applications so found must, as a result, be processed through the conditional use permit process set forth in section 66-25. 
c.  Review of the decision of the city council shall be made within 30 days and may be appealed as provided by law. 
(f)  Appeal of administrative determination. If a permit application for a tower as an administratively permitted use is determined by the administrator not to meet all applicable criteria of this article, the applicant may appeal the determination of the administrator to the governing authority in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the city. The city council shall dispense with the appeal by either: 
(1)  A determination that the application is valid and meets all applicable criteria of this article, which shall result in the issuance of a permit as set forth herein. 
(2)  A determination that the application does not satisfy all applicable criteria of this article. Applications which do not satisfy all applicable criteria must, as a result, be processed through the conditional use permit process set forth in section 66-25. 
(3)  Review of the decision of the city council shall be made within 30 days to a court a of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.6), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-25. - Conditional use permit required. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  If the proposed location, height, setback or other aspect of a proposed telecommunications facility cannot comply with the minimum requirements established in this article or is otherwise ineligible for administrative approval pursuant to section 66-24, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this article and all other applicable codes and ordinances, unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity. 
(2)  In granting a conditional use permit, the city council may impose additional conditions to the extent that it concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse effects from the proposed tower on adjoining or nearby properties as set out in subsection (e) of this section. 
(b)  Application; contents; fee. All applications for conditional use permits shall be submitted to the administrator who shall forward the same to the city council for its consideration. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 66-23. An application for a conditional use permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in section 66-23. An application fee shall be charged by the administrator in the amount stated in section 66-28. 
(c)  Collocation of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a tower or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to collocate upon an existing tower structure. An exception to collocation shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing tower suitable for collocation does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available as set forth in section 66-22(c). 
(d)  Public hearing. Before taking action upon the proposed conditional use permit, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the matter. At least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the city council shall cause the following notice requirements to be instituted by the administrator: 
(1)  A sign shall be erected in a conspicuous location on or adjacent to the property under consideration. The sign shall state the time, place, location, and purpose of the public hearing. 
(2)  A letter shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all property owners of record of abutting parcels, and to all property owners of residentially-used parcels lying in whole or in part within a distance of two times the height of the proposed tower as measured from its base (as such property owners may be reasonably ascertained by the administrator), giving notice of the public hearing. The letter shall state the same information as required for the sign. 
(3)  A public notice shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of the hearing. 
(4)  Subsections (d)(2) and (3) of this section shall be the responsibility of, and at the expense of, the applicant. 
(e)  Considerations in approval or denial of conditional use permits. Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The following factors may be taken into consideration in acting upon a conditional use permit application under the provisions of this article: 
(1)  The height and setbacks of the proposed tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof; 
(2)  The proximity of the tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  The surrounding topography; 
(5)  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  The design of the tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  The proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)  The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures for antenna collocation; 
(9)  The impact of the proposed tower, antenna, and equipment and structures in support thereof upon scenic views and visual quality of the surrounding area; 
(10)  The needs of the applicant as balanced against the detrimental effects on surrounding properties; 
(11)  The impact of the proposed tower or antenna on adjacent and nearby properties; and 
(12)  Such other considerations as may be implicated by the provisions of this article. 
(f)  Requirements for issuance of conditional use permit. The conditional use permit may be issued by the city council only upon satisfaction of the following requirements: 
(1)  A proper application filed in accordance with the requirements of section 66-23; 
(2)  The application is otherwise in compliance with the conditions for the proposed conditional use required by this section; 
(3)  The applicant complies with the conditions imposed by the city council for the purpose of reducing the harmful effects of the use on surrounding uses and ensuring compatibility with surrounding uses; 
(4)  The city council determines that the benefits and need for the proposed conditional use are greater than any possible depreciating effects or damages to neighboring or nearby properties; and 
(5)  All fees and other expenses required have been paid in full. 
(g)  Independent expert review. The administrator or city council may engage a licensed professional engineer or other qualified industry professional as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant for a conditional use permit and render an opinion regarding any concerns about the proposal, including, but not limited to, structural integrity and the feasibility of alternative sites or collocation; provided, however, that prior to seeking the review of an independent expert, the zoning administrator or city council shall convey its concerns to the applicant in writing and shall allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. If the applicant is unable to address those concerns to the satisfaction of the administrator or city council, the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, following the receipt of the letter to such effect, in which to modify the application to alleviate the administrator's or city council's concerns or withdraw the application altogether. If the applicant fails to so modify or withdraw the application within the required time, the administrator or city council may proceed to engage a licensed professional engineer to conduct the independent expert review and the expert's reasonable fees, costs and expenses shall be paid by the applicant; provided that the administrator or city council shall give the applicant written notice of its intent to do so. The expert's opinion shall not necessarily be determinative, but shall be a significant factor to be considered in granting or denying the application. No permit shall be issued until the applicant has paid all such fees, costs and expenses incurred under this section. 
(h)  Resubmittal of conditional use application. An application for a conditional use permit which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of six months, and then only if the applicant can document a substantial change in need for a tower or antenna at the same location. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.7), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-26. - Towers and antennas in residential and environmentally fragile areas. 
(a)  Placement of towers and antenna in residential areas. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tower (to also include the use of an alternative tower structure) shall be permitted in zoning districts R-1 through R-4 or within 2,000 feet of the boundary line of any property zoned R-1 through R-4 or any single-family residential dwelling located upon property not zoned R-1 through R-4 unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service that cannot be overcome by any other means including, without limitation, planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity; provided, however, that a tower (or use of an alternative tower structure) may, absent such showing, be permitted within 2,000 feet of any residential dwelling located on property not zoned R-1 through R-4 upon the written consent of the owner of such residentially used property. Applications for placement of a tower (or use of an alternative tower structure) within 2,000 feet of the external boundary line of any property zoned R-1 through R-4 shall be available only through the conditional use permit process. 
(b)  Placement of towers or antennas in DM-1 district. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tower or antenna shall be permitted in a zoning district classified dunes and marshland (DM-1). 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.8), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-27. - Removal of abandoned towers and antennas. 
(a)  Notice of abandoned antenna and structures. The owner or lessee of a tower or antenna shall promptly notify the administrator of its intent to abandon, or the abandonment of, any tower or antenna. 
(b)  Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. Any tower, antenna, or other equipment and structure in support thereof that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove the structure within 90 days of such abandonment. If said tower or antenna is not removed within said 90 days, the city council may, in the manner provided in this Code governing unsafe and abandoned structures, take such action as may be deemed necessary to remove, or cause to be removed, such tower, antenna, or other equipment and structure in support thereof at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the tower. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.9), 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 66-28. - Application and permit fees. 
The following fees will be required of any applicant submitting an application under this article: 
(1)  Administrative approval of new tower construction. An application for construction of a new tower up to a height of 300 feet in A-1, AR-1 or I-1 zoning districts, otherwise eligible for administrative approval, shall be $1,000.00. 
(2)  Administrative approval of antenna location on tower or alternative tower structure. An application for location of an antenna on an existing tower or alternative tower structure (so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten feet to the height of the existing tower or structure), otherwise eligible for administrative approval, shall be $250.00. 
(3)  Conditional use permit for construction of new tower. An application for construction of a new tower (including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna) not eligible for administrative approval shall be $2,000.00. 
(4)  Conditional use permit for location of antenna on tower or alternative tower structure. An application for location of an antenna on an existing tower or alternative tower structure not eligible for administrative approval shall be $500.00. 
(5)  Building permit fees. In addition to the application fees set forth herein, the applicable construction and utility inspection permit fees in effect at the time of the application for the permit shall apply. The foregoing permit fees shall also be in addition to any and all other costs and expenses required by this article to be borne by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2000-1, § I(1.10), 10-3-2000) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Uniform vehicle and traffic provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-370 et seq.; municipal court jurisdiction over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21; municipal court jurisdiction over persons operating motor vehicle without valid license or registration, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-13-22, 40-5-124; alternative sentencing for traffic violations, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; uniform regulations regarding signs, signals, markings, and other traffic control devices, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50; parking provisions and procedure, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; local authority to regulate parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

Sec. 70-1. - Speed limits—On-system roads. 

 
  
*SCHOOL ZONES ARE EFFECTIVE*  Morning School Days Only from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time  Afternoon School Days Only from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time 
(Ord. of 6-14-2005) 
Sec. 70-2. - Same—Off-system roadways. 

 
(Ord. of 6-14-2005) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed in this appendix is the city's zoning ordinance as readopted by an ordinance adopted on November 1, 2006, and effective on such date. The ordinance was originally adopted on February 13, 2002. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, the same system of headings and catchlines and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INTRODUCTION AND ENACTMENT 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance, City of Flemington, Georgia." 
Sec. 1.2. - Enactment. 
Whereas the city council of Flemington has acted pursuant to the authority as amended by the regular 1973 session of the General Assembly of Georgia, the following ordinance to be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of the City of Flemington, Georgia," is hereby adopted and ordained effective the 12th day of February, 2002. As part of this ordinance so enacted into law is the "Official Zoning Map of Flemington", said map being identified by the inscription "Zoning Map of Flemington" adopted on the 12 th day of February, 2002; and signed by the Mayor of the City of Flemington. 
Sec. 1.3. - Purposes. 
The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth are made in accordance with the comprehensive land use plan of Liberty County, with consideration for the character of the City of Flemington, its various parts and structures, and in order to promote, protect and facilitate the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, and of the public generally. The ordinance is designed to help prevent the danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property or other dangers. The ordinance is also intended to support the following community development objectives: 
1.3.1  Appearance. To improve the appearance and utility of the land and structures in the city and to control the filling of flood plains, misuses of marshlands and stream banks, use of signs, and screening of junkyards and other areas of bad appearance. 
1.3.2  Education. To help maintain public and private school systems, capable of maximizing a student's potential, including large administrative districts with diversified educational opportunities. To better educate people of all ages, races, incomes, mental capabilities and physical handicaps. 
1.3.3  Transportation. To create an integrated transportation system, by using public transportation to its maximum effectiveness, and integrating it with private transportation, and to prepare and obtain acceptance of a continuing transportation system for the city and particularly to assist low income groups and elderly citizens in obtaining better transportation to jobs and shopping areas. 
1.3.4  Recreation and tourism. Provide sufficient recreation facilities, particularly at the community level, and promote tourism to the greatest extent possible. 
1.3.5  Flooding. To provide additional flood protection for critical areas, and to discharge development in flood prone areas that would be damaged by flooding. 
1.3.6  Housing. To provide an adequate supply of safe and sanitary housing in a decent environment for all income groups, regardless of race, color or background, including the rehabilitation of existing structures. 
1.3.7  Crime prevention. To reduce the incidence of crime to the extent possible. 
1.3.8  Economics. To increase the tax base by providing land for commercial and industrial growth where feasible, and minimize the conflict between industrial and commercial growth and residential or public development. 
1.3.9  Utilities. To promote the provision of public and private utilities. 
1.3.10  Land use and comprehensive plans. To use the zoning ordinance as a tool to help implement the land use and comprehensive plans. 
1.3.11  Health. To improve the health of the residents of the city by controlling pollution, separating new residences for adequate light, sun and air, and providing adequate treatment facilities at the lowest possible cost. 
1.3.12  Compliance. Except as hereinafter provided, no land, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof or other structure shall be located, erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged, converted, altered or moved except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located, and in conformity with all duly ordained ordinances, resolutions and subdivision regulations of the city. No yard space or minimum area required for a building or use shall be considered as any part of the yard space or minimum area for another building or use. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - Schedule. 
For the purpose of the administration and enforcement of this ordinance, and unless otherwise stated in this ordinance, the following words shall have a meaning as indicated herein. 
Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, words used in the plural number shall include the singular number; the word "shall" is mandatory, not directory. 
Sec. 2.2. - Definitions. 
Abandoned sign. A sign which identifies, describes, directs attention to or gives direction for locating any business, service, or activity no longer properly licensed and in operation, or advertises any product no longer being marketed; or a sign that is not maintained in accordance with section 4.4.3 and 4.4.4 of this ordinance; or a sign for which no legal owner can be found. However, the frame of an abandoned sign shall not be required to be removed if it conforms to all the applicable terms of the ordinance. 
Accessory building. A secondary residence, garage, or other building or structure subordinated to and not forming an integral part of the main or principal building on a lot or parcel but pertaining to the use of the main building. 
Advertising signs. A surface whereon advertising material is set in public view, including reference to any use off premises whereon it is displayed or posted. 
Alcoholic beverage. All alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Alley. A narrow thoroughfare dedicated or used for public passageway up to 20 feet in width, which usually abuts the rear of the premises, or upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and which is not generally used as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, which is not used for general traffic, and which is not otherwise officially designated as a street. A way that affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alterations. Any change in the arrangement of a building, including any work affecting the structural parts of a building; or an enlargement; or any change in wiring, plumbing, heating, or cooling system; and includes the words "to alter" and "alter". 
Animated/flashing sign. Any sign the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effect. Any sign that uses fading, swiping, or other animated transition method, or uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. Further, any sign that has any moveable components, e.g. rotating sign face. Such signs may require electrical energy, but shall also include wind-actuated devices including, but not limited to, flags, spinners, banners, aerial devices, inflatable objects, and other attention-getting devices. For the purposes of this article, illuminated signs, whose message indicate time, temperature, and date, shall not be considered flashing signs as long as each message remains fixed for ten seconds and the transition shall occur within three seconds or less without any animated effects like fading or swiping. 
Apartment building. A building which is used or intended to be used as a home or residence for more than two families living in separate quarters. 
Automotive sales and services. The sale or storage of new or used automobiles, including paint and body repair shops. 
Awning and canopy sign. A sign located, imposed, or attached flat on an awning or other roof-like cover extending over a doorway or a window for shelter or for beautification of the building. 
Banner. Any sign of lightweight fabric, paper, canvas, plastic, or similar material on which a message, slogan, or emblem is painted, drawn, or otherwise projected, colored or shaped for the purpose of advertising or drawing attention to a product, object, activity, or facility, to include, but not limited to, such things as trash receptacle covers, tire covers, rack covers, changeable or removable paper, cardboard, cloth, canvas or plastic displays advertising products, services, or facilities obtainable or available on the premises. When mounted, banners shall remain stationary and not flap or wave in a manner similar to a flag. 
Beneficial user. Any person deriving the proceeds or other advantages from the erection or operation of a sign. 
Beacon/searchlight/spotlight. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
Billboard. A freestanding sign not more than 25 feet in height and a sign face not to exceed 300 square feet in area. No more than one sign face shall face in any one direction; i.e. there shall be a maximum of two sign faces per location which allows for back-to-back signs or signs in a "V" formation at an angle not to exceed 60 degrees. 
Boathouse. A house or shed for sheltering one or more boats. 
Boundary of district. The centerline of a street or right-of-way or the centerline of an alleyway between the rear or side property lines, or, where no alley or passageway exists, the rear or side property lines of all lots bordering on any zoning district limits or any zoning district boundary shown on the maps adopted by section 4.2. 
Brewpub. Any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in § 3-5-36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36] for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. As used in this article, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
Buildable area. That portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear yard requirements required for the district have been subtracted from the total lot area. 
Building. A building is any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls, having no communicating doors or windows or any similar opening, and being erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind, and having a foundation to which it is anchored. 
Building height. The height of a building with a gabled or hip roof shall be the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished building site to the top of the roof of the uppermost story or to the deck line of a mansard roof. The height of a building with a flat or nearly flat roof, less than seven degrees from the horizontal, shall be measured from the footing as stated above to the highest point of the roof. 
Building line. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and nearest extreme projection of a building (including all areas covered by any vertical projections to the ground or overhang, walls, roof, or any other part of the structure). 
Building site. The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
Building and zoning inspector. Any person hired by the local governing authority to inspect, determine compliance with, and render minor decisions concerning the compliance of structures and lots within a municipality, to the ordinances of that municipality. 
Building/wall sign. Any sign displayed upon or attached to any part of the exterior of a building, including walls, doors, parapets, colonnades, or window. 
Camper. A motor home, tent, trailer, or other self-contained vehicle designed for recreational purposes. 
Care homes. Includes rest and nursing homes, convalescent homes and boarding homes for the aged; established to render nursing care for chronic or convalescent patients, but excludes facilities for care of active or violent patients such as feeble-minded or mental patients, epileptics, alcoholics, senile psychotics, or drug addicts. 
Centerline, highway. The line running parallel with the highway right-of-way that is halfway the distance between the extreme edges of the official right-of-way width as shown on map approved by the county tax assessor. 
Certified survey. A survey, sketch, plat, map, or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional engineer, registered surveyor, architect, or other legally recognized person. 
Church. A legally approved structure and its accessory buildings used and approved on a permanent basis, primarily for the public worship of God. 
Club, private. An organization or association of persons for some common purpose, such as, but not necessarily limited to, a fraternal, social, educational or recreational purpose; but not including clubs organized primarily for profit or to render a service, which is customarily carried on as a business. Such organizations and associations must be incorporated under the laws of Georgia as a nonprofit corporation and such corporations' major purpose shall not be for the purpose of serving alcoholic beverages to its members or others. This may not be located on, or operated by, or in connection with any commercial use. 
Conditional use. Those uses allowed within a district, only after specific requirements are met. The local governing authority at its discretion may require additional restraints, restrictions, qualifications, or limiting factors upon a specific use so that it becomes acceptable. 
Density. The number of units or buildings per acre, or the number of people per unit, building, acre or mile, the quantity of people, structures, or units within a specified area. 
Depth of lot. The depth of a lot is the depth between its mean front street line and its mean rear line, measured along the median between the two side lot lines. 
Dwelling, condominium. A building or series of buildings on the same lot or portions thereof containing more than one dwelling unit under separate ownership with joint ownership of common open spaces. 
Dwelling, duplex. A residential building designed for, or used as, the separate homes or residences of two separate and distinct families, but having the appearance of a single-family dwelling house. Each individual unit in the duplex shall comply with the definition for a one family dwelling. 
Dwelling, group. A building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. The term "group dwelling" includes, but is not limited to, the terms "rooming house", "apartment hotel", "fraternity house," or "sorority house", "Y.M.C.A." or "Y.W.C.A." A hotel, motel, or tourist home shall not be deemed to be a group dwelling as herein defined. 
Dwelling, one family. A private residential building used or intended to be used as a home or residence in which all living rooms are accessible to each other from within the building, and in which the use and management of all sleeping quarters, all appliances for sanitation, cooking, ventilating, heating, cooling, or lighting are designed for the use of one family only on a minimum of a single lot. 
Eaves. The lowest horizontal line of a sloping roof. 
Electronic (changeable) copy. A sign on which the copy changes automatically on a lamp bank or through other means. The illuminated display is achieved by the use of a matrix of electric lams (e.g., digital, LED (light emitting diode) or similar refined technology, including but not limited to moveable discs, moveable panels, or other automated methods. 
Engineer. Any person having an acceptable degree from a recognized institution of higher learning who is capable of determining the correct manner in which to construct roads, streets, highways, water and sewerage systems, drainage system, structures or other technical related areas. The person to be a municipal engineer must be recognized by the State of Georgia as one. 
Erect. To build, paint, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. 
Estate. Any residential site comprising five acres or more shall come within the meaning of the word "estate". 
Facade. The front or face of a building. 
Facing. The surface or plane of a sign upon, against, or through which a message is displayed or illustrated. 
Family. One person, or a group of two or more persons living together, and interrelated by bond or consanguinity, marriage, or legal adoption occupying a dwelling unit designed as a single-family unit, with a single set of kitchen facilities. The persons thus constituting a family may also include gratuitous guests and domestic servants. 
Flag, governmental. A piece of cloth, or similar material, usually rectangular, of distinctive color and design, used as a symbol, a standard, a signal, or an emblem, representative of a country, nation, county, city, or federal government, or other legally organized governmental groups. 
Flag, streamer, festoons. A cloth, or similar material, a string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, streamers, or pinwheels with colors, patterns, etc., used as a signal. 
Flea market, permanent site. A permanent "flea market" site is one that has permanent structures both for the use as stalls for vendors and other accessories such as bathroom facilities. A permanent site must have at minimum, one men's restroom and one women's restroom, both of which must meet the applicable specifications as determined by the city's designed building official. Generally, a permanent site is one that is used on a weekly basis. 
Flea market, casual site. A casual "flea market" site is one where permanent structures are not allowed. Generally, it is considered as a site that is used no more than one weekend per three-month period, and no more than four weekends per one-year period. 
Flood prone areas. That land adjacent to a creek, stream, river, channel, canal or other body of water that is designated as a floodplain or flood prone area by a governmental agency. 
Floor area. The sum of the gross floor area for each of the several stories under roof, measured from the interior limits or faces of a building or structure. 
Floor area ratio. Floor area of building or buildings on any lot divided by the area of the lot. 
Frontage. The distance or width or a parcel of land abutting a public right-of-way and as measured upon such right-of-way. 
Garage, community. A structure or series of structures under one roof, and under one ownership, for the storage of vehicles by three or more owners or occupants of property in the vicinity where said structure has no public shop or mechanical services in connection therewith. 
Garage, private. A structure for the private use of the owner or occupant of a principal building, situated on the same lot as the principal building for the storage of motor vehicles with no facilities for mechanical service. 
Garage, public. A structure for the storage, care, repair, or refinishing of motor vehicles, or a structure containing a public shop, or where automobile mechanical service is provided. 
Gas station. A structure designated or used for the retail sale or supply of fuel, lubricants, air, water, and other operating commodities for motor vehicles and including the customary spacing and facilities for the installation of such commodities on, or in, such vehicles, but not including space or facilities for the storage, painting, repair, refinishing, body work, or other servicing of motor vehicles. 
Governing authority. The Mayor and Council of the City of Flemington or the Board of Commissioners of Liberty County. 
Highway. Any public thoroughfare of paving 22 feet or wider including streets, which affords primary access to abutting property, and any thoroughfare of less width which is not classified as an alley (street). 
Hospital. An institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical and surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices. 
Hotel. A building occupied as the more or less temporary residence of individuals who are lodged, with or without meals, and in which there are ten or more sleeping rooms with entrances through a common lobby or office. 
House trailer. House trailer means any vehicle or similar portable structure which was constructed with wheels so as to permit its being used as a duly licensable conveyance upon the public street, whether or not its wheels have been removed, and constructed to permit occupancy as a dwelling. 
Illuminated sign. Any sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs, or outlines illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign itself. Further, any sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Inflatable sign. Any sign, balloon, or similar device that can be inflated with air or gas and mounted or flown over a site. 
Institutional/civic/community uses. Religious buildings, schools, daycares, cemeteries, bed and breakfast inns, and other similar uses including all other uses allowed in residential districts by conditional use, but not including home occupations. 
Junk. Old iron, steel, brass, copper, tin, lead, or other base metals; old cordage, ropes, rags, fibers, or fabrics; old rubber; old bottles or other glass; bones, wastepaper and other waste or discarded material which might be prepared to be used again in some form; and motor vehicles, no long used as such, to be used for scrap metal or stripping for parts; but "junk" shall not include materials or objects accumulated by a person as by-products, waste or scraps from the operation of his own business, or materials or objects held and used by a manufacturer as an integral part of his own manufacturing process. 
Junkyard. A yard, lot, or place, covered or uncovered, outdoors or in an enclosed building, containing junk as defined above, upon which occurs one or more acts of buying, keeping, dismantling, processing, selling, or offering for sale any such junk, in whole units or by parts, for a business or commercial purpose, whether or not the proceeds from such acts are to be used for charity. 
Lot. Parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the official county zoning maps, or any piece of land described by a legally recorded deed. 
Lot, corner. Any lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersections or intersecting streets or public highways. If the angle or intersections of the direction lines of two highways is more than 135 degrees, the lot fronting on said intersection is not a corner lot. 
Lot, interior. Any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one street other than an alley. 
Lot line, front. In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this ordinance, provided it is so designated by the building plans, which meet the approval of the building and zoning inspector. 
Lot line, rear. The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the building and zoning inspector shall determine the rear lot line. 
Lot line, side. A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot line. 
Lot, through. Any lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets or other thoroughfares. 
Malt beverage. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such projects in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Malt beverage manufacturer. Any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Mansard sign. A sign imposed, mounted, or painted on a steeply roof-like facade architecturally similar to a building wall. 
Mapped streets. A mapped street is any approved street shown on an official map or the projection of any existing street through an unsubdivided parcel of land, whether the street is dedicated or in existence or not. 
Marquee sign. A sign imposed, mounted, or painted on a permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building. 
Marshland. All land subject to tidal action which is comprised of generally unstable soil materials commonly known as "hard or soft" marsh, which in its natural state is vegetated with marsh grass, reeds and similar growth and is usually characterized by poor load bearing capacity. Marshland lies below an elevation of 5.6 feet above mean sea level. 
Manufactured house. A structure or component thereof, designed primarily for residential occupancy which is wholly or substantially made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities and assembled on a building site, into a dwelling unit supported on a permanent foundation. "Manufactured houses" shall meet the rules of the state board of community affairs, factory built dwelling units (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq.). 
Mobile home. A non-self-propelled vehicle or conveyance that is towable and supported on its own chassis, permanently equipped to travel upon the public highways, that is used, either temporarily or permanently, as a residence or living quarters. Such unit shall be considered a "manufactured house" whether or not the wheels have been removed and whether or not set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks or other foundation. 
Mobile sign. Any sign which is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, painted or drawn on any vehicle, whether motorized or drawn, which is placed or maintained at one or more particular locations for the express purpose and intent of promotion or conveying an advertising message. 
Monument sign. A freestanding sign mounted directly upon the ground. Such sign may not be attached to or be a part of or supported by the building in or to which the sign applies. 
Motel or motor hotel. A building or group of two or more buildings designed to provide sleeping accommodations for transient or overnight guests with no common entrance or lobby. Each building shall contain a minimum of ten residential units or rooms, which generally have direct, private openings to a street, drive, or patio, etc. 
Multiple parcels. Where more than one parcel without street frontage have been developed under a single development permit, the term "parcel" or "property" in this article shall mean the entire site covered by the single development permit. 
Noncombustible material. Any material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
Nonconforming lot. Any lot which is smaller than the minimum dimensions, area, or other regulations of the district in which the lot is located. 
Nonconforming sign. Any sign, while legal at the time of erection, does no longer comply with the requirements of this article at the date of adoption of same. 
Nonconforming use. Use of any property or premises in any manner which does not comply with the regulations provided for the district in which the property or premises is situated, if such use was originally legally established at the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereof. 
Owner. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parapet sign. A sign imposed, mounted or painted on, and not extending above the top of the extension, false front or wall above the roofline. 
Parking space. That area required for the parking or storage of one automobile, including necessary aisle or driveway space providing access thereto. 
Pawnbroker. Any person with whom property is deposited as security for the payment of a debt. 
Permanent sign. A sign determined to meet the structural and construction requirements for signs according to the City of Flemington building codes as determined by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
Planning commission. The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission, which is an appointed body of people by the local governing authority whose responsibilities include the guidance of growth and development within the municipality and interpreting of the various municipal regulatory ordinances. 
Pole and panel sign (system). These signs are oftentimes sold as kits and consist of one or two poles and a sign face. 

Portable sign. Any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground, or to a structure or building. This definition shall include, but is not limited to, mobile signs; trailer signs; and devices mounted upon parked vehicles in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
Principal building. The building situated or to be placed nearest the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary use permitted by the zone classification in which it is located. 
Professional services. The conduct of business in any of the following or related categories: law; architecture; accounting; engineering; medicine; dentistry; optometry; osteopathy; chiropractics; optician; planning, or consulting of the nature of the aforestated categories and which do not include outside storage space for business vehicles or equipment. 
Projecting sign/bracket sign. Any sign that is attached perpendicular to a building or a pole and extends horizontally more than six inches from the plane of a building wall or a pole. 

Public body. Any government or governmental agency of the city, the county, the State of Georgia, or the United States government. 
Public use. Use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or authority, city, county, state or the federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
Repairs. Restoration of portions of a building to its condition as before decay, wear or damage, but not including alteration of the shape or size of any portion. 
Residential. The term "residential" or "residence" is applied herein to any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land and/or any building used exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including concomitant uses specified herein. 
Restaurant. A building, room or rooms where food is prepared and served to a group of families, a club, or to the public and for consumption within the enclosed structure. 
Retailer or retail dealer. Except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Right-of-way line. The outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, dedication or by the official right-of-way. 
Roof sign. A sign that is displayed above roofline of any building; not including mansard or parapet signs as previously defined. 
Roofline. The highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof, the roofline is the principal ridgeline, or the highest line common to one or more principal slopes of roof. On a flat roof the roofline is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet whichever is the higher. 
Rooming house. (The terms rooming house, boarding house, tourist home, cooperative house and lodging house are used synonymously in this ordinance). A building, other than a hotel or dormitory, where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, lodging or lodging and meals are provided for more than three persons not related to the owners of the structure. 
Rooming unit. Any room or group of rooms, forming a single habitable unit used for living and sleeping, but which does not contain cooking or eating facilities. 
Rotating sign. A sign that is designed to revolve by means of electrical power. 
Sandwich board sign/A-frame sign. A sign face on a sign support structure shaped like an "A" that is temporarily located upon the ground with dimensions including the support structure not to exceed 12 square feet. 

Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets. When a lot abuts on a street or road which has a right-of-way of less than 60 feet, the minimum setback for front, rear, or side yard shall be increased by the number of feet required to provide the same number of feet from the center of the road or street, as if said road or street had a right-of-way of 60 feet. 
Sign. Every name, identification, description, announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, flag, illustration, or insignia affixed directly or indirectly upon a structure, building, vehicle or moveable device, that is placed in view of the general public and which directs attention to any object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. 
Sign face. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message of the sign is exhibited. 
Sign height. The overall measurement from the highest part of a sign, including all support structures, to the highest surface of the adjacent public road, sidewalk, parking lot, or unimproved ground. Any earth berms and elevated foundations supporting signs, signposts or other sign supports shall be included in the height of the sign. 
Sign, permanent. The term "permanent sign" shall mean and include any sign as defined hereinabove. It shall have a structural frame and be constructed of materials other than cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials. 
Sign, temporary. The term "temporary sign" shall mean and include any sign as defined hereinabove. Examples of temporary signs include, but are not limited to, any sign, display board, handbill, poster, banner, pennant, streamer, whirligig, valance or advertising display constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard or other light materials (with or without structural frame). A temporary sign is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time only. 
Sign, wayfinding. A government sign that provides directions to locations and facilities or bears the city's adage, symbol, or logo. Such a sign shall be permitted in the city's rights-of-way. 
Signable area. The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representations, emblems or any figures or similar characters, together with any frame or other material or color forming any integral part of the display or used to differentiate this sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary support or uprights on which this sign is placed; provided, however, that any open space contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign, or between any component, panel, strip or fixture of any kind composing the display face, shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign whether this open space be enclosed or not by a frame or border. For projecting or double-faced signs, only one display face shall be measured in computing sign area when the sign faces are parallel or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less, provided that it is a common attached structure. If the two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face. 
Signs at the entrance to any subdivision and at the entrance to any planned development, e.g. apartment complexes, townhouse, or condo complexes, PUD developments, and other similar developments as long as no other stanchion/monument sign is located on the same parcel of land. 
Site. An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed. 
Sight triangle. On any corner lot, a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 25 feet for streets and roads and a distance of 15 feet for driveways and connecting the points so established to form a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the intersection. 
Special event. Any activity or circumstance above and beyond the normal day-to-day activities of the business or institution concerned, to include sales, grand openings, going-out-of business sales, relocations, new product announcements, and other temporary service. 
Special exception. A use, specifically designated in this ordinance, that would not be appropriate for location generally or without restriction throughout a given zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would, in the opinion of the governing authority, promote the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. 
Stanchion sign. A freestanding sign mounted on one or more steel poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertisement portion of such structure that rests upon or is supported by such poles. Such freestanding signs must be in conformance with size and height restrictions imposed elsewhere in this article. 
Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next above it. 
Street. A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic that affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structural alterations. Any change in the shape or size of any portion of a building or of the supporting members of a building or structure such as walls, columns, beams, arches, girders, floor joists, or roof joists. 
Structural trim. The molding, battens, capping, nailing strips, latticing, and platforms, which are attached to a signs structure. 
Surface. See "Facing". 
Surveyor. A person who determines or delineates the form, extent, position, distance or shape of a tract of land by taking linear and angular measurements, and by applying the principles of geometry and trigonometry. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires rigid location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground; provided, however, that utility poles, fences and walls (other than building walls) shall not be considered to be structures. 
Subdivision. "Subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land for residential purposes into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate, to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following exceptions are included within this definition only for the purpose of requiring that the local planning commission be informed and have record of such subdivisions: 
The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the governing authority; 
The division of land into six or less parcels where no new street is involved and the resultant lots are equal to the standard of the municipality in which the division of land is being made; 
Plats of such exception shall be received as information by the planning commission, which shall indicate such fact on the plats. 
Suspended sign or under canopy signs. Any sign which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. The lowest portion of the sign shall be at least nine feet over the walkway and at least 14 feet over any vehicular way. 
Temporary sign. Any non-permanent sign erected, affixed, or maintained on a premises that shall be removed no more than six months after placement. 
Temporary stanchion sign. A non-permanent, freestanding sign mounted on one or more posts or poles set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the advertising portion of the structure. Such freestanding signs must be in conformance with size and height restrictions and all other standards imposed elsewhere in this ordinance. It shall be removed no more than six months after placement. 
Tenant space. A single delineated portion of a multitenant/multi-occupancy building which may be occupied by title, rent, lease or other form of possession. 
Trailer. A non-self-propelled vehicle or conveyance permanently equipped to travel upon the public highways that provides temporary use as a residence or living quarters or office; serves as a carrier of people, new or used goods, products or equipment; or is used as a selling, advertising or display device, whether or not the wheels have been removed and whether or not set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks or other foundation. 
Trash. Cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, and rags. 
Use. The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
Variance. A modification of the strict terms of this ordinance granted by the governing authority where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest; and where, owning to conditions peculiar to the property and not as the result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship; and where such modification will not authorize a principal or accessory use of the property which is not permitted within the zoning district in which the property is located. 
Vehicle. A conveyance for persons or materials. 
Vehicular sign. Any sign placed, mounted, painted on or affixed to a motor vehicle, freight, flat bed or storage trailer or other conveyance when same are placed or parked in such a manner as to be viewed or intended to be viewed from the public rights-of-way except that this definition shall not apply when: 
(1)  Such conveyances are actively being used to transport persons, goods, or services in the normal course of business; 
(2)  When such conveyances are parked in an inconspicuous area; 
(3)  When such conveyances are actively being used for storage of construction materials for, and on the same lot with a bona-fide construction project for which building and other applicable permits have been issued and where construction is underway and provided said conveyances are located within designated storage areas; 
(4)  This definition shall also apply to portable signs as defined herein. 
Waterfront. Any site shall be considered as waterfront property provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of water including creek, canal, river, or any other body of water, natural or artificial, including marshland, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear, or side. 
Wine. Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to this definition of wine. 
Yard. An open space on the same lot with building, said space lies between the building and nearest lot or street line. 
Yard, front. That area of open space to the front of the platted lot, the area immediately adjacent to the street side of the lot. If streets bound on two sides of the lot, the narrower portion fronting on a street shall be declared the front. (See Lot line, front). 
Yard, rear. That area of open space that is opposite the area delineated as the front. That area of greatest distance from the street. (See Lot line, rear). 
Yard, side. That area of open space that is immediately adjacent to the side lot lines. (See Lot line, side). 
Zoning ordinance. An officially adopted ordinance that regulates the manner, type, size and use to which a piece of property may be put. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Abandoned real property. 
3.1.1  For any public street or alley that is hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to each parcel of abutting property shall apply to the centerline property that is abandoned. In the event abandoned property is not divided at the centerline for abutting properties, the zoning districts applicable shall apply to such ownership line as determined by virtue of such abandonment. 
3.1.2  For any public property other than streets or alleys the regulations applicable to the zoning classifications [of property], which abuts the abandoned property for the greatest number of lineal feet, shall apply to the entire property. 
Sec. 3.2. - Abandoned vehicles. 
Within all zoning districts except where specifically authorized, all vehicles which are inoperative and/or unlicensed shall not be abandoned in the public right-of-way or on private property in excess of 30 days except within a completely enclosed garage, unless permission is granted upon application to the governing authority. 
Sec. 3.3. - Access control. 
In order to promote the safety of motorists and the pedestrian and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict by reducing the magnitude of and the number of points of, contact, the following regulations shall apply: 
3.3.1.  A point of access, that is, a driveway or other opening for vehicles onto a public street, shall not exceed 25 feet in width, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
3.3.2.  The maximum number of points of access permitted onto any one street shall be as follows: 

 
3.3.3  In lieu of any two openings permitted on any one street, there may be permitted a single point of access up to 35 feet in width. However, service stations shall be permitted two openings, not to exceed 35 feet each in width along any abutting public street providing that such property abuts such street for a distance of not less than 120 feet. 
3.3.4  There shall be a minimum distance of 12 feet between any two openings onto the same street. 
3.3.5  No point of access shall be allowed within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of any public street. 
3.3.6  No curbs shall be cut or altered and no point of access or opening for vehicles onto a public street shall be established without a permit issued by the local governing authority under the supervision of the appropriate engineer. 
Sec. 3.4. - Accessory buildings in residential districts. 
No accessory building in residential districts shall be erected in any required court or any yard other than a rear yard, except as provided hereafter. An accessory building may be erected as part of a principal building or if at least six feet therefrom, may be connected thereto by a breezeway or similar structure, provided all yard requirements of this ordinance for a principal building are complied with. 
3.4.1  Corner lots in agricultural and residential district. Any agricultural or residential district, where a corner lot adjoins in the rear a lot fronting on the side street, no part of any accessory building on such corner lot within 25 feet of the common lot line shall be nearer a side road lot line than the least depth of the front yard required along such side street for a dwelling on such lot, and in no case shall any part of such accessory building be nearer to the side road lot line than the least width of the side yard required for the principal building to which it is accessory. 
3.4.2  Setbacks for accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall be a distance at least ten feet from alley lines, and at least ten feet from lot lines of adjoining lots in a residential district. 
Sec. 3.5. - Buildings on through lots. 
Where a lot extends through from one street to another, the setback requirement for each such street shall be complied with and any building shall have dual facing. No accessory building or other structure shall be placed on through lots if said structures would conflict with other building values or uses on the same street. On lots having frontage on more than two streets, the minimum front yard shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance on at least two of the street frontages. 
Sec. 3.6. - Churches and schools. 
Public schools shall be subject to the regulations in this ordinance set forth in section 5.3. 
3.6.1  Private schools, churches and religious institutions shall be permitted in agricultural, single-family residential districts, agricultural residential districts, multifamily residential districts, general commercial districts, and neighborhood commercial districts provided that the following requirements are complied with: 
3.6.1.1  Off-street parking shall be provided as set forth in section 3.29. 
3.6.1.2  The principal building and accessory buildings shall comply with the yard and setback requirements of the district in which it is located; and in no case less than the minimum requirements set forth in the district. 
3.6.1.3  Private schools, churches and religious institutions may be permitted in other districts only after recommendations of the planning commission, which shall hold a public hearing on such request, see section 7.2. 
Sec. 3.7. - Cemeteries, mausoleums, crematories. 
No premises shall be used or occupied for the purpose of a cemetery, mausoleum, or crematory in any district excepting in multi-family residential, single-family residential, agricultural residential, and agricultural districts, and then only upon approval after public hearing. No land for which a plat has not been recorded shall be used for any burials. The dead shall not be buried or placed closer than ten feet to any highway right-of-way, nor closer than ten feet to any other property line. The minimum size for a cemetery shall be one acre. 
Sec. 3.8. - Conversion of dwellings. 
The conversion of any building into a dwelling, or the conversion of any dwelling so as to accommodate an increased number of dwelling units or families, shall be permitted only within a district in which a new building for similar occupancy would be permitted under this ordinance, and only when the resulting occupancy will comply with the requirements governing new construction in such district with respect to minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, percentage of lot coverage, dimensions of yards and other open spaces, and off-street parking. Each conversion shall be subject also to such further requirements as may be specified hereinafter within the article applying to such district. 
Sec. 3.9. - Deed restrictions. 
These regulations shall not affect deed restrictions or restrictive covenants recorded with any deed, plat, or other legal document relating to the use or lot and building requirements. 
Sec. 3.10. - Excavation of sand, gravel, or other material (for industrial or commercial use). 
Excavation shall be considered a temporary use, and shall be permitted only in agricultural districts and when required, excavations shall conform to criteria as outlined in the county soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. The extent of excavation shall not be nearer than 100 feet to any school, church, dwelling, or highway. 
Sec. 3.11. - Existing uses. 
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be deemed or construed to prohibit a continuation of the particular lawful use or uses of any land, building, structure, improvement or premises legally existing in the respective districts at the time this ordinance became effective; provided, however, that if any such existing lawful uses change to a different use after the date of the adoption of this ordinance, such different use shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance regulating the particular district in which said premises is situated. If any legally existing use or occupancy of a building or premises conflicts with any requirement of this ordinance or any of its amendments, such building shall not be moved, structurally altered or added to except after a public hearing. 
All future buildings, structures, repairs, alterations or other improvements shall comply with all district requirements contained herein, and such structural provisions of the building code and other regulations as have been incorporated herein and made a part hereof, including any building on which construction had been suspended at the time this ordinance was adopted and any building for which foundations were not completed at said time. 
No nonconforming building or structure shall be extended or enlarged except when authorized by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission which may permit one enlargement or extension up to 25 percent of the floor area of the structure as it existed at the time of passage of this ordinance. 
Sec. 3.12. - Dilapidated buildings. 
Dilapidated and/or burned-out buildings or mobile homes shall be removed from the property on which they are located within 90 days after notice by the planning commission. 
Sec. 3.13. - Garbage disposal. 
Garbage or other refuse shall be deposited only in approved garbage cans or in approved garbage disposal areas. 
Sec. 3.14. - Group housing. 
Group housing developments, two single or multiple family dwellings to be constructed in a plot of ground under single ownership of one acre or more, not subdivided into the customary streets and lots and which shall not be so subdivided, may be developed in any multi-family district provided that: 
3.14.1  Maximum percent of lot coverage shall not exceed that which is required for the districts in which the project is located. 
3.14.2  Height limits, front, side, or rear yard requirements shall be met in accordance with the district in which such group housing is permitted. 
Sec. 3.15. - Home occupations. 
Home occupations are defined as professions such as, but not limited to doctor, lawyer, dentist; vocations such as public secretary, accountant, draftsman; personal services such as beautician, barber, and similar occupations which can be conducted in an occupied home without disrupting the family life and without changing the outward appearance of the neighborhood. Excluded are mortuaries, massage parlors, palm readers, tattoo parlors, or activities that require outside storage, and retail or wholesale sale establishments. Home occupations may be conducted in any residential or agricultural area, except R-4, upon approval of the governing authority. The governing authority shall act only after a public hearing and recommendation by the planning commission. 
3.15.1  The home occupation shall be conducted within the principal building and only by members of the family residing in the building. Not more than one person shall be employed who is not a resident of the premises. 
3.15.2  Not more than 20 percent of the gross floor area of any dwelling unit may be used as a home occupation, except for medical and dental offices and foster family care, which may use up to 40 percent. 
3.15.3  For the purpose of identification of such use, one nonilluminated wall sign not exceeding one square foot in area may be permitted. Such signs shall identify only the name of the profession and the name of the occupant of the premises and shall be mounted against a wall of the principal building. 
3.15.4  No motor power other than electrically operated motors shall be used in conjunction with such home occupation and the total horsepower of such permitted electrical motors shall not exceed three horsepower, or one horsepower for any single motor. 
3.15.5  There shall be no alteration in the residential character of the premises in connection with such home occupation unless so authorized by the local governing authority. 
3.15.6  No merchandise or articles for sale shall be displayed for advertising purposes and no sign or device relative to the sale of such merchandise shall be displayed on the premises 
3.15.7  No article or materials used in connection with such home occupation shall be stored other than in the principal building so used. 
3.15.8  Any home occupation as provided for in this section may be reviewed by the local governing authority at any time after 12 months following the approval of such use and may revoke permission to continue such home occupation at any time thereafter. 
3.15.9  There shall be no disturbance or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthful or unsightly condition. 
Sec. 3.16. - Junkyards. 
3.16.1  All junkyards shall be in compliance with the provisions as described and adopted in section IV-9, Junk dealers and Junkyards , of the License and Business Regulation Ordinance of and for the city of Flemington [see now Code section 22-112]. All existing junkyards shall have complied with these requirements within one year of the date of this ordinance, or shall then have terminated their operation. 
Sec. 3.17. - Land and water fills, dredging, excavations and mining. 
No person shall engage in the filling of land or water areas, dredging, the excavation of land or removal of earth and no mining operation shall be undertaken without application to the planning commission which shall refer and recommend approval or rejection to the governing authority. All applications for permits for any activities covered by this section shall be referred to the planning commission for its recommendation. 
Sec. 3.18. - Land subject to flooding. 
No new construction or substantial improvement of residential structures or location of a mobile home shall be permitted in a flood hazard area, unless the lowest floor (including basement) is elevated to or above the level of the 100-year flood. 
Sec. 3.19. - Living units in zones other than Residential. 
Dwellings shall not be permitted in any business or industrial zone as a principal use. However, living units may be established within the principal building in a business or industrial use, provided that such living units within any general commercial or neighborhood commercial district shall have direct access to an abutting street. In the general commercial or neighborhood commercial districts, living units shall be permitted as accessory to the permitted use, and single-family dwellings as accessory uses shall be permitted on existing lots of record including other uses permitted on the same lot. 
Sec. 3.20. - Minimum living area. 
No single or multiple family living unit shall be constructed with a total living area of less than 525 square feet. Provided, however, that a special exception to the minimum living area requirements may be granted, if it is established that the granting of such exception will not adversely affect the interest of the general public or the character of the surrounding neighborhood. Application for any such special exception shall be made to the planning commission. 
3.20.1  The planning commission shall forward its recommendations to the governing authority for its action. The planning commission may require the submission of plans in connection with such applications, showing the location and type of construction proposed, and may impose such additional requirements as a condition of the granting of the request, as it deems reasonable and appropriate. (This section shall not apply to mobile homes meeting all other requirements of this ordinance.) 
Sec. 3.21. - Mobile homes, trailers, mobile home parks and trailer parks. 
No trailer or mobile home shall be parked outside of a trailer or mobile home park, unless specifically permitted to provide living quarters or space for the conduct of business except that it may be used temporarily for office purposes during the construction of a principal building or a road, on the issuance of a temporary permit by the zoning officer, except as permitted below. 
3.21.1  Except for trailers offered for sale on trailer sales lots, the parking of a trailer, trailer coach or mobile home outside of a permitted area in any district for 49 hours or more shall be prohibited. Some utility trailers are excluded from this provision. 
3.21.2  No new mobile home park, addition or substantial improvement to an existing mobile home park, or location of a mobile home not in a mobile home park in a flood hazard area will be permitted until all criteria of Federal Flood Control Regulations 1910.3(c) 9 are met. In location of new mobile homes in now existing mobile home parks in flood hazard areas, Regulation 1910.3(c) 10 of Federal Flood Control Regulations must be complied with. 
Sec. 3.22. - Camping and recreational equipment. 
Any owner of camping and recreational equipment, including but not limited to travel trailers, pick-up coaches, motorized homes and boat trailers may park or store such equipment on private residential property subject to the following conditions: 
3.22.1  Such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment shall never be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes. 
3.22.2  If the camping or recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a building, it shall be parked or stored, if possible to the rear of the front building line of the lot. 
3.22.3  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection above, camping and recreation equipment may be parked anywhere on the premises while actually being loaded or unloaded. 
Sec. 3.23. - Moving of buildings. 
Whenever a building is moved from any location to a site within the city, the building shall immediately be made to conform to all provisions of the building, plumbing and electrical codes, if any, and zoning regulations. The owner causing the building to be moved shall secure a building permit from the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
Sec. 3.24. - Nonconforming buildings or structures. 
Any lawful use of any dwelling, building, or structure existing at the effective date of this ordinance may be continued, even though such use does not conform to the provisions hereof. If no structural alterations are made, a nonconforming rise of a building may be changed to another nonconforming use of a more restricted classification. Whenever a nonconforming use has been changed to a more restricted use or to a conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted use. No nonconforming building or structure shall be extended, or enlarged except when authorized by the planning commission which may permit one enlargement or extension up to 25 percent of the floor area of the structure as it existed at the time of passage of this ordinance. 
3.24.1  Whenever the use of a building shall become nonconforming through a change in the zoning ordinance or in the district boundaries, such use may be continued, and if no structural alterations are made, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or of a more restricted classification. 
3.24.2  A nonconforming use of a building or portion thereof, which is hereafter discontinued for a continuous period of six months, shall not again be used except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which such building is located. 
3.24.3  A nonconforming building that has been damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or the public enemy to the extent of more than 60 percent of its reproduction value at the time of damage, shall not be restored except in conformity with the regulations of the district in which it is located. When damage is less than 60 percent of its reproduction value, a nonconforming building may be repaired or reconstructed, and used as before the time of damage, provided such repairs or reconstruction are completed within one year of such damage. 
3.24.4  Nonconforming trailers or mobile homes located on a lot in any district when once removed shall not be relocated on such lot and shall not be replaced with another trailer or mobile home. 
Sec. 3.25. - Nonconforming lot. 
3.25.1  Remedies. Where two or more nonconforming lots with continuous frontage are under the same ownership or where a nonconforming lot has a continuous frontage with a larger tract under the same ownership, such lot or lots shall be combined to form one or more building sites meeting the lot requirements of the district in which they are located. 
3.25.2  Dwellings on nonconforming lots. A building permit may be issued for a single-family dwelling on any nonconforming lot excluding sub-standard lots, provided that the remedies set forth in this section cannot be complied with and provided that the regulations of the district in which the lot is located are met. 
3.25.3  Nonconforming uses of land. The nonconforming use of land not involving any principal building or structure existing on the effective date of this ordinance may be continued for a period of not more than three years; provided, however, that no such nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or adjoining property. 
3.25.4  [Discontinuance or change.] If such nonconforming use of land or any portion thereof is discontinued or changed, any future use of such land shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
3.25.5  Dwellings on sub-standard lots. The governing authority may authorize the issuance of a building permit for a single-family dwelling for a sub-standard lot only after it has been determined that remedies as set forth in this section cannot be complied with. The governing authority may also grant such variances on lot and building requirements in cases of hardship, if conditions detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare are not caused. 
Sec. 3.26. - Nonconforming use of buildings and structures. 
Use of any building or structure not in conformance with these regulations pertaining to uses permitted on the effective date of this ordinance; may not be: 
3.26.1  Changed to another nonconforming use except where it is determined by the governing authority that the design, construction, and character of the building is unsuitable for uses permitted in the district in which such nonconforming use is situated. The governing authority shall hold a public hearing, as set forth in section 7.2 of this ordinance in order to determine the question of suitability for uses permitted in the district in which such building is located. 
3.26.2  Re-established after discontinuance for six months except where it is determined by the governing authority that the design, construction, and character of the building is unsuitable for uses permitted in the district in which such nonconforming use is situated. The governing authority shall hold a public hearing, as set forth in section 7.2 of this ordinance, in order to determine the question of suitability for uses permitted in the district in which such building is located. 
3.26.3  Extended, enlarged, or expanded except when authorized by the governing authority which may permit one enlargement or extension up to 25 percent of the floor area of the structure as it existed at the time of passage of this ordinance. 
Sec. 3.27. - Nursing homes. 
Nursing homes shall include convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and such other activities designed to take care of the aged or persons unable to care for themselves without supervision or assistance. Nursing homes shall be permitted only with governing authority approval in any multi-family residential district: Such uses shall comply with all regulations applicable to the district. Such uses shall comply with the off-street parking requirements set forth in this article. In addition, such uses shall meet the minimum requirements as set forth by state or federal agencies regulating such activities and shall, upon application, for either building permit or occupancy certificate, provide certificates indicating approval by, such state and federal agencies. 
Sec. 3.28. - Obstruction to vision at road intersections. 
In order to minimize accidents caused by obstruction to vision at road intersections, the following regulations shall apply in all districts: 
3.28.1  Within the area formed by the rights-of-way lines of intersecting roads and a straight line connecting points on such rights-of-way lines, at a distance of 20 feet from their points of intersection there shall be a clear space with no obstruction to vision between the height of 30 inches and a height of ten feet above the average grade of each road as measured at the centerline thereof. 
3.28.2  Requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. 
3.28.3  Trees shall be permitted in the clear space provided that foliage is cut away within the prescribed height. 
Sec. 3.29. - Offensive color, designs, smoke, noise, etc. 
Nothing shall be allowed on the premises in any district that would in any way be offensive or obnoxious by reason of the emission of odors, liquids, gas, dust, smoke, vibration or noise; nor shall anything be placed, constructed, or maintained that will in any way constitute an eyesore or nuisance to adjacent property owners, residents, or to the community. All uses must satisfactorily comply with the requirements of the state department of natural resources as required by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Sec. 3.30. - Off-street parking and loading. 
In all districts off-street parking facilities shall be provided and properly maintained, as set forth in this section for any building that is hereafter erected, enlarged or increased in capacity. Such facilities shall be made available for public use: 
3.30.1  Size and access. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 180 square feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and be in useable shape and condition, except in the case of dwellings, and shall have no parking area containing less than three spaces. There shall be adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Where a lot does not abut on public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive leading to the parking or storage areas or loading spaces. Such access drive shall be not less than ten feet in width in the case of a dwelling, and not less than 20 feet in width in all other cases. 
3.30.2  Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to several well-defined locations, and in no case shall there be unrestricted access along the length of a street or alley. 
3.30.3  Number of parking spaces required. The number of off-street parking spaces required is set forth in the following table. Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply. 
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS 

 
3.30.4  Location of off-street parking spaces. Such parking space as required in this section shall in no part exist upon and no portion of any vehicle shall overhang the right-of-way of any public road, street, alley, or walkway. There shall be no off-street parking in the front yards of residential districts except as normally exists in driveways. 
The parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same plot as the main building. 
Parking spaces for all other uses shall be provided on the same plot with the main building or not more than 300 feet distance, as measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway provided that such area is under the same ownership as the principal use. The applicant for a building permit who proposes to use an area for off-street parking in order to meet the requirements of this ordinance and in accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall submit evidence of a restrictive covenant running with the land to be used for off-street parking purposes stating that such land shall not be encroached upon, used, sold, leased, or conveyed for any other purpose until such time as the principal building ceases to be required to provide such off-street parking facilities. 
Parking requirements for two of more uses of the same or of different types may be provided by the establishment of the required number of spaces for each use in a common parking area provided that all such uses being served by a common parking area are under the same ownership. Accessory uses shall not be required to have additional parking spaces other than those required by the principal use. 3.29.3.5. Off-street parking areas may be situated in any residential district abutting any commercial district or industrial district to a depth not exceeding 120 feet and provided that all off-street parking lot improvements as provided in subsection 3.29.4. of this article are complied with. 
3.30.5  Parking lot improvement requirements. Any off-street parking lots serving any use other than dwellings of four units per building or less shall meet the following off-street parking lot improvement requirements: 
3.30.5.1  Screening and landscaping. Off street parking and areas for more than five vehicles, and off-street loading areas shall be effectively screened on each side that joins or faces residential or industrial premises situated in any residential district. 
3.30.5.2  Surfacing for all retail sales and services, business services and professional services serving the general public and having access to and abutting a paved street, the off-street parking area shall be provided with a hard surface, all-weather pavement of asphalt or cement and shall be so graded and drained to provide for the adequate run-off and disposal of surface water. 
3.30.5.3  Lighting. Where lighting facilities are provided for the parking area, they shall be designed and installed so as to reflect the light away from any contiguous residentially zoned property. 
3.30.6  Off-street loading requirements. 
3.30.6.1  Every hospital, institution, commercial or industrial building or similar use having a floor area of 20,000 square feet or more and requiring receipt or distribution by vehicle of materials or merchandise shall have at least one permanent off-street loading space for each 20,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof immediately adjacent to the principal building. 
3.30.6.2  Every building which requires the receipt or distribution by vehicles of material or merchandise, shall provide off-street loading berths in accordance with the following table: 
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS 

 
3.30.6.3  Every off-street loading and unloading space shall have direct access to the public street or alley and shall have the following minimum dimensions: length, 30 feet; width, 12 feet; height, 14 feet. 
Sec. 3.31. - Overhang or extruding projections. 
In single-family residential districts, multi-family residential districts and mobile home park districts, every part of a required yard or court shall be open from its lowest point to the sky unobstructed except for the customary projection of sills, belts, courses, cornices, ornamental features, and eaves; provided, however, that none of the above projections shall extend into a required yard more than 36 inches. Open or enclosed fire escapes, outside stairways, balconies, chimneys, flues or other projections shall not extend into any required yard except that uncovered steps may project not more than three feet into the required yard. 
Sec. 3.32. - Parking of trucks and trailers. 
Within any residential district, no trucks, trailers or wagons in excess of one-ton capacity shall be parked for storage purposes, including overnight, on any public right-of-way or on private property except within a completely enclosed garage. Trailers of less than one-ton capacity, including pleasure boat trailers, collapsible camping trailers, and cargo trailers, may be parked on private property in any district provided that such trailers are parked only within areas in which the principal building, accessory building, or the parking of vehicles is permitted. 
Sec. 3.33. - Performance standards. 
These performance standards shall apply to all nonresidential uses: 
3.33.1  Smoke, dust and dirt. All emissions of visible smoke, dust, dirt, fly-ash or any particulate matter from any pipes, vents or other openings from any other source shall conform to state and federal standards. 
3.33.2  Fume, vapors, and gases. All emissions of any fumes, vapors or gases of a noxious, toxic, or corrosive nature which can cause any damage or irritation to health, animals, vegetation, or to any form of property shall conform to state and federal regulations. 
3.33.3  Sewage. There shall be no discharge at any point of liquid or solid waste into any public sewage disposal system that will overload such system or create detrimental effects in the flow and treatment of public sewage. There shall be no discharge of any industrial wastes into any private sewage disposal system, stream, or into the ground of any kind or nature which would contaminate any water supply or otherwise cause emission of dangerous or objectionable elements or conditions. There shall be no accumulation of solid waste conducive to the breeding of rodents or insects. 
3.33.4  Odors. There shall be no emission of odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive, obnoxious or unpleasant beyond the property line on which the principal use is located. Any process including the preparation of food, which may involve the creation and emission of any such odor, shall be provided with a primary and secondary safeguard system so that odor control may be maintained in the event of failure of the primary safeguard system. Any odorous matter shall be kept a minimum of 1,500 feet from any residence, school, hospital, or church, and any commercial district. 
3.33.5  Noise. The permitted level of noise or sound emission at the property line of the lot on which the principal use is located shall not at any time exceed the average noise level prevailing for the same hour as generated by the American Standards Association. 
3.33.6  Glare. There shall be no direct glare visible from any residential district caused by unshielded floodlights or other sources of high intensity lighting. 
Sec. 3.34. - Pending applications for building permits. 
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the overall layouts, plans, construction, size, or designated use of any development, building, structure, or part thereof, for which official approval and required permits have been granted, or where no approvals or permits are necessary, where construction has been legally started, before the enactment of this ordinance and completed within a one year period. 
Sec. 3.35. - Permitted building area. 
The principal building on any lot or parcel of land shall be erected within the area bound by the building lines established by setback or yard requirements. Accessory buildings may be erected within any building line established for the principal building and in required rear yards as may be otherwise provided in these regulations. 
Sec. 3.36. - Principal building on a lot. 
Except in mobile home parks and the group housing projects as provided in these regulations, only one principal building and its customary accessory building may hereafter be erected on any lot of record. Any dwelling shall be deemed to be the principal blinding on the lot on which the same is located. An addition to any building shall not be construed as a principal building. 
Sec. 3.37. - Retaining walls. 
Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to prohibit or to prevent the erection of a retaining wall on any property provided that such retaining wall does not adversely affect the natural flow of surface water or create any other adverse effect upon adjacent or adjoining properties. However, any application for a retaining wall shall be subject to approval of the board of commissioners before the issuance of a permit. 
Sec. 3.38. - Shopping centers. 
Shopping centers are hereby defined as a group of retail stores or shops under single ownership or management with an area of five acres or more and with a minimum depth of 300 feet established as a shopping entity with common parking facilities, ingress and egress, loading and unloading facilities. Shopping centers shall be permitted in any general or neighborhood commercial district and may be developed in accordance with approval by the planning commission. The shopping center shall not be divided into separate lots for each store or use. No permit shall be issued for the construction of shopping centers until the plans and specifications, including the design of ingress and egress roads, parking facilities and other such items as may be found of importance, have been approved by the planning commission. No buildings shall be erected closer than 50 feet to any road right-of-way line. There shall be provided a minimum of one parking space for each 200 square feet of floor area designed to be used for business or shopping purposes. Such parking area, including maneuvering areas, ingress and egress roads, and driving lanes shall be paved and kept in good repair at all times with a hard, all-weather surface. All points of access shall be to the public road; however, there shall be no public roads or alleys within the shopping center property. All loading and unloading shall be done entirely within the shopping center property. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all uses within the shopping center shall conform to other regulations as set forth in this resolution. 
Sec. 3.39. - Rear dwelling and easements required therewith. 
In all districts except the industrial districts, no building in the rear of a principal building on the same lot shall be used for residential purposes unless it conforms to the open space requirements of this ordinance. For the purpose of determining the front yard in such case, the rear line of the required rear yard for the principal building in front shall be considered the front lot line for the building in the rear. In addition, there must be provided for any such rear dwelling, an unoccupied and unobstructed access way not less than ten feet wide to a road, and there shall not be more than one dwelling, housing not more than two families for each such easement, except that a common easement of access at least 40 feet wide may be provided for two or more dwellings, housing any number of families. 
Sec. 3.40. - Road frontage required. 
No lot shall contain any dwelling unless it abuts at least 20 feet on a public street, or unless it conforms to the easement of access required in this article. 
Sec. 3.41. - Traffic visibility across corner lots. 
On any corner lot in any district, no fence, structure or planting, more than 30 inches high measured from the center of the road, shall be erected or maintained within 20 feet of the "corner" so as not to interfere with traffic visibility across the corner. 
Sec. 3.42. - Certain building and land use excepted. 
3.42.1  Agricultural uses. Except for compliance with minimum yard requirements, visibility across comer lots, and for the commercial raising of fur-bearing animals, or hog farms, nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the use of any land for agricultural purposes as defined herein, or the construction or use of buildings or structures incident to the use for agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings or structures are located, in any agricultural district. 
3.42.2  Public or semi-public uses. Nothing in this ordinance shall prohibit the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of essential services, by public utilities or county, city, or other governmental agencies and no zoning certificate shall be required for any such structure; provided, however, that the provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to buildings, towers, or storage yards of such public utilities or governmental agencies except when conforming to the procedures specified by state law. 
State Law reference— Zoning proposal review procedures law, O.C.G.A. § 36-67-1 et. seq. 
Sec. 3.43. - Swimming pools, private, community or club. 
3.43.1  Private swimming pools. A private swimming pool in the ground or permanent installations above the ground, but not including farm ponds, as regulated herein, shall be any pool, lake or open tank not located within a completely enclosed building and containing or normally capable of containing water to a depth at any point greater than 1½ feet. No such swimming pool shall be allowed in a "B-1", "A-1", "AR-1" or any "R" District except as an accessory use and unless it complies with the following conditions and requirements. 
3.43.1.1  The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located, and their guests, and no fee shall be charged. 
3.43.1.2  It may not be located, including any walks or paved areas or accessory structures adjacent thereto, closer than ten feet to any property line of the property on which it is located. 
3.43.1.3  The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located, shall be so walled or substantially fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or from adjacent properties, and said fence or wall to be not less than four feet above ground level and maintained in good condition and grounded for electricity. Pools shall conform to the department of health standards. 
3.43.1.4  Existing pools shall conform in 90 days to these requirements. Inspection by the zoning officer to ascertain conformance with the law shall be made before use of the pool by the owner or any friend or relative of the owner or paid member will be allowed. The inspection shall be made within one week of completion of all construction. 
3.43.2  Community or club swimming pools. A community or club swimming pool shall be any pool constructed by an association of property owners, or by a private club solely for use and enjoyment by members of the association or club and their families and guests of members. Community and club swimming pools shall comply with the following conditions and requirements: 
3.43.2.1  The pool and accessory structures thereto, including the areas used by the bathers, shall not be closer than ten feet to any property line of the property on which it is located. 
3.43.2.2  The swimming pool and all of the area used by the bathers shall be so walled or fenced as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the street or adjacent properties. The said fence or wall shall not be less than four feet in height and maintained in good condition and grounded for electricity. The area surrounding the enclosure, except for the parking spaces, shall be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs and trees and maintained in good condition. 
Sec. 3.44. - Time limitation. 
No zoning permit for construction, erection, or alteration of any building or structure or part thereof, or for signs or outdoor advertisements, or part thereof, shall be valid for more than one year unless work at the site has commenced within said period. 
Sec. 3.45. - Notice of starting work. 
The building and zoning inspector shall be given at least 24 hours' notice by builder or applicant prior to commencement of work at the site under zoning permits. 
Sec. 3.46 - Adult entertainment or services. 
No premises shall be occupied for the purpose of providing adult entertainment or services, including but not limited to adult book stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult novelty shops, palm readers, tattoo parlors, in any district except B-2 or A-1 with the following provisions: Regarding B-2, general commercial, only upon the approval of the governing authority after a public hearing and in compliance with the provisions set forth in the adult entertainment ordinance [chapter 6 of this Code]. In no event shall any such activity within district B-2 be located within 750 feet of any church, school, children's daycare, public park or other property zoned AR-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4 or PUD or within 1,000 feet of any other activity which provides the same type entertainment. Regarding A-1, agricultural, only upon the approval of the governing authority after a public hearing and in compliance with the provisions set forth in the adult entertainment ordinance [chapter 6 of this Code] and only if it is also at least 2,000 feet from any church, school, children's daycare, public park or other property zoned AR-1, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-4 or PUD and at least 1,000 feet from any other activity which provides the same type entertainment. All distances are to be measured pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-2-2 and Regulation 560-2-2.32 of the State Revenue Commission (2007). 
(Ord. of 12-9-2008; Ord. No. 2015-02, 10-13-2015) 
State Law reference— Municipalities authorized to restrict adult entertainment facilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
Sec. 3.47. - Bed and breakfast inn. 
Bed and breakfast inns are authorized as a traditional use and shall include but are not limited to the following: 
3.47.1  Host or hostess shall live in the inn. 
3.47.2  Each bedroom for rent shall have a private bath. 
3.47.3  A minimum of one parking space for each bedroom for rent plus two shall be provided in parking area, and entrance thereto shall be paved. 
Sec. 3.48. - Placement of manufactured homes. 
3.48.1  Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the meanings as set forth below unless otherwise required by context. 
3.48.1.1  Manufactured home, class A , shall mean a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Standards Act, 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), and meeting the following development standards: 
3.48.1.1.1  The manufactured home shall have a minimum width in excess of 20 feet. 
3.48.1.1.2  The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof and be finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in conventional residential construction, including, but not limited to, wood shakes, asphalt composition shingles, fiberglass, slate or such other similar material comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to shingles commonly used in conventional residential construction, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
3.48.1.1.3  The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, stucco, aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) or such other similar material comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
3.48.1.1.4  The manufactured home shall be placed on a durable foundation and be anchored in a manner that complies with the latest published edition of the Council of American Building Officials (CABO) One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor). Furthermore, a curtain wall, unpierced except for required ventilation and access and constructed of masonry, shall be installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. Such a wall shall be finished with brick, stucco, or such other similar material as may be approved by the zoning administrator. 
3.48.1.1.5  The tongue, axles, transporting lights, and all other towing apparatus shall be removed from the manufactured home after placement on the lot and before occupancy. 
3.48.1.1.6  Landings at each outside doorway of the requisite composition and size as per section 312.1 of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor), with said provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as part of this requirement. 
3.48.1.1.7  All manufactured homes must be otherwise installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
3.48.1.2  Manufactured home, class B, shall mean a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), and meeting the following development standards: 
3.48.1.2.1  The manufactured home shall be finished with a type of roofing that is commonly used in conventional residential construction, including, but not limited to, wood shakes, asphalt composition shingles, fiberglass, slate or such other similar material comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to roofing commonly used in conventional residential construction (to include any original roofing made a part of the manufactured home, but in no case exceeding the reflectively of gloss white paint), as determined by the zoning administrator. 
3.48.1.2.2  The exterior siding shall consist of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, stucco, aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) or such other similar material comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in conventional residential construction, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
3.48.1.2.3  The manufactured home shall be placed on a durable foundation and be anchored in a manner that complies with the latest published edition of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor). Furthermore, skirting shall be installed, and maintained in good repair, with appropriate ventilation, so as to enclose the area located under the home to the ground level. Such skirting shall be of a material commonly used in conventional residential construction as approved by the zoning administrator. 
3.48.1.2.4  The tongue, transporting lights, and all other towing apparatus shall be removed from the manufactured home after placement on the lot and before occupancy to the extent practicable. In the event it is not practicable to remove such transportation and towing apparatus, the same shall be skirted in their entirety as provided in subparagraph 1(b)(iii) hereinabove. 
3.48.1.2.5  Landings at each outside doorway of the requisite composition and size as per section 312.1 of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (or its successor), with said provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as part of this requirement. 
3.48.1.2.6  All manufactured homes must be otherwise installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
3.48.1.3  Manufactured home, class C, shall mean a dwelling unit fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445 (the HUD Code, which became effective on June 15, 1976), but which does not satisfy the criteria necessary to qualify the unit as a class A or class B manufactured home. All class C manufactured homes must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
3.48.1.4  Manufactured home, class D, shall mean a manufactured home (to include mobile homes) that does not meet the definitional criteria of a class A, class B or class C manufactured home (i.e. not constructed to the HUD code). All class D manufactured homes permitted by this section must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
3.48.1.5  Permitted residential districts shall mean the following zoning districts as defined by section 4.1 of the zoning ordinance of the City of Flemington: A-1, AR-1, R-2, R-2A, and R-4 districts. 
3.48.2  Permitted location of manufactured homes, class A. Manufactured homes qualifying as class A manufactured homes as defined herein shall be allowed only in the permitted residential districts and shall be regulated uniformly with other housing constructed on site, subject to the restrictions and limitations imposed herein. Approval to place the class A manufactured home within such permitted residential districts shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon application and determination that the manufactured home meets the requirements of this section and all other applicable state and local laws. Manufactured homes qualifying as class B, class C or class D manufactured homes shall be located only in those areas as expressly authorized by this section and are not permitted in R-2 zoning districts. 
3.48.3  Permitted location of manufactured homes, class B. Manufactured homes qualifying as class B manufactured homes as defined herein shall be allowed only within R-2A, A-1, and AR-I zoning districts, as well duly licensed and approved parks for manufactured and mobile homes located within R-4 mobile home park residential districts. Approval to place the class B manufactured home within such R-2A, A-1 and AR-1 zoning districts shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon application and determination that the manufactured home meets the requirements of this section and all other applicable state and local laws. 
3.48.4  Permitted location of manufactured homes, class C. Manufactured homes qualifying as class C manufactured homes shall not be permitted, except in duly licensed and approved parks for manufactured and mobile homes located within R-4 mobile home park residential districts. 
3.48.5  Permitted location of manufactured homes, class D. Manufactured homes qualifying as class D manufactured homes shall not be introduced or otherwise permitted, provided, however, that class D manufactured homes qualifying as a legal nonconforming use pursuant to this section may be relocated in duly licensed and approved parks for manufactured and mobile homes located within R-4 mobile home park residential districts. Furthermore, class D manufactured homes qualifying as a legal nonconforming use pursuant to this section and which otherwise satisfy the requirements of a class B manufactured home set forth in subparagraphs 1(b)(i) through (vi) may also be relocated in R-2A, A-1, and AR-1 zoning districts, provided approval to place said class D manufactured home within such R-2A, A-1, and AR-1 zoning districts shall be granted by the zoning administrator upon application and determination that the manufactured home meets the requirements of this section and all other applicable state and local laws. 
3.48.6  Emergency placement. Any person desiring to place a manufactured home not complying with the standards herein provided may make application for same to the zoning administrator, who shall refer said application to the governing authority for determination on the following basis: If in the opinion of the governing authority, it should become necessary as a temporary emergency or hardship or for security or protection, such permit may be granted on a limited basis for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date of permit. If before the expiration date of the permit, the emergency or other reasons for the home shall no longer exist, then said permit shall be automatically cancelled and said structure removed by the owner. If said home is not removed on or before the expiration date of the permit, the city or the county, at the owner's expense, may remove it. Such permit, if granted, shall be a privilege and not a right and shall be issued strictly at the determination of the governing authority that shall prescribe the terms, location, conditions and duration of the permit, and their decision shall be final. 
3.48.7  Application and approval for placement of manufactured homes. Person(s) proposing to locate a manufactured home in the city for the first time or which are proposing to relocate a manufactured home within said city must make application to the zoning administrator of Liberty County as follows: 
3.48.7.1  Application. Applications for placement of manufactured homes shall be made on a form or forms developed for that purpose and shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval in accordance with this section. Such application shall include all information necessary to make a determination as to conformity with the provisions of this section as applicable to each such manufactured home, including photographs or renderings of the front and side of the manufactured home, exterior finish, and other information necessary to make a determination required by this section. 
3.48.7.2  Review of application. Approval or denial of the application shall be within 15 calendar days of receipt of the completed application and all required supporting materials. The applicant shall be notified in writing of the approval, conditional approval or denial of the application within five business days after such decision is made. Conditional approval shall require that the conditions and reasons therefore be stated in writing and be agreed to by the applicant; such conditions shall be binding upon the applicant. In the case of disapproval, the reasons therefore shall be stated in writing. 
3.48.7.3  Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the zoning administrator regarding the approval, conditional approval or denial of the placement of a manufactured home may appeal from such decision to the governing authority by filing with the Liberty County administrator a petition in writing setting forth plainly, fully and distinctly wherein the decision appealed from is contrary to the provisions of this section or the laws of this state. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days after the date on which notification of the decision is received. The governing authority shall fix the date and time certain for the hearing of the appeal and shall give notice thereof to the appealing party. The governing authority shall decide the appeal within ten working days after the date and time of the hearing. In exercising its powers, the governing authority may reverse or affirm the decision appealed, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or determination appealed from and to that end shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal was taken. Any decision from the governing authority of the county may be appealed by filing [a] writ of certiorari with the superior court of this county within 30 calendar days after the date of the decision on appeal has been rendered in writing. The decision made by the governing body shall be placed in writing and the factual basis for the decision shall be set forth in the written decision. 
3.48.8  Penalty. Any person who locates a manufactured home within the city without first having obtained approval to do so as set forth herein or who otherwise violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of no more than $500.00 for each and every such offense, or imprisonment of not more than 60 days, or both. 
3.48.9  Enforcement. The Magistrate's Court of Liberty County shall have jurisdiction over violations of this section and all procedures for enforcement hereof shall be as provided in article 4, chapter 10, title 15, Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.). Complaints of violations of any provision contained herein shall be brought before the magistrate's court on a citation issued by the Zoning Administrator of Liberty County or the Chief Magistrate of Liberty County and shall be prosecuted through that court. Vviolations of this section will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined by the Zoning Administrator of Liberty County. Service of citation shall be performed by the constable of the Magistrate's Court of Liberty County, Georgia. Citations shall meet all the official requirements as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63, as amended. It is provided, however, that the county retains any and all civil remedies, including the right of civil injunction for the prevention of said violations and for the recovery of money damages therefor. 
3.48.10  Nonconforming individual manufactured homes. Manufactured homes in place on or before December 10, 1998, and otherwise authorized by the governing authority, are declared to be legal nonconforming uses at their current location; provided, however, that such homes may not be altered, relocated, or expanded in any way unless the alteration, relocation or expansion results in conformance with this section. When a nonconforming use is discontinued or abandoned, for whatever reason, for six consecutive months or 18 months during any two-year period, the use shall be considered abandoned, shall not be reestablished, and the structure and/or land used in accordance with this section. 
3.48.11  Nonconforming R-2 lots preserved. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, any lot within an R-2 zoning district whereupon a legal nonconforming manufactured home is located as of December 10, 1998, is declared to be a legal nonconforming lot, and any placement of a manufactured home thereon after such date shall be permitted, provided, however, that such qualifying manufactured home satisfies the requirements of a class B manufactured home as defined herein and otherwise meets all other applicable state and local laws. Should ownership of any such legal nonconforming lot change at any time, the nonconforming lot shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of this section; provided that the legal nonconforming manufactured home located thereon at such time shall continue to qualify as a legal nonconforming manufactured home pursuant to subsection 3.48.10. Notwithstanding the foregoing, once a conforming manufactured home is located or otherwise established on any legal nonconforming lot, such lot shall thereafter be subject to the provisions of this section. 
3.48.12  Restrictive covenants. No provisions of this section shall preempt or preclude any protective or restrictive covenants, which may be attached to any property within the City of Flemington. 
Sec. 3.49. - Storing or parking of junk. 
Except as permitted by this ordinance in certain zoning districts, the storing or parking of junk is prohibited. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The Ordinance of Feb. 12, 2013, deleted the former Art. IV, §§ 4.1—4.15, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to sign regulations and derived from the Ordinance of November 1, 2006 which readopted the provisions originally adopted on February 13, 2002. 

Sec. 4.0. - Purpose and scope. 
The purpose and intent of this article is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the aesthetic quality of the city. Signs are a proper use of private property and serve an important function in identifying and promoting properties, businesses, services, events, and are also a means of personal expression. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. This article shall govern placement, maintenance, and removal of signs within the City of Flemington by establishing standards for the number, size, height, spacing, and illumination of signs. This article is not intended to prohibit the First Amendment right for free speech guaranteed by the United States Constitution. However, absent any regulations, signs tend to proliferate leading to thoroughfares cluttered with signs, which might pose hazards to pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists. 
The following lists the specific purposes of this article: 
To control the proliferation and placement of signs in an unregulated manner so to pose a safety hazard and a threat to the aesthetic value and economic vitality of the city and its environment. 
To protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with the surrounding areas, to protect the public investment in the streets and the highways, and to protect and maintain the residential and historic character of residential areas. 
To preserve and protect the value of land and buildings, and to preserve and protect landscapes; 
To have signs that are by design an integral architectural element of the building and site; 
To control the use of increasingly vibrant, ostentatious, and distracting signs that might cause a higher level of distractibility for motorists and are in contrast to the vision and sense of place the City of Flemington wants to create. 
To preserve the views of open spaces from unnecessary blight and blockage caused by signage and billboards. 
In addition, certain corridors or districts along Flemington's major thoroughfares and gateways have different composition of historic, residential, and commercial areas and therefore require different approaches to sign standards. 
4.0.1.  Gateway Corridor (Hwy 84 E) is the predominant location of commercial properties and is also designated as Flemington's overlay-commercial district (OC-1). Signage shall be complementary to the buildings' design and shall be encouraged to be designed such as to contribute in a positive way to the city's image and local character. This shall be especially true for new developments. 
4.0.2.  Old Towne Corridors. Old Hines Road, Old Sunbury Road, and Old Savannah Road contain historic structures and are predominantly residential in character. Signs on these corridors must remain limited in number, scale, and design to retain the original distinction of this area and emphasize and preserve the sense of place. Large, modern, and ostentatious signage is not in keeping with these corridors. 
4.0.3.  Contemporary Corridors. Wallace Martin Drive, Joseph Martin Road; Patriots Trail. 
All other roads shall be classified by Flemington's Mayor and Council. A map depicting Flemington's up-to-date road network shall be adopted by Flemington's Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.1. - General sign requirements. 
4.1.1  Sign placement. A sign may be erected, placed, created, or maintained in the city only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this article. Signs shall have a setback of at least ten feet off of the public right-of-way line unless otherwise noted in this article. 
4.1.2  Sign construction and maintenance. All permanent signs shall be constructed of non-combustible materials. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with applicable building and electrical codes, state laws, and sound engineering practices. All signs, together with their supports, braces, guys and anchors, shall be kept in good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall be given a protective coating as necessary to maintain a clean appearance and safe condition. Defective, broken, or rusting parts shall be repaired promptly. 
4.1.3  Federal/state highways. All signs located on sites abutting federal or state highway rights-of-way shall conform to all applicable federal or state regulations. In instances where the sign controls of this ordinance are stricter, then the city's regulations shall apply. 
4.1.4  Clearance standards. Signs shall be located such that there is at every intersection and driveway clear sight distance for pedestrians, cyclists, and motorists traveling on or entering any street, road, or highway. 
4.1.5  Sight triangle. On any corner lot, a triangle formed by measuring from the point of intersection of the front and exterior side lot lines a distance of 25 ft. for streets and roads and 15 ft. along access drives and connecting the points so established to form a sight triangle on the area of the lot adjacent to the intersection. 
(1)  Streets and roads. The area formed at a corner intersection of two public roads and streets whose two sides are 25 feet, measured along the right-of-way line of the two roads/streets, and whose third side is a line connecting the two sides. 
(2)  Driveways/alleys. The area formed at a corner intersection of public right-of-way and a driveway, whose two sides are 15 feet, measured along the right-of-way line of the street and the edge of the driveway, and whose third side is a line connecting the two sides 
4.1.6  Permit requirements. Except where specifically excluded by other provisions of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to post, display, substantially change, alter or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained all applicable state and local permits. 
4.1.7  Obscene display. No sign shall contain any statement, words or pictures that would constitute a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, or any other applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.2. - Permit required and procedures. 
4.2.1  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, replace, restore, alter, or relocate within this municipality any sign or billboard as defined in this article, without first obtaining a permit from the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission and the City of Flemington in the manner set forth in this section. However, a permit shall not be required for ordinary and necessary repairs and maintenance of signs previously permitted and for signs as exempted by this article. 
4.2.1.1  Application for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the City of Flemington and the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
4.2.1.2  Name, mailing address, and telephone number of the person, firm, corporation, or association erecting the structure; 
4.2.1.3  Written consent of the owner of the building or land to which, or on which the structure is to be erected; and 
4.2.1.4  The address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign or billboard is to be attached or erected; 
4.2.1.5  One accurate scale drawing of the plans, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground for the sign or billboard; this drawing of the site shall depict drives, rights-of-way, property lines, buildings, sight distance triangles, other signs, and any other limiting site features; also describe or depict materials, dimensions and elevations of the sign, dimension of any supporting structure of the sign, and height of the sign; 
4.2.1.6  For illuminated signs indicate type of illumination;. 
4.2.1.7  Inventory of number, type, location, and display area for all existing signs on the same property and /or building on which the sign is to be located may also be required as determined by the zoning official; 
4.2.1.8  Sign installation must be certified by a structural engineer as being designed to meet/exceed a 110 mph wind load unless the request is waived by the City of Flemington and the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission; 
4.2.1.9  Electrical load calculations and wiring plan must be in accordance with NFPA 70 and other documents, if required; all signs must bear the "U.L." label; 
4.2.1.10  Such other information as the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall require showing full compliance with this and all other ordinances of the city. 
4.2.2  Issuance of permit. 
4.2.2.1  Upon the filing of an application for a permit and the payment of all necessary fees as required by this section, it shall be the duty of the City of Flemington and the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission to examine all plans and specifications submitted and the premises upon which the structure is proposed to be erected, replaced, restored, altered, or relocated, and if it shall appear that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the requirements of this article and all other ordinances and laws of the City of Flemington, the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall then issue the permit. Such review shall be completed within 45 days from complete submittal of the sign permit application and other requested information. If the work authorized under a permit has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance, the said permit shall become null and void. No refunds shall be made for permits that expire. One 90-calendar day extension can be granted by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
4.2.2.2  The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission and City of Flemington's Mayor and Council shall deny any sign permit application that does not meet the requirements of this article or contains insufficient or false information. 
4.2.3  Procedures upon denial of permit application or revocation of existing permit. 
4.2.3.1  If a permit is denied, the City of Flemington and/or Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall state the reasons for denial in writing. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail or by first class mail or hand delivered to the applicant's address listed on the application, on or before the 45th day of submittal of the application to the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
4.2.3.2  If a permit has been revoked, the City of Flemington and/or Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall state the reasons in writing. The notice shall be mailed by certified mail or by first class mail or hand delivered to the applicant's address listed on the application. If the applicant cannot be reached, a notice of revocation shall be affixed onto the sign itself. 
4.2.3.3  In any circumstance where the sign ordinance has been violated, the City of Flemington shall have the discretion and the authority to issue or have issued a citation for all violations not remedied within 30 days of written notification by certified mail. Each additional day said condition remains uncorrected beyond the 30-day period shall constitute a separate offense and each offense shall be punishable by a $100.00 fine. The city may cause any such sign to be removed following the 30-day notice at the expense of the owner thereof, and to destroy or otherwise dispose of same. 
4.2.3.4  Any sign applicant/permittee whose application was denied or revoked may appeal that decision to the Liberty County Superior Court as provided by law. 
4.2.3.5  While a sign appeal is under way, no action shall be taken by the City of Flemington or the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
4.2.4  Procedures for hazardous and temporary signs, and unauthorized signs. 
4.2.4.1  Hazardous signs. If the city determines that any sign is structurally unsafe, a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment, capable of causing electrical shocks to members of the public, or is placed in the right-of-way without a permit, the city shall immediately remove such signs at the expense of the owner. If the owner of said removed sign is known, the city shall provide notice to the owner of the removal of said sign and if such sign is not retrieved from the city within 24 hours notice of the removal of said sign, the city may destroy or otherwise dispose of the same without incurring any liability to the owner thereof. 
4.2.4.2  Temporary signs in violation. The City of Flemington and the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall have the authority to and may, without notice, immediately remove any and all temporary signs that are in violation of this section. The expense incurred by the city for the removal of said signs may be billed to and collected from the individual, special interest group, or organization responsible for placement of the sign. 
4.2.4.3  Owner of property with unauthorized sign. Nothing herein shall prohibit the owner of any property or the owner's designee from immediately removing any sign placed thereon without authority of such owner. 
4.2.5  Display of permit. Every sign or billboard constructed, erected, or maintained for which a permit is required by this article shall be plainly marked with the permit decal issued for said structure firmly affixed thereon in such manner that the information therein contained shall be readily accessible and durable. 
4.2.6  Permit fees. On all signs or sign electrical circuits requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing the application, in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges maintained and established by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission and/or by Liberty County Building and Licensing. Fees for permits shall be fixed from time to time by Flemington's Mayor and Council. A sign permit application is considered incomplete if payment requested has not been made. Removal of signs off of the city's rights-of-way or signs that pose a danger to the public are exempt from notice and appeal procedure. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.3. - Prohibited signs. 
4.3.1  The following signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
4.3.1.1  Signs imitating warning signals are prohibited. No sign shall display lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, regardless of the color; nor shall any signs use the words, slogans, dimensional shape and size, or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
4.3.1.2  It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post, or nail any paper, metal, wood or other signs of any character on any natural features (such as trees or rocks), fence posts, telephone, electric or other utility type poles, located in any public right-of-way. 
4.3.1.3  Portable signs unless otherwise indicated in this ordinance. 
4.3.1.4  Signs for business operations located in any residential districts are prohibited. 
4.3.1.5  Roof signs and trailer-mounted signs are prohibited. 
4.3.1.6  Sign walker. A person holding a sign walking alongside the road or a person in a costume waving or holding a sign for any extended period of time in the same general vicinity. 
4.3.1.7  Dilapidated or deteriorated signs as defined in section 4.4.3 and section 4.4.4. 
4.3.1.8  Reserved. 
4.3.1.9  Beacon/searchlight/spotlight (see definitions). 
4.3.1.10  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A § 16-12-80. 
4.3.1.11  Signs shall not be in violation of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 
4.3.1.12  Signs that threaten, intimidate, or may incite violence or unrest. 
4.3.1.13  Rotating signs/flashing/animated signs ( see definitions). 
4.3.2  The following signs are exempt from this article; however, application for a permit may be required for public safety reasons as determined by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
4.3.2.1  Traffic and other municipal signs, such as railroad crossing signs, legal notices, and such temporary emergency signs as required. 
4.3.2.2  Signs of public utility companies indicating danger, or which serve as an aid to public safety, or which show the location of underground facilities or of public telephones. 
4.3.2.3  "No Trespassing" signs, or other such signs regulating the use of property, such as "No Hunting', "No Fishing", etc. of no more than two square feet in area. 
4.3.2.4  Memorial signs, or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface, or inlaid so as to be part of the building, or when constructed of any bronze or other non-combustible materials. 
4.3.2.5  Directional signs. Directional signs not exceeding four square feet in area and no more than a maximum height of four feet, and with lettering not exceeding six inches in height, designed to direct and inform the public as to the location of exits, entrances, service areas, loading and unloading areas, or other matter of a similar informational nature. Directional signs shall be limited, however, to no more than two per business to be displayed at any entrance and/or exit. 
4.3.2.6  Flags, governmental. The flagpole structure upon which a governmental flag as defined herein is displayed shall not exceed 20 feet in height or be less than ten feet from the street right-of-way. 
4.3.2.7  Non-illuminated signs no more than 16 square feet in aggregrate area in residential areas. 
4.3.2.8  Public signs or other signs incidental thereto for identification, information or directional purposes erected or required by governmental bodies. 
4.3.3.9  Signs which are not intended and designed to be legible from public rights-of-way or adjacent properties, such as menuboards for drive-through restaurants, signs interior to a shopping center, commercial buildings and structures, ball parks, stadiums, and similar uses. 
4.3.3.10  Portable sign. One non-illuminated portable sign like an A-Frame Sign ( aka sandwich board sign) located not more than five feet off of the entrance to the business and not exceeding three ft in height and three ft in width during business hours. Sign shall be removed every day after business is closed or during inclement weather conditions. 
4.3.3.11  Wayfinding signs or historic markers erected by the City of Flemington can be located in city rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.4. - Special requirements, regulations and construction standards; all signs. 
4.4.1  Wind pressure and dead load requirements. All signs and billboards shall be designed and constructed to meet or exceed 110 m.p.h. windload and shall be constructed to receive dead loads as required in the city's building code or other ordinances or laws of the city or state. 
4.4.2  Materials required. All permanent signs and billboards for which this article requires a permit shall be made out of non-combustible materials. 
Signs for which a permit is not required under this Ordinance that are constructed of deteriorating materials may be posted for a maximum of 60 days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any other such replacement sign may be posted for another 60 days maximum. 
4.4.3  Maintenance. All signs regulated by this article shall be kept in good condition and not show signs of deterioration, dilapidation, or neglect as described below and be clean, neatly painted, and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose connections, and the premises surrounding same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a sanitary and inoffensive condition, free and clear of all weeds, rubbish, and debris. 
4.4.4  Dilapidated or deteriorated condition. Any sign which has the following characteristics shall be considered dilapidated or deteriorated: 
Where elements of the surface or background can be seen as viewed from the normal viewing distance, where portions of the finished material or paint flaked, broken off, or missing, or otherwise not in harmony with the rest of the surface; or 
Where the structural support or frame members are visibly bent, broken, dented, or torn; or 
Where the panel is visibly cracked, or materials are disintegrating in such a way as to constitute an unsightly or harmful condition; or 
Where the sign or its elements are twisted or leaning or at angles other than those at which it was originally erected such as a result of a failure of a structural support; or 
Where the message or wording can no longer be clearly read under normal viewing conditions. 
4.4.5  Stanchion signs or monument signs. Corner, double-frontage lots shall be allowed a secondary stanchion or monument sign on the secondary frontage. Commercial lots with more than 600 feet of road frontage shall also be permitted a secondary freestanding sign spaced a minimum of 150 feet from the primary sign. Secondary freestanding signs shall not be more than ten feet in height and have one half the sign area of the principal freestanding sign. 
4.4.6  Building/wall sign. If three signs per business are permitted per Corridor specifications, they can be of any combination, e.g., wall, mansard, projecting, or window sign. 
4.4.7  Construction requirements for banners. All banners for display shall not exceed 60 square feet of sign face and be mounted to a permanent structure and may not be displayed on temporary mounting such as metal stakes, wood posts or trees, or other improvised manner. Banners shall be constructed of a weight and material type strong enough to withstand gusting winds and inclement weather. The corners of said banner shall be reinforced for stronger durability. All banners shall be maintained in good condition. 
4.4.8  Surface of signs. All signs or billboards shall have a smooth surface, and no nails, tacks, or wires shall be permitted to protrude therefrom, except electrical reflectors and devices which may extend over the top and in front of the advertising structures. 
4.4.9  Moveable parts. Chains or hinges shall securely fasten any movable part of any sign or billboard. 
4.4.10  Reflectors. Goose neck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on stanchion signs and wall signs; provided, however, the reflectors shall be provided with proper glass lenses concentrating the illumination upon the area of the sign so as to prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. 
4.4.11  Internal illumination. The illumination of signs or billboards in which the light source is concealed or contained within the structure itself and which becomes visible in darkness by shining through a translucent surface shall not exceed 16 foot candles of incident light measured at a distance of ten feet from such structure. All such signs that are illuminated shall use base-mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall have photoelectric cells for purposes of activation. 
No other lighting, including, but not limited to, neon, running lights, or animation, shall be permitted. 
4.4.12  Floodlight illumination. Signs or billboards illuminated by floodlights or spotlights shall be positioned in such a manner that none of the light spills over or onto adjoining property or glares or shines into the eyes of motorists or pedestrians. 
4.4.13  Fluctuating illumination. Any attraction device or sign that flashes, blinks, is animated, or fluctuates in light intensity shall be prohibited; 
4.4.14  Obstruction to doors, windows, or fire escapes. No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained so as to prevent free ingress to, or egress from, any door, window, or fire escape; nor shall any sign be attached to any standpipe or fire escape. 
4.4.15  Signs not to constitute traffic hazard. No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this article shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or be placed at any location where by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal, or device: or make use of the words "STOP," "LOOK," "DRIVE-IN," "DANGER," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
4.4.16  Removal of certain signs. Any sign deemed to be abandoned shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the building, structure, or property upon which such sign may be found within ten days after written notification by certified mail is made by the city. 
4.4.17  Historical sites. Signs within 300 feet of any officially designated historical site or monument shall require a special permit approved by the mayor and city council. However, signs pertaining to that particular historical site shall not require special permit approval. 
4.4.18  No signs shall be erected within ten feet of an established road right-of-way line except as otherwise provided herein. 
4.4.19  All signs must conform to section O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 
4.4.20  Extrusions. No extrusion outside the face of the sign, except for the apron, shall be allowed. 
4.4.21  Sign copy. The content of all signs shall be in compliance with section O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 
4.4.22  Stanchion signs and billboards. 
4.4.22.1  Height limitations. Height limitations shall be as prescribed in the section of this ordinance relative to the zone and corridor within which the sign shall be erected. 
4.4.22.2  Signable area limitations. Signable area limitations shall be as prescribed in the section of this ordinance relative to the land use zone, and/or corridor within which the sign is to be erected. 
4.4.22.3  No sign facing shall be located closer than two feet off the ground. 
4.4.22.4  Multi-tenant signs. Individual sign panels or cabinets on the same sign structure shall be uniform in width and similar in design. 
4.4.22.5  Distance between signs. No stanchion sign shall be nearer than 25 feet to any other sign; and a stanchion sign which is six square feet or more in area may not be closer than 75 feet to any other stanchion sign which is six square feet or more in size, unless otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
4.4.22.6  Erection standards. Stanchion signs and billboards shall meet all construction standards as specified in the applicable section of the current State of Georgia adopted Standard Building Code governing signs. 
4.4.22.7  Setback requirement. No stanchion, monument sign, or pole and panel sign shall be erected on, over, or within ten feet off any public right-of-way unless otherwise permitted by this article. 
4.4.22.8  Public parks, etc. No billboard shall be erected within a 1,000-foot circumference of the nearest property line of any of the following: historic site, school, church, hospital, retirement or nursing home, cemetery, governmental building, public park, playground, recreation area, convention center, or any area in which billboards are prohibited. 
4.4.22.9  Electronic (changeable) message signs. Electronic changeable message signs can only be located on stanchion signs or monument signs. 
4.4.22.9.1  Each message shall remain fixed for at least 15 minutes. 
4.4.22.9.2  The transition from one message to another shall occur in three seconds or less. The transition shall occur without any special effects like swiping, fading, or any other special effect transition method. 
4.4.22.9.3  The illumination of an electronic message sign shall not exceed 12 foot candles as measured from the nearest point of the highway or public road. 
4.4.22.9.4  A certified statement of a structural engineer that the footing of the sign is adequate to securely anchor the sign into place. 
4.4.22.10  Billboards adjacent to the highway shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under the Georgia Outdoor Advertising Law. 
4.4.22.11  No billboard shall be located in such a position that it obstructs or obscures the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in such a manner as to endanger the safe movement thereof. 
4.4.22.12  Each billboard shall be set back at least ten feet from any road or street right-of-way line, measured from the closest part of the billboard. 
4.4.22.13  No billboard shall be located within a 1,000 feet off any right-of-way underpass, overpass, bridge or tunnel, or within 1,000 feet of any street intersection. 
4.4.22.14  No billboard shall be permitted whenever property zoned residential would be between the sign and the roadway toward which it is oriented. 
4.4.22.15  No part or foundation or support of any billboard shall be placed on, in, or over any private property without the written consent of the property owner. 
4.4.22.16  No part or foundation or support of any billboard shall be placed on, in, or over any public property, including public rights-of-way, or any utility or drainage easement, or upon telephone or utility poles, or natural features such as trees and rocks. 
4.4.22.17  No billboard shall be erected or maintained upon or above the roof of any building structure. 
4.4.22.18  No billboard shall be constructed on a lot where it obscures or shades the windows or doorways of adjacent buildings. 
4.4.22.19  No two billboards located upon, or oriented towards traffic traveling upon the same side of a public street or road with four or more lanes shall be spaced less than 2,000 feet apart; on the same side of public streets or roads with less than four lanes, the spacing shall be no less than 2,000 feet apart. This distance shall be measured along a straight line between the two nearest points of the signs. The minimum spacing requirement shall not apply to two panels viewed from different directions that share a common support structure. Nor shall any billboard be located within a 2,000-foot radius of any other billboard even though the two billboards are on different streets. 
4.4.22.20  No billboard shall exceed 300 square feet in total surface display area. 
4.4.22.21  Billboards may be single-faced or double-faced but no billboard shall contain more than one face on each side of the display and the surface area (sign face) shall not exceed a total area of 300 square feet per structure 
4.4.22.22  No billboard shall be permitted which, because of its size, shape, or location, may obscure or obstruct the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or be confused with any authorized traffic control sign, signal, or device. 
4.4.22.23  No billboard shall be permitted which, because of its size, shape, or location, may impair any scenic vista from the highway or a building adjacent to the highway or to the billboard. 
4.4.22.24  No billboard shall exceed 25 feet in height. This distance shall be measured from the highest point of paved or unpaved highway or road to the highest point of the billboard. Two signs in the same location, whether back-to-back or in a "V" formation, shall be the same height above the surface of the highway. 
4.4.23  Wall signs. Signs on the walls of a building (including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs and projecting signs) shall meet the following requirements: 
4.4.23.1  Erection standards. Wall signs shall meet all construction standards as specified in the applicable section of the current State of Georgia adopted Standard Building Code governing signs. 
4.4.23.2  Placement and signable area limitations. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially cover any wall opening, or project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached, or project away from such wall more than eight inches. Wall signs placed in the space between windows may not exceed in height more than two-thirds of the distance between the top of the window and the sill of the window above. 
4.4.23.3  Projection above sidewalk. No wall sign shall be attached to a wall at a height of less than ten feet above the sidewalk or ground. 
4.4.23.4  Illuminated signs. Illumination devices shall be so placed and so shielded that light from the sign itself will not be directly cast into any residential district, sleeping rooms in any district, or the eyes of an automobile or vehicular driver. 
4.4.24  Awning and canopy signs. Awnings and canopies that incorporate signs shall relate to the shape of the opening. Direct back illuminated awnings are prohibited. However, awnings may be illuminated with direct surface lighting (e.g. gooseneck lighting). This lighting restriction shall not apply to lighting that is intended for sidewalk illumination. Awnings and support structures shall have a minimum clearance of eight feet above a sidewalk and above all other mode of traffic lanes. 
4.4.25  Projecting signs. 
4.4.25.1  Signable area limitations. The signable area of any one projecting sign shall not exceed 100 square feet each side. 
4.4.25.2  Projections. No sign shall project from the wall of a building more than six feet. 
4.4.25.3  Projection over public property. Every projecting sign shall be placed at least 12 feet above the public sidewalk over which it is erected, and a distance not greater than two feet from the face of the wall to which it is attached, measuring from the point of the sign nearest thereto; and no sign or part thereof shall extend nearer the curb line than one foot. Projecting signs shall not project over public driveways, alleys, and thoroughfares. 
4.4.25.4  Erection standards. Projecting signs shall be in conformance with the requirements as outlined in the current State of Georgia adopted Standard Building Code governing sign construction. 
4.4.26  Temporary and mobile signs. 
4.4.26.1  Size and signable area limitations. Size and signable area limitations for temporary or mobile signs shall be as prescribed in the section of this ordinance relative to the zone and corridor in which the sign is to be erected. 
4.4.26.2  Placement limitations. No temporary or mobile sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way, Any temporary sign exceeding aggregate sign area of 16 square feet shall be located at least ten feet off of the right-of-way. 
4.4.26.3  Erection standards. Each temporary sign shall meet all construction standards as specified in the applicable section of the current State of Georgia adopted Standard Building Code governing signs. 
4.4.26.4  Sign lighting. The sign shall not be lighted either directly or indirectly. 
4.4.26.5  Sign location. The sign shall be located entirely on the property of the owner. 
4.4.26.6  Signs in violation. The City of Flemington and the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall have the authority to and may, without notice, immediately remove any and all temporary signs that are in violation of this section. The expense incurred by the city for the removal of said signs may be billed to and collected from the individual, special interest group or organization responsible for placement of the sign. 
4.4.26.7  Permitting procedures. For temporary signs in residential areas, sign permitting procedures are waived. 
4.4.26.8  Temporary signs. Temporary signs are prohibited on public property and in the public right-of-way including any public buildings, or fences surrounding public properties, sidewalks, crosswalks, curbs, curbstones, fences, walls, public playground equipment and/or facilities, street lamp posts, traffic light poles, guy lines, horizontal struts, city barricades, hydrants, trees, shrubs, tree stakes or guards, railroad trestles, poles for electric light or power or telephone wire, public bridges, drinking fountains, street signs or traffic signs, planter strips and in city facilities such as parks, City Hall, libraries, fire stations, and corporation yards. The public right-of-way generally extends behind the sidewalk, if one is present. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.5. - Gateway Corridor (Hwy 84 E). 

 

 
The City of Flemington Mayor and Council shall review each sign application for height and sign area requirements and for aesthetics and compatibility with the architecture of the building especially in the commercial overlay district area (OC-1). 
For existing and new development in the OC-1 corridor the following shall be taken into consideration: 
Sign structures shall be architecturally designed and incorporate design details, materials, and colors of the associated buildings. 
When a building contains several store fronts, signs for the individual businesses shall relate well to each other in terms of locations, height, proportion, color, and illumination. Individual tenant sign panels should be uniform or similar in size. Maintaining continuity will enhance the appearance of the buildings and the common areas. 
Internally lit illuminated cabinet signs are discouraged. The use of signs with a projected light-source (spotlight), individually illuminated letters, either internally illuminated or backlit solid letters (reverse channel) are preferred, as they are easier integrated into the design of the building. 
If institutional/civic/community uses are located in residentially zoned areas, only non-illuminated or externally illuminated signage shall be allowed. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.6. - Old Towne Corridors. 

 

 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.7. - Contemporary Corridors. 

 

 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.8. - Nonconforming signs. 
4.8.1  Nonconforming signs. Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, 
Until one of the following conditions occur: 
4.8.1.1  Reserved. 
4.8.1.2  The sign is abandoned or obsolete. 
4.8.1.3  The permittee or property owner fails to maintain the sign in accordance with this article. 
4.8.1.4  When 50 percent or more of the sign structure of any nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed (including poles, cabinet, or support structure), the sign structure shall be replaced so as to comply with all applicable provisions of the City of Flemington zoning ordinance. 
4.8.1.5  No changes in shape, size, or design, shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this ordinance. 
4.8.2  Non-durable signs. Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth, or other non-durable material, all temporary signs other than those permitted herein, and any signs that are not affixed to a building or the ground shall be removed within 12 months of the date of enactment of this article. 
4.8.3  Replacement of nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign shall not replace another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or changeable copy on nonconforming signs shall be permitted 
4.8.4  Minor repairs and maintenance. Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs, such as repainting, electrical repairs, and neon tubing shall be authorized. Structural repairs or changes in the sign or shape of any sign [size] shall not be allowed except to cause the sign to be brought into compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.9. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4.10. - Reserved. 
Sec. 4.11. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 5.1. - Type of districts. 
For the purpose of this ordinance the area of Flemington, Georgia, is hereby divided into the following zoning districts: 

 
Sec. 5.2. - Zoning maps. 
The boundaries of these zoning districts are hereby established on a map to be designated "zoning map" for the City of Flemington, Georgia, which is hereby made a part of this ordinance, together with all existing and future notations, references and amendments. The originals of said zoning map properly attested, shall be and remain on file in the office of the planning commission, with copies at the office of the clerk of superior court of Liberty County and Flemington city hall. 
Sec. 5.3. - District boundary lines. 
The district boundary lines on the zoning maps are intended to follow property lines on the centers of streets, alleys, railroads or watercourses. In the case of unsubdivided property, the district boundary lines shall be determined using the appropriate scale. 
ARTICLE VI. - USES PERMITTED IN DISTRICTS 

Sec. 6.1. - "A-1" agricultural district. 
6.1.1  Permitted uses : 
6.1.1.1  Single- and two-family dwellings including mobile homes with their customary uses, on the basis of one dwelling for each one acre of land or more under the same ownership. 
6.1.1.2  All commercial agricultural pursuits, and structures incidental thereto, including dairy products, livestock, poultry and poultry products, field crops, truck crops, horticultural specialties and forestry. 
6.1.1.3  Churches, charitable, semi-private or philanthropic institutions or camps and state parks. 
6.1.1.4  Airfield, together with subordinate uses. 
6.1.2  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in any agricultural district on a conditional basis upon approval by the governing authority after review by the planning commission. 
6.1.2.1  Commercial riding stables provided that no building or enclosure for animals is located closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
6.1.2.2  Cemetery. The minimum size for a cemetery shall be one acre. 
6.1.2.3  Planned unit development (PUD) upon approval of the planning commission. 
6.1.2.4  Home occupation upon approval of local governing authority. 
6.1.3  Prohibited uses. Any business, commercial, or industrial use, except in connection with the agricultural pursuits otherwise permitted in this section. 
6.1.4  Lot and building requirements. 
[Principal buildings.] The principal building, accessory buildings, and other land uses shall be located so as to comply with the following requirements: 

 
Accessory buildings. 
Minimum setback from lot line: 
Front: 50 feet 
Rear: 25 feet 
Side: Same as principal building. 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
Sec. 6.2. - "AR-1"agriculturaI residential district. 
6.2.1  Permitted uses: 
6.2.1.1  Single-family dwellings, including mobile homes, and their customary uses, on the basis of one dwelling for each 30,000 square feet of land or more under the same ownership. 
6.2.1.2  All uses permitted in the agricultural district as shown in section 5.1. 
6.2.2  Conditional uses: 
6.2.2.1  Small retail commercial establishments upon the approval of the governing authority. 
6.2.2.2  Cemeteries under same conditions as for 5.1.2.2. 
6.2.2.3  Bed and breakfast inns. 
6.2.2.4  Home occupations upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.2.3  Lot and building requirements: 

 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
(Amd. of 7-13-2010) 
Sec. 6.3. - "R-1" single-family residential district. 
6.3.1  Permitted uses: 
6.3.1.1  Single-family detached dwelling (other than a mobile home). 
6.3.1.2  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses, including normal club house and pro shop activities, and other business activity associated with country clubs. 
6.3.1.3  Noncommercial horticulture or agriculture, but not including the keeping of poultry or animals. 
6.3.2  Conditional uses: 
6.3.2.1  Home occupations upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.3.2.2  Planned Unit Development (PUD) upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.3.2.3  Churches, synagogues, temples or other place of worship provided that: (1) such use is housed in a permanent structure, and (2) no stricture on the lot is closer than 25 feet to any abutting residential property line. 
6.3.2.4  Public and private school engaged in teaching general curriculum for educational advancement provided the structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any residential property line. 
6.3.2.5  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is neither office nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around facility. 
6.3.2.6  Cemetery, provided that such use: (1) consists of a site of at least one acre; (2) includes no crematorium or dwelling unit other than for a caretaker, (3) has a front yard setback of at least 70 feet from the centerline of the street or ten feet from the street right-of-way line; whichever is further. 
6.3.2.7  Bed and breakfast inns. 
6.3.3  Lot and building requirements. 
[Principal buildings.] The principal building and accessory buildings shall be located and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 

 
Accessory buildings 
Minimum setback from lot line: 
Rear: 7½ feet 
Side: Same as principal building 
Required utilities. The minimum lot area is only permitted for property served by a central water system and a central sanitary sewer service system. If no central sanitary sewer service is available, an applicant for a building permit must have a minimum of 25,000 square feet. If neither central sanitary sewer nor central water system is available in the area at the time of building the applicant must have a minimum of 30,000 square feet and the permit will be issued with the requirement that upon such time that either service is extended to the property, hook-up will be required within 90 days. Health department approval must be obtained prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
Sec. 6.4. - "R-2" two-family residential district. 
6.4.1  Permitted uses: 
6.4.1.1  All permitted uses in the single-family residential district. 
6.4.1.2  Duplexes and two-family structures. 
6.4.1.3  Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted users. 
6.4.2  Conditional uses: 
6.4.2.1  Mobile homes upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.4.2.2  Home occupations upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.4.2.3  Planned Unit Development (P.U.D.) upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.4.2.4  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers, provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is neither office nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. 
6.4.2.5  Cemetery, provided that such use: (1) consists of a site of at least one acre; (2) includes no crematorium or dwelling unit other than for a caretaker, (3) has a front yard setback of at least 70 feet from the centerline of the street or ten feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is further. 
6.4.2.6  Churches, synagogues, temples, or other places of worship provided that: (1) such use is housed in a permanent structure, and (2) no structure on the lot is closer than 25 feet to any abutting residential property line. 
6.4.2.7  Public and private school engaged in teaching general curriculum for educational advancement provided the structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any residential property line. 
6.4.2.8  Bed and breakfast inns. 
6.4.3  Lot and building requirements. 
Principal buildings. 

 
Required utilities. The minimum lot area is only permitted for property served by a central water system and a central sanitary sewer service system. If no central sanitary sewer service is available, an applicant for a building permit must have a minimum of 20,000 square feet. If neither central sanitary sewer nor central water system is available in the area at the time of building the applicant must have a minimum of 30,000 square feet and the permit will be issued with the requirement that upon such time that either service is extended to the property, hook-up will be required within 90 days. 
Accessory buildings. 
Minimum setback from lot line: 
Rear: Ten feet 
Side: Same as principal building 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
Sec. 6.5. - "R-2A" single-family, two-family, and mobile home residential district. 
6.5.1  Permitted uses: 
6.5.1.1  All permitted uses in a single-family residential district. 
6.5.1.2  Duplexes and two-family structures. 
6.5.1.3  Mobile homes as defined in this ordinance. 
6.5.1.4  Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted uses. 
6.5.2  Conditional uses: 
6.5.2.1  Home occupations upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.5.2.2  Planned unit development (P.U.D.) upon approval by the local governing authority. 
6.5.2.3  Public utilities substation or subinstallation including water towers provided that: (1) such use is enclosed by a painted or chain link fence or wall at least, six feet in height above finished grade; (2) there is neither office nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises; and (3) a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained around the facility. 
6.5.2.4  Cemetery; provided that such use: (1) consists of a site of at least one acre; (2) includes no crematorium or dwelling unit other than for a caretaker; (3) has a front yard setback of at least 70 feet from the centerline of the street or ten feet from the street right-of-way line, whichever is further. 
6.5.2.5  Churches, synagogues, temples, or other places of worship provided that: (1) such use is housed in a permanent structure, and (2) no structure on the lot is closer than 25 feet to any abutting residential property line. 
6.5.2.6  Public and private school engaged in teaching general curriculum for educational advancement provided the structures are placed not less than 50 feet from any residential property line. 
6.5.2.7  Bed and breakfast inns. 
6.5.3  Lot and building requirements. 
Principal buildings: 

 
Required utilities. The minimum lot area is only permitted for property served by a central water system and a central sanitary sewer service system. If no central sanitary sewer service is available, an applicant for a building permit must have a minimum of 12,000 square feet per unit. If neither central sanitary sewer nor central water system is available in the area at the time of building the applicant must have a minimum of 20,000 square feet per unit (25,000 square feet minimum for duplexes) and the permit will be issued with the requirement that upon such time that either service extended to the property, hook-up will be required within 90 days. 
Accessory buildings. 
Minimum setback from lot line: 
Rear: Ten feet 
Side: Same as principal building 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
Sec. 6.6. - "R-3" multi-family residential district. 
6.6.1  Permitted uses: 
6.6.1.1  All permitted uses in the single-family residential district and two-family residential district. 
6.6.1.2  Multiple family dwellings, rooming houses, fraternities, sororities, and dormitories. 
6.6.1.3  Customary accessory buildings incidental to the above permitted uses. 
6.6.2  Lot and building requirements: 
Principal buildings. Garden apartments: 

 
Accessory building. 
Minimum set back from lot line: 
Rear: Ten feet 
Side: Same as principal building 
Principal building: Townhouse 

 
Principal building: Condominium 

 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
6.6.3  Conditional uses: 
6.6.3.1  Bed and breakfast inns. 
Sec. 6.7. - "R-4" mobile home park residential district. 
6.7.1  Permitted uses: 
6.7.1.1  Mobile home parks, and accessory structures incidental thereto. 
6.7.1.2  Recreational facilities. 
6.7.1.3  Laundry facilities solely for the mobile home park occupants. 
6.7.1.4  Office and mail facilities for the mobile home park. 
6.7.1.5  The sale of new and used mobile homes shall be permitted within the boundaries of an approved mobile home park subject to the following conditions: 
6.7.1.5.1  Allowable number. The number of mobile homes for sale shall not exceed five percent of the total number of approved mobile home spaces in the mobile home parks. 
6.7.1.5.2  Location. Mobile homes for sale shall be located only on approved mobile home spaces in the mobile home parks, and subject to the same setbacks and yard requirements as occupied mobile homes. 
6.7.1.5.3  Maintenance. There shall be no renovation, overhaul, or repair to mobile homes offered for sale within mobile home parks. However, customary maintenance shall be permitted, such as would be allowed for an occupant while living in a mobile home. 
6.7.1.5.4  Advertising. There shall be no advertising signs, banners, pennants, or any type of display advertising mobile homes for sale except that one sign, not over 18 inches by 24 inches shall be permitted to be posted on each mobile home offered for sale. 
6.7.2  Approval of mobile home parks. No mobile home park may hereafter be developed or expanded until all requirements and regulations set forth in the mobile home park ordinance for the county and this zoning ordinance have been met and the site plan thereof has the approval of the local governing authority. 
Required utilities. A minimum lot of 8,000 square feet area is permitted for mobile home parks on property with or without a central water system and/or a central sanitary sewer service system. 
Sec. 6.8. - "B-1" neighborhood commercial district. 
6.8.1  Permitted uses: 
Retail stores 
Personal services 
Professional services and offices 
Banks 
Commercial offices 
Soda fountains, cafes or restaurants (without entertainment) 
Parking areas 
Mortuaries 
Public and semi-public uses 
Utilities (except storage yards) 
Accessory uses to the above 
Outdoor signs 
6.8.2  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a neighborhood commercial district upon approval of the governing authority: 
Multiple dwellings 
Theaters (indoor) 
Entertainment facilities 
Casual flea markets 
Drive-in commercial uses (not including drive-in theaters) 
Automotive sales with service and repair related to the sales. (Six foot fence required on sides and rear of facility.) 
Accessory uses to the above. 
Minimum side setback, street: 15 feet 
Maximum building height: 35 feet 
Maximum percent of lot coverage: 25 percent 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
6.8.3  Lot and building requirements. 
Principal and accessory buildings: 

 
Minimum side setbacks for interior lots may be zero feet when two adjacent lot owners wish to abut their property and so request in writing. (Request should be made on application for building permit). Governing authority may approve smaller lot sizes when buildings are to abut. 
Sec. 6.9. - "B-2" general commercial district. 
6.9.1  Permitted uses: 
Service stations 
Restaurants 
Motel and tourist courts 
Tourist homes 
Entertainment facilities 
Retail businesses 
Personal services 
Offices and banks 
Professional activities 
Garages for service (excluding storing junked vehicles outdoors) 
Mortuaries 
Animal hospitals, clinics or kennels 
Commercial greenhouses and plan nurseries 
Golf-driving ranges and miniature golf 
Public and semi-public uses 
Utilities 
Lumberyards 
Tire retreading and recapping 
Business services 
Food processing 
Research and testing facilities 
Commercial recreation 
Hotels 
Printing, lithographing or publishing plants 
Taverns 
Malt beverage manufacturers and/or retailers 
Brewpubs 
Wine retailers 
Alcoholic beverage manufacturers and distributors 
Accessory uses to the above 
Outdoor advertising signs 
Clubs and lodges 
Mobile home sales 
Automotive sales, with service and repair related to sales, (six foot fence required on sides and rear). 
6.9.2  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in a general commercial district upon approval of the governing authority: 
Amusement parks 
Feed and grain, sales and storage 
Wholesale business 
Equipment sales and repair 
Truck terminals 
Stone or monument works 
Bulk fuel storage 
Cleaning, laundry and drying plants 
Drive-in theaters 
Cemeteries 
Apartments 
Machine shops 
Flea markets 
Billiard or poolrooms 
Pawnbrokers 
Accessory uses to the above 
6.9.3  Lot and building requirements: 

 
Minimum setbacks for interior lots may be zero feet when two adjacent lot owners wish to abut their property and so request in writing. (Request should be made on application for building permit.) Governing authority may approve smaller lot sizes when buildings are to abut. 
Lot sizes indicated in this section are the minimum sizes allowed. Due to local soil conditions, larger lot sizes may be required by the Liberty County Health Department when individual septic tanks are used. 
(Amd. of 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 6.10. - "I-1" industrial district. 
All uses in an industrial district shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
6.10.1  Submission of plans. The owner of a tract of land zoned for industrial uses shall submit to the planning commission for its review a plan for the use and development of each tract of land. It shall then be the duty of the planning commission to investigate and ascertain whether the proposed activity complies with all of the provisions of this ordinance that pertain to "I-1" districts. The commission may employ experts in specific fields as needed, and as funds are available, to determine whether a proposed use meets the required performance standards. 
6.10.2  Referral and authorization. A report of its findings shall be furnished by the commission to the governing authority. The commission may suggest disapproval, recommend the plan as submitted, or may modify, alter, adjust or amend the plan before recommendation, and in recommending it, may propose the prescribing of other conditions. The report of the planning commission to the governing authority shall be in writing, and shall include a finding as to whether the proposed use is consistent with the applicable provisions and requirements of the zoning ordinance. If the governing authority finds that the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of the zoning ordinance to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, it may direct the proper official to authorize a permit. 
6.10.3  Performance standards. All industrial uses must conform to the following performance standards: 
6.10.3.1  Smoke. The emission of gray smoke at a density greater than No. 1 on the Ringlemann Chart published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines (Power's Micro-Ringlemann Chart, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co., 1954, may be used) shall not be permitted except gray smoke of a shade not darker than No. 2 may be emitted for not more than four minutes in any 30 minutes. These provisions, applicable to gray smoke, shall also apply to visible smoke of a different color but with equivalent apparent capacity [opacity]. 
6.10.3.2  Odor. No emission of unpleasant gases or other odorous matter shall be permitted in such quantities as to be offensive outside the lot lines of the tract. Any process that may involve the creation of emission of any odors shall be provided with secondary safeguard system, so that control will be maintained if the primary safeguard system should fail. There is hereby established as a guide in determining such quantities of offensive odors Table 3 (Odor Thresholds) in Chapter 5 "Air Pollution Abatement Manual," copyright 1951, by Manufacturing Chemists Association, Inc., Washington, D.C. Where said publication gives a range of figures a simple average of these shall be used. 
6.10.3.3  Toxic gases. The emission of gases or fumes injurious to persons or property beyond the lot lines occupied by the use is prohibited. 
6.10.3.4  Glare and heat. Glare and heat from arc welding, acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be performed so as not to produce glare which is visible, or objectionable heat, beyond the property line of the lot on which the operation is located. Direct glare from incandescent exposed lights shall not be visible from adjoining streets or properties. 
6.10.3.5  Sewage. No discharge is permitted at any point in any private sewage disposal system or stream or into the ground, of any materials in such a way or of such nature or temperature as could contaminate any water supply, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous objectionable elements. 
6.10.3.6  Vibration. Any use creating intense earthshaking vibration shall be set back as far as possible from the lot lines on all sides, and, in no case shall any such vibration be perceptible along any lot line. 
6.10.4  Uses prohibited. 
6.10.4.1  Residential subdivisions and developments and the construction of dwellings on existing lots zoned as industrial except for dwellings for watchmen, caretakers or farms. All buildings shall be a minimum of 1,500 feet from the closest industrial building. 
6.10.4.2  Schools, hospitals, clinics, or other institutions for human care, except where incidental to a permitted principal use. All buildings shall be a minimum of 2,000 feet from the closest industrial building. 
6.10.5  Conditional uses. The following uses shall be permitted in an industrial district upon approval of the board of commissioners: 
Solid waste disposal area 
Junkyards 
Bulk-fuel storage 
Accessory uses to the above 
Sec. 6.11. - "PUD" planned unit development district. 
The purpose of the planned unit development (P.U.D.) district is to encourage flexibility in land planning that will result in improved design, character, and quality of new homogeneous and mixed use developments; to promote the most appropriate use of land; to facilitate the provision of streets and utilities; and to preserve the natural and scenic features and open space. In order that the public health, safety and welfare be furthered in an era of increasing urbanization and growing demand for housing of all types and design; to ensure that the exacted zoning ordinance provisions encourage innovations in residential and nonresidential development and redevelopment so that the growing demand for housing and commercial areas may be met by a greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space ancillary to said buildings; so that greater opportunities for better housing and recreation may extend to all citizens and residents; and in order to encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services and to reflect changes in the technology of land development so that economies secured may add to the benefit of those who need homes; and, in the aid of these purposes to provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and layout of residential and nonresidential development to the particular site and the particular demand for housing and commercial activity existing at the time of development in a manner consistent with the preservation of the property values within existing areas, and to ensure that the increased flexibility of regulations over land development authorized herein is carried out under such administrative standards and procedures as shall encourage the disposition of proposals for land development without undue delay; this section is enacted. 
6.11.1  General requirements of the planned unit development district (P.U.D.): 
6.11.1.1  The provisions of section 6.11 of this article shall apply only to a tract of land: (1) which either has a minimum of five acres, or (2) a minimum of 20 units. The review procedures will require a P.U.D. conceptual development plan, a P.U.D. general development plan, a P.U.D. specific development plan, and a P.U.D. final development plan. 
6.11.1.2  The P.U.D.'s conceptual, general, specific and final development plans require a recommendation from the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission (LCPC) to the governing authority. The governing authority will vote to approve, deny or table any action submitted. 
Properties consisting of less than 50 acres shall not be required to submit a P.U.D. conceptual development plan and may begin the review process with an application and a P.U.D. general development plan. 
Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application for a planned unit development an applicant, at applicant's option, said applicant may confer with the planning commission to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys, and other data. 
6.11.1.3  Commercial areas within all planned unit developments shall comply with the following: 
• All planned unit development plans which propose commercial uses shall identify the proposed areas as either general commercial and/or neighborhood commercial and describe the proposed building forms. 
• For purposes of this subsection, "neighborhood commercial" means commercial areas with use and design standards generally consistent with the B-1 zoning district, further described within article V, section 6.8 of the city zoning ordinances. Neighborhood commercial uses may be included as part of the P.U.D. specific development plan. 
• For purposes of this subsection, "general commercial" means commercial areas with use and design standards that are generally consistent with the B-2 district, further described within article V, section 6.9 of the city zoning ordinance. 
6.11.1.4  Reserved. 
6.11.2.  The P.U.D. conceptual development plan. 
P.U.D. Conceptual development plan. The planning commission in its review of the P.U.D. conceptual development plan shall consider: 
• The adequacy of existing and proposed streets, utilities, and other public services to serve the development. 
• The character, design, and appropriateness of the proposed land uses and their adequacy to encourage desirable living conditions, to provide separation and screening between uses where desirable to preserve the natural amenities of streams, wooded areas and similar natural features. 
• The adequacy of open and play areas and other recreation facilities will be considered in harmony with the needs of the development and community. 
• The P.U.D. conceptual development plan shall include general design standards governing the building form and architectural design, the general design and location of parking areas, pedestrian circulation, and plazas, arcades, squares or other civic spaces. A detailed design booklet of the building forms and architecture shall be submitted with the application. The design standards shall be approved by the planning commission and the local governing authority. 
6.11.2.1  A recommendation of approval from the planning commission to the governing authority shall be accompanied by a report stating the reasons for recommendation of approval of the application and specific evidence and facts showing that the proposed planned unit development will not adversely affect the property adjacent to the area included in the plan. 
6.11.2.2  A recommendation of approval of a planned unit development P.U.D. from the planning commission to the governing authority shall not be granted until the owner or owners of the property give written notice of their consent to the proposed development. 
6.11.3  The P.U.D. general development plan review and administrative procedures. 
P.U.D. General development plan. The establishment of a planned unit development ("P.U.D.") requires public hearings by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission and approval of the P.U.D. general plan for the proposed development by the local governing authority. 
The land area to be covered by the P.U.D. general development plan must be defined by a survey. The specific parcels and exact limits of the project shall be identified. The general development plan should identify and map the types of uses in the planned unit development. The general location for streets, parks and other amenities, as well as the overall densities and intensities of all uses. The general development plan should provide all information required for any state required development of regional impact (DRI) analysis. The governing authority approval of the general development plan will constitute the approval for the P.U.D. zoning for the area. Where approval has been granted by the governing authority the same shall be noted on the zoning map. 
6.11.3.1  In reviewing the P.U.D. general development plan the planning commission shall consider, among other things, the consequences of the plan on traffic flow, the economy in the provision of public services, maintenance of open space and preservation of sensitive natural areas, the extent to which the development is planned as a unit, the relationship of activities within the development, and particularly the compatibility of the planned neighborhood with properties not a part of such development. 
6.11.3.2  In exercising its discretion as to the recommendation of approval or disapproval of a planned unit development, the planning commission shall be guided by consideration of suitability and desirability of such development in relation to its location and surroundings. No such development shall be recommended for approval unless the commission finds that it will constitute a sustainable environment of continuing desirability and stability, in reasonable harmony with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and ensuring substantially the same or a higher standard of development than that which occurs pursuant to a base zoning district. 
6.11.4  The P.U.D. specific development plan. the following information shall appear on the specific development plan: 
P.U.D. Specific development plan. Detailed plan and general location map, showing the projected area prepared at a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall show such designations as proposed streets (public and private), all buildings and their use, common open space, recreation facilities, parking areas, service areas, and other facilities to indicate the character of the proposed development. The submission may be composed of one or more sheets and drawings and shall include: 
6.11.4.1.1  Boundary lines. Bearings and distance. 
6.11.4.1.2  Easement. Location, width, and purpose. 
6.11.4.1.3  Streets on, and adjacent to, the tract. Street name, right-of-way width, existing or proposed centerline elevations, pavement, walks, curbs, gutters, and culverts (and their respective types). 
6.11.4.1.4  Utilities on, and adjacent to, the tract. Location, size, and invert elevation of sanitary and storm sewers; location and size, of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, manholes, electrical and telephone lines and street lights; direction and distance to, and size of, nearest water mains and sewers adjacent to the tract showing invert elevation of sewers. 
6.11.4.1.5  Ground elevations on the tract. For land that slopes less than two percent, show one foot contours; show spot elevations at all breaks in grades, along all drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than 100 feet apart in all directions; for land that slopes more than two percent, show contours at five-foot intervals. 
6.11.4.1.6  Subsurface conditions on the tract if required by the appropriate engineer. Location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock, and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater, unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet. 
6.11.4.1.7  Zoning on, and adjacent to, the tract. 
6.11.4.1.8  Internal uses of each building or structure, as well as the specific overall land use of the premises. 
6.11.4.1.9  Title and certificates. Present tract designation according to official records of the office of deeds; title under which the proposed development is to be recorded, with names and addresses of owners, and notation stating acreage. 
6.11.4.1.10  Names. The names and addresses of the persons to whom notice of hearings are to be sent including the sub-divider or developer, the designer of the subdivision or development, and the owners of the land within 200 feet of any part of the property proposed to be changed. 
6.11.4.1.11  Open space. All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use or reserved for the use of all property owners with the purpose indicated and their sizes. 
6.11.4.1.12  General location, purpose, and height of each building, other than single-family residences on individually platted lots. 
6.11.4.1.13  Map data. Name of development, north point, scale and date of preparation. 
Character. Explanation of the character of the planned unit development and the reasons it has been planned to take advantage of the flexibility of these regulations. 
6.11.4.1.14  Ownership statement of present and proposed ownership of all land within the project. 
6.11.4.1.15  Development schedule indicating: 
6.11.4.1.16  Stages in which project will be built with emphasis on area, density, use, and public facilities such as open space to be developed with each stage. Overall design of each stage shall be shown on the plan and through supporting graphic material. 
6.11.4.1.17  Approximate dates for beginning and completion of each stage. 
6.11.4.1.18  Covenants. Proposed agreements, provisions which will govern the use, maintenance, and continued protection of the planned unit development and any of its usable open space. The covenant documents should be submitted for review during the preliminary plan process. The official covenant documents should be for recorded with the final development plan. 
6.11.4.1.18.1  Density. Provide information on the density of uses, including structures per acre, and the number of buildings by type. Total number of parking spaces. 
Total number of dwelling units in the project. Number and type of nonresidential units in the project. Types and square footage of floor spaces of all nonresidential uses provided. 
6.11.4.1.19  Nonresidential use. Provide information on the type and amount of ancillary and nonresidential uses in a residential planned unit development, including the amount and location of usable open space. 
6.11.4.1.20  Service facilities. Provide information on all service facilities and off-street parking facilities. 
6.11.4.1.21  Architectural plans. Preliminary architectural plans for all primary buildings shall be submitted in sufficient detail to permit an understanding of the style of the development, the design of the building, and the number, size, and type of dwelling units. 
6.11.4.1.22  Facilities plans. Preliminary plans for: 
Roads, including classification, width of right-of-way, width of pavement, and construction details. 
Sidewalks 
Sanitary sewers 
Storm drainage 
Street light plan 
Water supply system 
Underground supply system 
General landscape planting plan 
6.11.4.1.23  Review of preliminary residential plans: 
Public hearings. Within 60 days after the filing of a specific development plan for approval a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said application shall be held by the planning commission. The specific development plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission and a recommendation for approval or disapproval shall be made to the local governing authority. 
6.11.4.1.24  A verbatim record of the hearing shall be made by the planning commission whenever such records are requested by any party to the proceeding; but the cost of making and transcribing such a record shall be borne by the party requesting it and the expense of copies of such record shall be borne by those who wish to obtain such copies. All exhibits accepted in evidence shall be identified and duly preserved or, if not accepted in evidence, shall be properly identified and the reason for the exclusion clearly noted in the record. 
6.11.4.1.25  The governing authority may continue the hearing from time to time, and may refer the matter back to the planning agency for a report. Any requested report must be returned to the agency within 120 days after the date of the request or a statement should be submitted to the governing authority explaining the cause(s) for delays which prevent the planning agency from returning the requested report to the governing authority. 
6.11.4.1.26  The planning commission, within 120 days following the conclusion of the governing authority's public hearings shall provide by official written communication, to the landowners, the decision of the governing authority; which shall be either; 
(1)  Grant approval of the specific development plan as submitted; 
(2)  Grant approval subject to specified conditions not, included in the specific development plan as submitted; or 
(3)  Deny approval to the specific development plan. 
In the event, that approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official written communication of the planning commission, notify such governing body of such landowner's refusal to accept all said conditions, in which case, the planning commission shall be deemed to have denied approval of the development plan. 
In the event the landowner does not, within said period, notify the planning commission of such landowner's refusal to accept all said conditions, approval of the specific development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as granted. 
The grant or denial of approval by official written communication shall include not only conclusions, but also findings of fact related to the specific proposal and set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or for the denial, and said communication shall set forth with particularity in what respects the specific development plan would or would not be in the public interest. 
6.11.4.1.27  Status of specific development plan after approval: 
The official written communication provided for in this article shall be certified by the secretary or clerk of the planning commission and shall be filed in such office, and a certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner. 
6.11.4.1.28  Approval of a specific development plan shall not qualify nor release a plat of the planned unit development for recording nor authorize development or the issuance of any building permits. 
6.11.4.1.29  Within a maximum of 18 months following the approval of the specific development plan, the applicant shall file with the planning commission a final development plan. At its discretion and for good cause, the planning commission upon written request from the applicant may extend for six months the period for filing of the final development plan. 
6.11.5  The P.U.D. final development plan. The final development plan shall be reviewed and recommended by the planning commission for approval or disapproval to the local governing authority after substantial completion of all improvements according to the subdivision ordinance. 
P.U.D. Final development plan. 
6.11.5.1.1  In the event that a P.U.D. development plan is given approval and thereafter, but prior to final development plan approval, the landowner shall elect to abandon said development plan and shall so notify the governing authority in writing, or in the event the landowner shall fail to file application or applications for final development plan approval within the required period of time or times, as the case may be, the approval shall be deemed to be revoked and all that portion of the area included in the specific development plan for which final approval has not been given shall be subject to those local ordinances otherwise applicable thereto as they may amended from time to time, and the same shall be noted on the zoning map and in the records of the secretary or clerk of the governing authority. 
6.11.5.1.2  A final development plan, suitable for recording with the register of deeds shall be prepared. The purpose of the planned unit development plan is to designate with particularity the land subdivided into conventional lots as well as the division of other lands, not so treated, into common open areas and building areas, and to designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building or structure as well is of the land in general. The final development plan of the P.U.D. planned unit development shall include, but not be limited to: 
6.11.5.1.3  An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate development within the planned unit development. 
6.11.5.1.4  If subdivided lands are included in the planned unit development, a subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all the requirements of a normal subdivision plat. 
6.11.5.1.5  An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use area, including usable open space. 
6.11.5.1.6  Designation of the exact location of all buildings to be constructed, and a designation of the specific internal uses to which each building shall be put. 
6.11.5.1.7  Tabulations on each separate unsubdivided use area, number of dwelling units per square acre along with net usable area. 
6.11.5.1.8  All public facilities and improvements made necessary as a result of the final development plan shall be either constructed in advance of the approval of the final plan, or, at the election of the governing authority. Escrow deposits, irrevocable letters of credit in a form approved by the governing authority, or performance bonds shall be delivered to guarantee construction of the required improvements. 
6.11.5.1.9  Final agreements provisions, or covenants shall govern the use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned residential development. 
6.11.5.1.10  A landscape plan showing the location, type and size at installation of all proposed landscape materials, existing landscaping and trees to be retained on the site, as well as an identification of the existing trees will meet the requirements of the city tree ordinance, all proposed fences, walls, berms and any pertinent architectural elements associated with the landscaped plan. 
6.11.5.1.11  The applicant shall submit an 18-inch by 24-inch reproducible Mylar of the approved final development plan to the planning commission which, at the expense of the developer, shall record final development plan in the office of the register of deeds. The Mylar shall contain the following information: 
6.11.5.1.12  Graphic representation of the exact location of all buildings and accessory structures. 
6.11.5.1.13  Land use characteristics in table form containing the following information: 
6.11.5.1.14  Gross project area in terms of acres. 
6.11.5.1.15  Net project area in terms of acres. 
6.11.5.1.16  Approved density for the project in terms of area per structure. 
6.11.5.1.17  Approved usable open space for the project in terms of square feet of open space per structure. 
6.11.5.1.18  Total number of parking spaces. 
6.11.5.1.19  Total number of dwelling units in the project. 
6.11.5.1.20  Number and type of nonresidential units in the project. 
6.11.5.1.21  Types and square footage of floor spaces of all nonresidential uses provided: 
6.11.5.1.22  Graphic representation of all public easements and legal descriptions thereof, to which the easement is conveyed, the purpose of such easement, and any conditions relating to the use of the easement. 
6.11.5.1.23  Legal description of the gross project area. 
6.11.5.1.24  All public and private streets, roads, and alleys included in the project shall be shown by their bearings, widths and names. All streets, roads or alleys, not dedicated to public use, shall be marked "private" and named. All curves, portions of streets, roads or alleys shall be defined by curve data including points of curvature, points of tangency, points of compound curvature, radii of curves, central angles and length and bearing of its long chord. 
6.11.5.1.25  In the event streets in the planned unit development are to be dedicated, a statement shall appear on the Mylar that the streets shown on it are dedicated to the use of the public. 
6.11.5.1.26  The planning commission shall issue a certificate certifying the final approval of the planned unit development, and the chairman of the planning commission shall place such chairman's signature on such certificate, which shall appear on the Mylar. In the event said Mylar is not submitted, the building official shall not issue any building permits for the development or phase of a particular development until said Mylar is received. 
6.11.5.1.27  In the event the planned unit development is to be submitted for final approval in stages, the applicant shall submit reproducible Mylar for each stage of the development containing the information required above. 
6.11.5.1.28  Control of the final development plan after final approval. 
6.11.5.1.29  After the certificate of approval has been issued and the final plan recorded, no changes may be made in the approved final development plan except upon application to the appropriate agency under the procedures provided below: 
6.11.5.1.30  Major land use changes. Changes which alter the concept or intent of the P.U.D., including changes in the approved public street or private drive construction standards, increases in density, decreases in proposed open space, changes in sizes of public and/or private sewer or water lines, other than service connections, resulting in less capacity, changes in the location of and types of nonresidential uses approved by the governing authority, change in the alignment of any street, drive, parking area or water or sewer line in excess of 25 feet, change in the location of any public casements, change in the proportion of housing types by more than five percent or 50 dwelling units of the approved dwelling unit count, a violation of any specific condition set forth by the planning commission or governing authority and any changes in the final governing agreements, provisions, or covenants. All such changes may be approved only by submission of a new final development plan and supporting data, following the "preliminary approval" steps and subsequent amendment of the P.U.D. final development plan. 
6.11.5.1.31  Minor land use changes. The following minor changes to the approved P.U.D. final development plan may be authorized by the chairman of the planning commission upon written request by the developer and upon submission of detailed plans demonstrating the requested change: 
6.11.5.1.31.1  Decrease in density. 
6.11.5.1.31.2  Increases in open space. 
6.11.5.1.31.3  Changes in the proportion of housing unit types by less than five percent but not more than ten approved dwelling units. 
6.11.5.1.31.4  Increases in acreage of the planned residential development providing that the acreage under consideration is five percent or less of the gross site area, in which the increase can only be used for open space or parking. 
6.11.5.1.32  Minor engineering changes. The following minor engineering changes to the approved engineering plans may be authorized by the director of public works in consultation with the appropriate engineer and others as required only upon written request by the developer and submission of detailed engineering plans demonstrating the requested change: 
6.11.5.1.32.1  Changes in road alignment and parking lot location by 25 feet or less. 
6.11.5.1.32.2  Changes in the alignment of storm and sanitary sewers and water by 25 feet, or less. 
6.11.5.1.32.3  Increases in the approved capacity of storm and sanitary sewers and water lines. In the event a situation occurs where it is not clear whether a modification constitutes a major or minor change, the responsibility to make such determination shall be jointly vested with the chairman of the planning commission, and the appropriate engineer. 
6.11.5.1.32.4  A P.U.D. final development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final approval shall be so certified without delay by the planning commission and shall be filed on record forthwith in the office of the recorder of deeds before the development shall take place in accordance therewith. Upon filing record of the P.U.D. final development plan, the zoning and subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall cease to apply thereto. Pending completion within a reasonable time of said planned residential development or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of said P.U.D. final development plan, or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made except with the consent of the landowner. 
6.11.5.1.32.5  [Reserved.] 
6.11.5.1.32.6  Re-filing of disapproved or withdrawn petitions. If the governing authority denies a petition or decides the matter adversely, thereafter the governing authority shall take no further action for substantially the same proposal or the same property, until one year after the date of such disapproval. If a rezoning petition is advertised, and thereafter withdrawn by the applicant before or at the meeting of the governing authority, applicant shall be precluded from filing another application for substantially the same proposal on the same premises for six months. 
6.11.5.2  Irrevocable letter of credit. 
6.11.5.2.1  The applicant shall be the developer. 
6.11.5.2.2  The beneficiary shall be the City of Flemington. 
6.11.5.2.3  The governing authority must be able to draw on the letter of credit when a signed statement from the governing authority is shown to the lending institution. Such statement must certify that the developer is in default of the accompanying agreement. The statement must also show the amount of money due as a result of such default. 
6.11.5.2.4  Credit must be automatically extended for an additional period one year from the present and each future expiration date unless the governing authority is notified not less than 45 days in advance of an expiration date. The letter of credit shall not be withdrawn or reduced until all required improvements are completed and accepted by the local governing authority. 
6.11.5.2.5  The governing authority must be able to draw the outstanding balance of money upon presentation of a signed statement by the governing authority as a cash bond to secure continued adherence to the terms of the agreement. This clause would be utilized in the event the lending institution chooses not to extend the expiration date and improvements are not complete. 
6.11.5.2.6  The lending institution will receive the original letter of credit marked "cancel" upon tender of payment or upon completion of improvements to the satisfaction of the governing authority. 
6.11.5.2.7  The lending institution must agree to be responsible for the governing authority's court costs and attorney fees in the event the governing authority initiates a suit under the letter of credit. 
6.11.5.2.8  The letter of credit must state that the letter of credit is specifically governed by the Uniform Commercial Code (or similar code) in force in the State of Georgia. 
6.11.5.2.9  Acceptance of improvements. Upon completion of all required (street, drainage, lighting, signage, water, sewer, etc.) improvements, the governing authority may accept the dedication of streets and other improvements. Each portion of these improvements must have also been inspected and approved by the engineer or his designated representative. These improvements must also have been constructed in accordance with the standard specifications. Prior to acceptance of the improvements, the governing authority must obtain the engineer's certificate and a maintenance bond. The acceptance of any improvements by the local governing authority shall be recorded in the official minutes of the governing authority. 
6.11.5.2.10  A maintenance bond is required for acceptance of the completed paving, curb and gutter, sidewalks, drainage, water and sewer facilities, and other required improvements. The bond shall be written in the amount of 15 per cent of the construction cost of the work. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission's engineer. The maintenance bond shall guarantee the work for a period of two years from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the local governing authority. 
During the period of the two-year guarantee, any maintenance, replacement or repair required will be the responsibility of the developer. The required improvements will be inspected by the developer at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. Any required maintenance shall be completed prior to release of the bond. If maintenance is not completed, the bond will be forfeited to the governing authority. Upon the expiration of the two-year period, the governing authority may assume maintenance of the accepted improvements. Prior acceptance by the governing authority shall not relieve the developer of responsibility for subsequent failures occurring within the period of the two-year guarantee. If at any time during the two-year period the developer fails to make prompt repairs or fails to maintain the road to the satisfaction of the governing authority, the governing authority may inform the developer and utilize bond funds or guarantee funds as needed. 
(Ord. No. 2009-02, 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 6.12. - "DM-1" dunes and marshlands district. 
It is the intent of this district to protect those areas of the city that are considered to be environmentally sensitive to development due to soil types, drainage, vegetation, wildlife habitats or other factors that are subject to being seriously endangered, damaged, or destroyed if allowed to develop in a manner inconsistent with their conservation and preservation. Since the welfare and well-being of the citizens of the city are directly linked and related to the natural environment of the area, it is recognized that in order to maintain sensitive areas in their natural condition for the benefit of mankind, it is necessary to protect such areas from degradation. All regulations of the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act shall be applicable in this district. 
6.12.1  Establishment of dunes and marshland areas. Areas that meet any one of the following criteria shall be considered environmentally sensitive areas, subject to the conditions of this section, which may be applied to such areas: 
6.12.1.1  Marshland. All land subject to tidal action which is comprised of generally unstable soil materials commonly known as "hard or soft" marsh grass, reeds and similar growth and is usually characterized by poor land bearing capacity. Marshland lies below an elevation of 5.6 feet above mean sea level. 
6.12.1.2  Dunes. All land where, through natural action of the wind, sand has accumulated in hills and ridges forming a mound of sand. This area is usually confined to the soil classification Kershaw-Osier complex and is found immediately adjacent to the Atlantic Ocean on the barrier islands. The slopes range from zero to eight percent. 
6.12.2  Permitted uses in marshland and dune areas. 
6.12.2.1  Boating. 
6.12.2.2  Swimming. 
6.12.2.3  Sunbathing. 
6.12.2.4  Picnicking. 
6.12.2.5  Fishing. 
6.12.2.6  Hunting. 
6.12.2.7  Educational uses. 
6.12.2.8  Other active and passive recreational uses not inherently destructive to the existence or integrity of the marshlands and dune lands. 
6.12.3  Conditional uses in marshland areas. The applicant for a conditional use permit shall prove conclusively that the proposed use will have no significant short or long-term adverse environmental effects, including increasing potentials for disturbance of existing ecosystems, penetration of channels of navigable waterways, interference with existing established dune sequences; and exposure of inland properties to wind, water, or wave damage. Subject to the conditions set forth, the following uses shall be permitted in the marshland areas: 
6.12.3.1  Seawalls. 
6.12.3.2  Jetties 
6.12.3.3  Bulkheads. 
6.12.3.4  Piers. 
6.12.3.5  Revetments. 
6.12.3.6  Groins. 
6.12.3.7  Breakwaters. 
6.12.3.8  Roads, streets, utility lines, sewer lines. 
6.12.4  Conditional uses in dune areas. 
6.12.4.1  No conditional uses are allowed in dune areas of the "DM-1" Districts. 
6.12.5  Permit required for marshland alterations. A permit from the State Coastal Marshlands Protection Committee, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, is required for many types of marshland alterations. (Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970, Georgia Laws 1970, p. 939; Coastal Marshlands Protection Committee. Georgia Laws 1972, pp. 1015, 1027, and amendment Georgia Laws 1973, p. 564.) 
State Law reference— Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-280. 
Sec. 6.13. - "O-1" office-institutional district. 
6.13.1  Permitted uses: 
6.13.1.1  Professional and business offices, including medical clinics, but not including the practice of veterinary medicine. 
6.13.1.2  Agencies, studios, schools and libraries. 
6.13.1.3  Financial institutions. 
6.13.1.4  Municipal, county, state or federal use, but not including warehouses or outside storage areas. 
6.13.1.5  Community centers and similar places of public assembly. 
6.13.1.6  Hospitals. 
6.13.2  Conditional uses. When approved by the governing authority. 
6.13.2.1  Pharmacy, when O-1 district includes medical clinics, doctor's offices and/or a hospital. 
6.13.2.2  Private or public care homes, provided such facility conforms with the requirements of the Georgia State Board of Health and provided plans for such facilities receive the written approval of the Liberty County Board of Health prior to the issuance of any permits for construction and operation; copies of such approval to be attached to the building permit and to be retained in the files of the county building official. 
6.13.3  Lot and building requirements. 

 
Minimum side setbacks may be zero feet when two adjacent lot owners wish to abut their buildings. Lot sizes may be decreased when buildings are to abut. 
Parking shall be in accordance with section 3.29.2 
(Amd. of 10-13-2009) 
Sec. 6.14. - "OC-1" overlay-commercial district. 
In addition to the general requirements for the general commercial district listed in section 5.8, the specific purposes of the overlay commercial district is to: 
Encourage and provide a means for effectuating the development of a more desirable environment by the application of planning techniques not specifically applicable to all commercial development through the literal application of the zoning ordinance. 
Establish a procedure for commercial development in order to ensure that the appearance and effects of buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the area in which they are located. 
Ensure orderly and thorough planning and review procedures that will result in quality urban design. 
Provide a mechanism whereby the city may authorize desirable commercial development in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan without inviting speculative rezoning applications. 
6.14.1  Where the (OC-1) overlay-commercial district has been imposed, the land use regulations and development standards of the existing land use zone (herein referred to as the "underlying" zone) shall remain in full force, except as follows: 
6.14.1.1  Landscape buffers. 
6.14.1.1.1  Site planning and design of projects proposed adjacent to dissimilar land uses shall carefully address the potential undesirable impacts on existing uses. These impacts include traffic, parking, circulation and safety issues, light and glare, noise, odors, dust control and security concerns. 
6.14.1.1.2  Unattractive project elements such as storage areas, trash enclosures, transformers, generators and similar features should be sited in areas which are generally not visible from the street and must also be screened from view. 
6.14.1.1.3  Landscaping shall be provided adjacent to and within parking areas to screen vehicles from view and to minimize the expansive appearance of parking fields. This landscaping should include fast growing trees in parking lots to create summer shade. 
6.14.1.1.4  Landscape planting areas shall be provided an average of every 20 parking stalls within a surface parking lot to provide visual relief and summer shade. Landscape planting areas that are used for separation between banks of parking stalls shall be a minimum of four feet in width. In general, the minimum clear inside dimension of a landscape planting area shall be two feet. However, trees (with the exception of shrub standards) shall not be planted in areas of less than four feet in width. 
6.14.1.2  Signage 
6.14.1.2.1  All signs shall be architecturally integrated with their surroundings in terms of size, shape, color, texture, and lighting so that they are complementary to the overall design of the building and are not in visual competition with other signs in the area. 
6.14.1.2.2  All signs shall complement their surroundings without competing with each other, shall convey their message clearly and legibly, shall be vandal-proof and weather resistant, and if illuminated, shall not be overly bright for their surroundings. 
6.14.1.2.3  New signs proposed for existing buildings shall provide a compatible appearance with the building signage of other tenants. With multiple signs on a single building, attempt to bring in a unifying element (such as size), even where no sign program exists. 
6.14.1.2.4  New construction design shall anticipate signage and, where necessary, a sign program. New building design should provide logical sign areas, allowing flexibility for new users, as the building is re-tenanted over time. Designs that provide for convenient and attractive replacement of signs are encouraged. 
6.14.1.3  Building compatibility 
6.14.1.3.1  Architectural design shall be compatible with the developing character of the neighboring area. Design compatibility includes complementary building style, form, size, color and materials. 
6.14.1.3.2  Multiple buildings on the same site shall be designed to create a cohesive visual relationship between the buildings. 
6.14.1.3.3  Exterior building design and detail on all elevations shall be coordinated with regard to color, types of materials, number of materials, architectural form, and detailing to achieve harmony and continuity of design. 
6.14.1.4  Building structures 
6.14.1.4.1  Encourage the decline of the "mini-mall" and building structures like it. 
6.14.1.4.2  The appearance of a "sea of asphalt" parking lot in the front of the center shall be avoided. Both perimeter and interior parking lot trees shall be provided for shade and visual relief in the parking area while maintaining view corridors to the storefront areas. 
6.14.1.5  Utilities 
6.14.1.5.1  Encourage the use of underground utilities whenever possible on new construction and property improvements. Such buried utilities must be in compliance with standards as set forth by the Georgia Power Company. Such standards read, in part, as follows: 
6.14.1.5.1.1  Buried encroachments may be permitted within rights of way provided operation and maintenance are not adversely affected and provided the following standards are observed: 
6.14.1.5.1.1.1  All buried encroachments cross the right of way perpendicularly, if at all possible, at least 25 feet at ground line from any structure or attachment. 
6.14.1.5.1.1.2  Underground construction parallel to the centerline of any easement is limited to the outside five feet of the right of way. Locate manholes off the right of way, if at all possible. If it is necessary for manholes to be on the right of way, place them flush with the ground and use Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) strength specifications. Bolted covers may be required on gravity sewer systems. 
6.14.1.5.1.1.3  Locate septic drain fields off the right of way except where terrain dictates it must be on right of way. Drain field should be limited to the outer five feet of the right of way if at all possible. 
6.14.1.5.1.1.4  The utility will not be responsible for any damage to any facilities placed on its right of way. 
6.14.1.5.1.2  Electrical transformers, which are installed as part of a new project, shall be located to the rear of the site or underground. Substantial landscaping and/or an architectural barrier shall screen existing transformers located at the front of the site. (See Acceptable Vegetation under 5.13.1.1(c)) 
6.14.1.5.1.3  Utility lines and utility located within the easement on either side of a highway shall have landscape buffers as allowed by the Georgia Power Company. Landscapes buffers shall consist of vegetation acceptable by Georgia Power's standards. Such standards read, in part, as follows: 
The following is a list of trees and ornamentals that are acceptable species for planting on Georgia Power Company transmission rights of way. Generally, in order to qualify for consideration, a plant cannot reach a mature height greater than fifteen feet, and must be located in a landscaped area. This area shall be maintained by the property owner in such fashion that it is obvious to all that it is a landscaped area, not requiring work from a right of way crew. If the trees are planted in an area where right of way crews could mistake it for "brush", it will likely be cut down. 
General plants: 

 
The following plants are not permitted: 

 
6.14.1.6  Auto dealerships 
6.14.1.6.1  Special attention shall be directed toward the site landscaping which is visible from the street. Trees to provide both shade and visual relief shall be located within the dealership (insofar as it is reasonably practical with auto display) as well as on the site perimeter. The vehicle display parking areas may remain relatively open, if balanced by substantial landscaping and tree planting on other visually prominent areas of the site. 
6.14.1.6.2  Landscaping, special paving treatments, setbacks, and building orientation shall be used to provide an attractive appearance from the front property line. 
6.14.1.6.3  The architecture of the dealership buildings shall be well designed to provide a strong and unique visual identity for the auto dealership. 
6.14.1.6.4  The service area and/or service bays shall be screened or sited so they are not visible from the street. 
6.14.1.6.5  Vehicles under repair shall be kept either inside a structure or in an area that is screened from views from the street. 
6.14.1.6.6  Service areas shall provide adequate queuing space that does not impede vehicle circulation through the site or result in vehicles stacking into the street. 
6.14.1.6.7  Perimeter fencing, security fencing, or gateways shall be constructed of attractive materials, which are compatible with the design, and materials used throughout the project. Razor wire or electric fencing shall not be allowed and chain link fencing is strongly discouraged. 
6.14.1.6.8  Night lighting and security lighting shall be sensitively designed to ensure that no off-site glare is directed to neighboring parcels and that the overall intensity of the site lighting is not excessive. The use of excessive night-time security lighting is discouraged. Other security measures should instead be considered. 
6.14.2  Site plan review. Preliminary and final site development plans shall be prepared by the developer for all proposed developments in any OC-1 overlay commercial district and shall be submitted for review and approval as follows: 
6.14.2.1  Plans required. Plans for a development shall be drawn at an appropriate scale and shall include the following: 
Survey. Property and topography, showing land owned and proposed for development, the surrounding streets, adjoining streets and adjoining lots and their uses; 
Buildings. Location, size, height and use of all proposed main and accessory buildings, the general design, materials and colors, and the nearest buildings on adjoining lots and their uses; 
Traffic. Proposed system of on-site vehicular circulation, details of accessways to streets, methods for control of traffic and types of pavement; 
Parking areas. Layout and estimate of the number of spaces, landscaping and other design features and types of pavement; 
Utilities. Location, size and grade of all utility installations and connections to present or proposed facilities; 
Site development. Grading plan, designs of landscaped yards, planting areas and fence screens adjoining residential areas, the size, location and type of all outdoor signs, and exterior lighting; and 
Agreements. Preliminary drafts of all agreements, contracts, dedications, deed restrictions, sureties and other instruments as may be required. 
6.14.2.2  Approval of plans. A preliminary development plan designed in accordance with the planning standards, regulations and criteria established in this section and elsewhere in this ordinance shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. If the preliminary development plan, together with any modifications thereof proposed by the developer, is found by the planning commission to be in compliance with the requirements of this section and any other applicable parts of this ordinance, the planning commission shall approve such preliminary development plans within 40 business days from the date of the meeting when all required plans and data were received. If not found to be in compliance therewith, the plans will be submitted to the county for any required variance, approval or disapproval. Upon approval of the preliminary development plan, the developer shall prepare and submit to the Flemington city council a final development plan, which shall include the final grading plan and detailed plans and specifications for all streets, storm and sanitary sewers, water distribution and all other site features designed in accordance with this section and all other applicable sections of this ordinance. If the city finds that the proposed final development plan is in accordance with and represents a detailed expansion of the preliminary plan heretofore approved, that it is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable sections of this ordinance, and that it complies with all of the conditions which may have been imposed in the approval of the preliminary plan or in the review of the final plan by the city, the city shall approve such final plan within 40 business days. After approval, the developer may apply for a building permit, which shall be issued by the building inspector. 
6.14.2.3  Revision and lapse of approval. The final development plan may be revised by the developer and resubmitted through the same procedure required for the original preliminary and final development plan. Failure to begin construction of all or a substantial portion of the improvements approved in the final development plan within one year after the issuance of a permit shall make null and void the plan as approved, unless an extension of time is granted by the city. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 7.1. - Existing lots of record. 
Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this ordinance in any "A-1", "AR-1", or "R" district, may be used for the erection of a single-family dwelling, even though its area and width is less than the minimum requirements set forth herein, except as set forth hereinafter. Front, side and rear yards shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance as closely as possible. Where two adjacent lots of record with less than the required area and width are held by one owner, the request for a permit shall be referred to the governing authority, which may require that the two lots be combined and used for one main building. 
Sec. 7.2. - Yards. 
7.2.1  Front yards of through lots. In any "R" district, where a lot runs through a block from street to street, a front yard as required by this ordinance shall be provided along each street lot line. 
7.2.2  Projections into yards and courts. A wall or fence six feet in height or under, or higher if a retaining wall, may be erected within the limits of any yard not extending beyond the front setback line. Any wall or fence in the front yard, not including a retaining wall, shall be limited to 48 inches in height. 
Patios may not be located closer than ten feet to any adjacent property line. 
Architectural projects. Chimneys, leaders, cornices, eaves, gutters and bay windows, and the like, may extend not more than 24 inches into any required yard. 
7.2.3  Accessory structures. Accessory structures, which are attached to the principal building, shall comply with all the yard requirements for a principal structure. 
Unattached accessory structures in "A-1", "AR-1" and "R" districts may be erected within a rear yard, provided they conform to the following: 
7.2.3.1  Maximum height. One and one-half stories or 15 feet, except in "A-1" and "AR-1" districts. 
An accessory structure shall not be less than ten feet from any lot line. 
An accessory structure shall be located not less than ten feet from a principal structure. 
Not more than two accessory structures, including a private garage, shall be located in any "R" district, on one lot. 
Unattached nonresidential accessory structures shall comply with the front and side yard requirements for the principal structure. They shall have a rear yard of ten feet, except as otherwise specified in this ordinance. 
ARTICLE VIII. - APPEALS 

Sec. 8.1. - Organization and procedure. 
8.1.1  [Decisions.] All appeals shall be decided by the governing authority, the same being the Liberty County Board of Commissioners. 
8.1.2  Procedure. Appeals may be made by any person or official aggrieved or affected by any provision of the zoning ordinance or by the decision of the planning commission or by the decision of the building and zoning inspector or other officer charged with enforcement, of the provisions of the zoning ordinance. Such appeal must be made within 20 days after said decision, by filing with the building and zoning inspector, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. The building and zoning inspector shall arrange for the proper notices and shall bring the appeal before the governing authority at its next meeting. 
8.1.3  Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building and zoning inspector shall certify to the governing authority after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in such inspector's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the governing authority or by a court of equity, after notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
8.1.4  Filing. The governing authority may require the applicant to furnish such information as it deems necessary when filing an application or appeal, and may require specific forms to be used. 
8.1.5  Refiling of disapproved or withdrawn cases. If the governing authority disapproves a case, thereafter the governing authority shall take no further action for substantially the same proposal for the same property, until one year after the date of such disapproval. If a case before the governing authority is advertised, and thereafter withdrawn by the applicant before or at the meeting of the governing authority, applicant shall be precluded from filing another application for substantially the same proposal on the same premises for six months. 
Sec. 8.2. - Hearings. 
Upon filing of an appeal or application, the governing authority shall fix a time and place for a hearing, and give notice as follows: 
8.2.1  Public notice. Notice given not more than 30 days and not less than 15 days in advance of any public hearing required by this ordinance. Such notice shall be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. 
8.2.2  Decisions of the governing authority. The governing authority shall decide all applications and appeals within 60 days after the final hearing thereon. Notice of decision shall be given to all parties so requesting. The governing authority's decision shall be binding on the building and zoning inspector, and such inspector shall incorporate the terms and conditions of the same in any permit issued. 
Sec. 8.3. - Conditional uses. 
Initial application for a conditional use shall be made to the building and zoning inspector who shall determine whether the use is allowed as a conditional use in the particular zone. If such use is allowed, the building and zoning inspector shall submit the application to the planning commission for its comments. Upon review by the planning commission, recommendations shall be presented to the governing authority as to additional restraints, restrictions, qualifications, or limiting factors that are felt to be desirable. The governing authority shall review all recommendations and approve or disapprove the conditional use. 
8.3.1  Considerations for determining additional requirements for conditional use. 
8.3.1.1  Approval of a conditional use shall not adversely affect the economic values or the physical appearance of the neighborhood or areas surrounding the site or lot in question. 
8.3.1.2  The physical and environmental effects of allowing the conditional use shall be considered. 
8.3.1.3  Buffer zones, where necessary to shield any adverse factors, shall be considered. 
8.3.1.4  Additional space for parking, landscaping, building, loading zones and setback shall be considered if necessary to protect adjacent structures or lots from any adverse impact. 
8.3.2  Action of governing authority. The governing authority may add, delete, modify or change any recommendation made by the planning commission. 
Sec. 8.4. - Powers and limitations of the board. 
8.4.1  Administrative review. The governing authority shall have the following powers: 
8.4.1.1  To hear and decide appeals where an error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the building and zoning inspector in the enforcement of any section or article adopted pursuant to this ordinance. 
8.4.1.2  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the ordinance upon which such board is required to pass. 
8.4.1.3  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the governing authority that: 
8.4.1.3.1  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
8.4.1.3.2  The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
8.4.1.3.3  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved, and 
8.4.1.3.4  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the ordinance, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by the ordinance. In exercising the above powers, the governing authority may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
8.4.2  Variances. On an appeal from an order, requirement, decision or determination of the building and zoning inspector, or any other administrative officer or agency, the governing authority may grant a variance in the application of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, only if all of the following findings are made: 
8.4.2.1  That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or shape or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the particular property. and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such conditions, and not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the neighborhood or district in which the property is located. 
8.4.2.2  That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the zoning ordinance, and that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 9.1. - Administration. 
9.1.1  Building and zoning inspector. A building and zoning inspector, the office of which is hereby established, shall administer the provisions of this ordinance. 
9.1.1.1  Duties. The duties of the building and zoning inspector shall be: 
9.1.1.1.1  To receive and check all applications for zoning permits and certificates of occupancy. 
9.1.1.1.2  To issue zoning permits and certificates of occupancy only for construction and uses which are in accordance with the regulations of this ordinance and subsequent amendments; or through board or court approval. 
9.1.1.1.3  To record and file all application for zoning permits and certificates of occupancy together with accompanying plans and documents and keep them for public record. 
9.1.1.1.4  To immediately prepare and publish a complete list of all nonconforming uses and occupations existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance or any amendment thereto. Such list shall contain the names and addresses of the owner or owners of such nonconforming uses and of any occupant other than the owner, the legal description or descriptions of the land, to the degree reasonably attainable, and the nature and extent of land use. Notification of this list shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the jurisdiction of this ordinance indicating where and when such list may be examined. Property owners and occupants shall be given one month to inspect the list and suggest necessary changes. They shall be given opportunity to appeal to the board for such changes in the list, as they request, but which are not made by the building and zoning inspector. After any necessary changes have been made by the building and zoning inspector, copies of the list shall be delivered to the board of commissioners for approval and recording. 
The building and zoning inspector shall issue certificates of occupancy for legal nonconforming uses. He shall examine them periodically to determine that they do not expand beyond the limitation prescribed in the ordinance. 
9.1.1.1.5  Upon specific request of the commission or board, to furnish such facts, records and similar information, which will assist such body in reaching its decision. 
9.1.1.1.6  To be responsible for keeping this ordinance, including the zoning map, up to date, and to include any amendments thereto. To approve plats that qualify as exceptions to the definitions of a "subdivision" contained in the subdivision regulations. 
9.1.1.1.7  If the building and zoning inspector shall find that any provisions of this ordinance are being violated, such inspector shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such inspector shall order discontinuance of illegal uses of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations of structural changes thereto; order discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall by this ordinance prevent violation of its provisions. 
Sec. 9.2. - Zoning permits and certificates of occupancy. 
9.2.1  Zoning permits. A zoning permit shall be required prior to the erection, construction, moving or alteration of any building, structure or portion thereof. 
Applications for zoning permits shall be made in writing to the building and zoning inspector, and shall contain all information necessary to ascertain whether the proposed erection, construction, alteration or use complies with the provisions of this ordinance including the following: 
9.2.1.1  Plan in duplicate drawn to scale indicating: 
9.2.1.1.1  Actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon. 
9.2.1.1.2  Exact size and location on the lot of all buildings and other structures, if any, and the location and dimensions of proposed buildings and other structures or alterations. 
9.2.1.1.3  Existing and proposed uses, showing the number of families the building is designed to accommodate. 
9.2.2  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to the occupation for use or change of use of land, building or structure. 
Application for certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building and zoning inspector. 
When use of premises involves a new building or structure, or alterations to an existing building or structure, such application shall be made at the same time application for a zoning permit is made. 
When no construction or alteration is involved, application to occupy and use land may be made at any time. Such application shall contain all information necessary for the building and zoning inspector to determine whether the proposed occupation and use of land conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. 
An application for a certificate of occupancy shall be granted or refused within 15 days after the building and zoning inspector has been officially notified of (a) completion of construction, or (b) application to occupy and use land where no construction is involved. 
Sec. 9.3. - Enforcement. 
The building and zoning inspector shall enforce this ordinance. Such inspector shall grant no permit or certificate of occupancy provided for in this ordinance for any purpose except in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance, or with a decision of the governing authority or the courts. 
Sec. 9.4. - Complaints regarding violations. 
Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof, which shall be filed with the building and zoning inspector. Such inspector shall acknowledge such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided in this ordinance. 
Sec. 9.5. - Schedule of fees. 
Fees shall be paid in connection with applications under this ordinance as follows: 
Application for appeal to the governing authority: $100.00. 
Application for zone changes: $100.00. 
Building permits as established by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 9.6. - Remedies. 
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, or of any ordinance or other regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the board of commissioners, or, with the approval of the board of commissioners, the building and zoning inspector or other proper official, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use to restrain, correct, or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, business, or use in or about such premises. 
ARTICLE X. - AMENDMENTS TO MAP OR TEXT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10.1. - General. 
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice require, the governing authority by ordinance, may, after receipt of recommendation thereon from the planning commission, and subject to the procedures provided by law, amend, supplement, or change the regulations, district boundaries or classifications of property, now or hereafter established by this ordinance or amendments thereof. 
Sec. 10.2. - Applications for change. 
Applications for any change in the text or classifications of property shown on the zoning map, shall be submitted to the building and zoning inspector upon such forms and accompanied by such data and information as may be prescribed for that purpose by such inspector, so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the record. Each application for a change of district boundaries or classification of property shall be verified by at least one of the owners or lessees of property or such person's representative, attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts and information presented with the application. It shall contain a map of the area proposed to be rezoned, and the area within 200 feet, giving the names and addresses of property owners, and all district boundary lines, and streets and alleys located therein. The inspector shall check the application to determine whether it conforms to the requirements listed above. Amendments to the zoning ordinance may also be initiated by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission or the Flemington city council and after a public hearing, may be recommended to the local governing authority. 
Sec. 10.3. - Public hearing. 
All amendments to this zoning ordinance shall require a public hearing. Additional public hearings may, be held if deemed appropriate by the governing authority. 
10.3.1  Responsibility for hearing. The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission is delegated authority to hold all hearings required by this ordinance in lieu of a hearing by the governing authority. 
10.3.2  Public notice of hearing. Notice of hearing shall be given at least 15, but not more that 45 days in advance by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city by the commission and shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. If the purpose of the hearing is to consider rezoning property (amend zoning map), the notice shall include the location of the property, Liberty County tax map number and parcel number, its present zoning classification and proposed zoning classification and owner or representative who is making the request. 
10.3.3  Posting sign on property. A sign shall be placed on the property (in a conspicuous location) by the commission, not lessthan 15 days prior to the hearing, containing information that rezoning is being considered, the date, time and place of the hearing, present zoning classification and proposed zoning classification. 
10.3.4  Notice to applicant. The commission shall notify the applicant in writing at least 15 days in advance of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
10.3.5  Notice to other property owners. The commission shall give notice of the time, place and purpose of public hearings to be held by it on proposed amendments or supplements, by mailing a postal card or letter notice to the owners of all properties lying within 200 feet of any part of the property proposed to be changed. The failure to notify any specific property owner as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any recommendations adopted hereunder, provided that other adjacent property owners are notified; it being the intention of the section to provide, so far as may be possible, due notice to the persons substantially interested in the proposed change, that an application is pending before the commission, proposing to make a change in the zoning map or the regulations set forth in this ordinance. 
10.3.6  Conduct of hearing. The following procedures shall be followed: 
10.3.6.1  The hearing shall be conducted by the chairman of the planning commission or in the chairman's absence by the vice-chairman. 
10.3.6.2  A secretary shall record the proceedings of the public hearing. The record with all evidence submitted at the hearing shall be recorded as such and become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. Any party desiring a verbatim transcript of the hearing may bring a stenographer or tape recorder. 
10.3.6.3  The chairman shall open the hearing by stating the specific zoning amendment being considered and indicated on [the] county tax map the specific area involved. 
10.3.6.4  The chairman shall determine if the applicant is present. 
10.3.6.5  The chairman shall determine the number and names of persons attending who desire to testify or present evidence at the hearing. 
10.3.6.6  The chairman shall permit the applicant to present the proposal, then. 
10.3.6.7  The chairman shall permit each person attending who has indicated a desire, to present such person's evidence, and/or speak. When there are a large number of individuals, time limits may be invoked which shall apply equally to all individuals. 
10.3.6.8  All speakers shall address the chair and may not ask questions of each other. Members of the commission may ask questions of any speaker. 
10.3.6.9  When all have been heard the chairman shall declare that the receiving of testimony is closed. 
10.3.6.10  After the receipt of all testimony and the consideration of all facts developed, the commission shall take into account the following factors: 
10.3.6.10.1  Will the zoning proposal adversely affect the existing use value or usability of adjacent or nearby property? This especially applies to adjacent or nearby residential property. 
10.3.6.10.2  Will the proposed zoning amendment permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
10.3.6.10.3  Does the property proposed to be rezoned have a reasonable economic use as currently zoned? 
10.3.6.10.4  Will the proposed zoning change result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools? 
10.3.6.10.5  Will the proposed zoning change be in conformity with the policy and intent of the Liberty County land use plan? 
10.3.6.10.6  Are there other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property proposed to be rezoned which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval? 
10.3.6.10.7  Is this request a logical extension of a zoning boundary that would improve the pattern of uses in the general area and conform to the comprehensive plan? 
10.3.6.10.8  Is this spot zoning and generally unrelated to either existing zoning or the pattern of development of the area, and contrary to the intent of the comprehensive plan? 
10.3.6.10.9  Would granting this request extend to the applicant development rights denied to others similarly situated in the same area? 
10.3.6.10.10  Does this request have the potential of achieving short-term, to the disadvantage of long-term, development goals? 
10.3.6.10.11  Could this request have a "domino effect," in that it becomes the opening wedge for further rapid growth, urbanization, or other land-use change beyond what is indicated in the existing land use plan? 
10.3.6.10.12  Could a change in classification adversely affect market values and/or tax rates of nearby properties? 
10.3.7  Action by planning commission. When all considerations of the matter have been completed the chairman shall entertain a motion from any member of the planning commission as to what recommendation shall be made to the governing authority. If no motion is made, the chairman shall ask for a vote of those who recommend approval and then those who recommend disapproval. The planning commission may recommend approval, disapproval or approval to a more restrictive zoning than that requested. 
Sec. 10.4. - Reconsideration of zoning decision. 
All adverse determination of rezoning requests made by the governing authority may not be again submitted for rezoning for a period of six months from the date of the adverse determination by the governing authority. 
ARTICLE XI. - INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY 

Sec. 11.1. - Interpretation. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued, pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties not in conflict with this ordinance. 
Sec. 11.2. - Validity. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 11.3. - Repeal. 
All ordinances or parts thereof that are in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 11.4. - Effective date. 
This ordinance shall become effective from and after the date of its approval and adoption provided by law. 
ARTICLE XII. - CRIMINAL PENALTIES 

Sec. 12.1. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of the zoning ordinance for the City of Flemington, Georgia, or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates said zoning ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the zoning administrator of Liberty County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Sec. 12.2. - Jurisdiction. 
The magistrate's court of Liberty County shall have jurisdiction over violations of said zoning ordinance and all procedures for enforcement of said zoning ordinance shall be as provided in article 4, chapter 10, Title 15, Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. title 15, ch. 10, art. 4]. Complaints of violations of any provision of said zoning ordinance shall be brought before the magistrate's court on a citation issued by said zoning administrator or the chief magistrate of Liberty County and shall be prosecuted through that court. Violations of said zoning ordinance will be tried upon citations either with or without a prosecuting attorney as determined by said zoning administrator. The constable of the magistrate's court of Liberty County, Georgia shall perform Service of citation. Citations shall meet all of the requirements as specified in the Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 15-10-63, as amended [O.C.G.A. § 15-10-63]. 
Sec. 12.3. - Other penalties. 
In addition to criminal penalties listed above, violation of the provisions of the zoning ordinance, as amended, shall be cause for denial of a business license, and where a business license has already been granted shall be cause for suspension, revocation or denial of renewal of such business license. 
Sec. 12.4. - Effective date. 
The effective date of this ordinance shall be February 13, 2002. 
Sec. 12.5. - Repeal. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are repealed. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The City of Flemington subdivision regulations, adopted May 13, 2008, repealed the former subdivision regulations and enacted new subdivision regulations as set out herein. The former subdivision regulations were adopted on Feb. 13, 2007 and became effective on May 1, 2007. 
Editor's note— Printed herein are the city's subdivision regulations, which regulations were adopted on May 13, 2008, and became effective on May 15, 2008. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, the same system of headings and catchlines and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION AND APPLICATION 

Sec. 1.1. - Authority. 
The general planning authority contained in art. IX, § 2, ¶ 4 of the 1983 Constitution, grants authority to the governing body of each county and municipality to regulate subdivisions and land development. 
State Law reference— Such act is not included in the Official Code of Georgia, planning and zoning authority is contained in the 1983 Const., Art. IX, § 2, ¶ 4. 
Sec. 1.2. - Jurisdiction. 
These regulations shall apply to all land located within the boundaries of the City of Flemington. 
Sec. 1.3. - Application. 
These regulations shall apply to the following forms of land subdivision and development: 
(a)  The division of land into two or more parcels, lots, or tracts. 
(b)  The dedication, vacation or reservation of any public or private easement or roadway through any tract of land regardless of the area involved, and 
(c)  Planned developments such as manufactured home parks, apartment complexes, commercial complexes, and other developments where the site is not subdivided into lots and public streets as contained in article VIII. 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND SHORT TITLE 

Sec. 2.1. - Purpose. 
The public health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, morals, and general welfare require the harmonious, orderly and progressive development of land within the City of Flemington. In furtherance of the general intent of this ordinance, the regulation of land subdivision by municipal and county governing authorities is authorized for the following purposes, among others: 
(a)  To encourage the development of economically sound, sustainable and stable municipalities and counties; 
(b)  To assure the timely provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(c)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in and through new land developments; 
(d)  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; and 
(e)  To assure, in general, the wise and timely development of new areas, in harmony with the comprehensive plan of the municipalities and the county. 
Sec. 2.2. - Short title. 
This ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "City of Flemington Subdivision Regulations". 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 3.1. - Rules. 
In the construction of these regulations, the rules and definitions contained in this section shall be observed and applied, except when the content clearly indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense; words used in the singular number shall include the plural number; words used in the plural number shall include the singular number. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory, not discretionary. 
(c)  The word "may" is permissive. 
(d)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
Sec. 3.2. - Definitions. 
3.2.1.  Accessory building: A secondary residence, garage, or other building or structure subordinated to and not forming an integral part of the main or principal building on a lot or parcel but pertaining to the use of the main building. 
3.2.2.  Alley: A narrow thoroughfare or lane dedicated or used for public passageway up to 20 feet in width, which usually abuts the rear of the premises, or upon which service entrances or buildings abut, and which is not generally used as a thoroughfare by both pedestrians and vehicles, which is not used for general traffic, and which is not otherwise officially designated as a street. An alley may be a way which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
3.2.3.  Build-able area: That portion of any lot which may be used or built upon in accordance with the regulations governing the given zoning district within which the particular lot is located, once the various front, side and rear yard requirements required for the district have been subtracted from the total lot area. 
3.2.4.  Building: A building is any structure having a roof entirely separated from any other structure by space or by walls, having no communicating doors or windows or any similar opening, and being erected for the purpose of providing support or shelter for persons, animals, things or property of any kind, and having a foundation to which it is anchored. 
3.2.5.  Building line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the street right-of-way and nearest extreme projection of a building (including all areas covered by any vertical projections to the ground or overhang, walls, roof, or any other part of the structure). 
3.2.6.  Building site: The ground area of a building or buildings together with all open spaces surrounded by said building or buildings. 
3.2.7.  Building and zoning inspector: Any person hired by the local governing authority to inspect, determine compliance with, and render minor decisions concerning the compliance of structures and lots within the jurisdiction of the governing authority, to the ordinances of the governing authority. 
3.2.8.  Certified survey: A survey, sketch, plat, map, or other exhibit is said to be certified when a written statement regarding its accuracy or conformity to specified standards is signed by the specified professional engineer, registered surveyor, architect, or other legally recognized person. 
3.2.9.  Condominium (building): A building containing two or more attached, individually owned, dwelling units and related, jointly owned common areas under condominium or cooperative ownership. 
3.2.10.  Development: Any construction or activity that results in a change in, or changes the use of a parcel, or portion of a parcel, of land. The definition of development shall also include redevelopment. 
3.2.11.  Dwelling: A building or portion thereof which is designed or used as living quarters for one or more families or persons. 
3.2.12.  Dwelling, single-family: A detached dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
3.2.13.  Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A building on a single lot or parcel designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independent of each other and does not include condominiums or townhouses. 
3.2.14.  Dwelling, group: A building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident, persons or families. The term "group dwelling" includes but is not limited to the term's rooming house, apartment hotel, fraternity house, sorority house, YMCA, or YWCA. A hotel, motel, or tourist home shall not be deemed to be a group dwelling as herein defined. 
3.2.14.  Dwelling, multifamily: A dwelling within a building containing three or more dwellings designed for occupancy by three or more families living independently from each other including apartments, apartment houses, but not including auto or mobile home parks, subdivisions or camps, condominiums or townhouses designed for owner-occupancy, hotels or resort type hotels. 
3.2.15.  Dwelling unit: One or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate independent housekeeping establishment for use on a basis with provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping, and bath room facilities and physically set apart from other rooms or dwelling units in the same structure. 
3.2.16.  Easement: A grant by the property owner to any person, firm, corporation, municipality or to the general public of the use of a strip or parcel of land for a specific purpose. 
3.2.17.  Engineer: Any person having an acceptable degree from a recognized institution of higher learning who is capable of determining the correct manner in which to construct roads, streets, highways, water and sewerage systems, drainage system, structures or other technical related areas. The person must be a registered professional engineer in good standing with the state board of registration. An engineer may be designated by the governing authority or by the planning commission to review and approve the engineering design for all subdivisions and planned developments. 
3.2.18.  Enforcing official: Where reference is made to the duties of certain officials named herein, that designated official who has duties corresponding to those named officials herein shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing these regulations. 
3.2.19.  Family: One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that service or health providers employed on the premises may be housed on the premises. 
3.2.20.  Flood prone area: The land that is usually flooded whenever a rise in the water level of a creek, stream, river or other body of water is experienced. That land adjacent to a creek, stream, river, channel, canal or other body of water that is designated as a floodplain or flood prone area by a governmental agency. 
3.2.21.  Group development: A development comprising two or more principal structures, whether in single, condominium, or diverse ownership built on a single lot, tract or parcel of land and designed for occupancy by separate families, firms, businesses or other enterprises. Such development generally contains parcels or tracts of land in common and such land is controlled and maintained through a property owners' association or similar group. 
3.2.22.  Governing authority: The mayor and council of the City of Flemington. 
3.2.23.  Lot: Parcel of land shown on a recorded plat or on the official governing authority zoning maps, or any piece of land described by a legally recorded deed. 
3.2.24.  Lot area: Gross lot area shall mean the total area of the lot including easements. Net lot area shall mean the area, minus any portions of the lot or parcel that do not represent useable space. For such a lot or parcel the unusable space consists of wetlands, utility and drainage easements and other such areas that cannot be used and enjoyed by the individual property owner. The net lot area shall be the area defined in the zoning ordinance as the minimum lot area for any zoning district. 
3.2.25.  Lot, corner: Any lot situated at the junction of and abutting on two or more intersections or intersecting streets or public highways. If the angle or intersections of the direction lines of two highways is more than 135 degrees, the lot fronting on said intersection is not a corner lot. 
3.2.26.  Lot, double frontage: A lot having frontage and access on two or more public streets. A corner lot shall not be considered having double frontage unless it has frontage and access on three or more streets. 
3.2.27.  Lot, interior: Any lot which is not a corner lot that has frontage only on one street other than an alley. 
3.2.28.  Lot line, front: In the case of a lot abutting upon only one street, the front lot line is the line separating such lot from such street. In the case of a corner lot, that part of the lot having the narrowest frontage on any street shall be considered the front lot line. In the case of any other lot, one such line shall be elected to be the front lot line for the purpose of this ordinance, provided it is so designated by the building plans which meet the approval of the building and zoning inspector. 
3.2.29.  Lot line, rear: The rear lot line is that boundary which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, or any odd-shaped lot, the building and zoning inspector shall determine the rear lot line. 
3.2.30.  Lot line, side: A side lot line is any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is an exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot, or lots, is an interior side lot line. 
3.2.31.  Lot, reverse frontage: A lot having frontage on two or more public streets, the access of which is restricted to one street. 
3.2.32.  Lot width: The distance between the side boundaries of the lot measured at the minimum required front yard setback line. 
3.2.32.  Manufactured home: A non self-propelled vehicle or conveyance that is towable and supported on its own chassis, permanently equipped to travel upon the public highways, that is used, either temporarily or permanently, as a residence or living quarters. Such unit shall be considered a "manufactured home" whether or not the wheels have been removed and whether or not set on jacks, skirts, masonry blocks or other foundation. A "modular home" is a house that does not have its own chassis, is not towable, and is constructed at some site other than the parcel on which it is located, and then installed on a permanent foundation. 
3.2.33.  Manufactured home park: A parcel of land under single ownership or management which is used or intended to be used for rental or lease of spaces or lots and the provision of services for two or more manufactured homes. 
3.2.34.  Manufactured home space: A plot of ground within a manufactured home park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured home. 
3.2.35.  Manufactured home subdivision: A manufactured home park except that manufactured home spaces are for sale rather than or as well as, for rent. 
3.2.36.  Metes and bounds description: A method of property description whereby properties are described by means of their direction and distances for an easily identifiable location or point. 
3.2.37.  Planning commission: The Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission is the appointed body of people established by the local governing authority whose responsibilities include the guidance of growth and development within the county and all municipalities in the county and interpreting of the various regulatory ordinances concerning land use. The secretary of the planning commission shall be the enforcing official acting on behalf of the planning commissioners. 
3.2.38.  Plat: A map showing the features of a proposed subdivision (lot split, metes and bounds description). This plat would show the entire tract, and the lot which is to be subdivided, the adjacent properties and owners, roads or streets, and giving all necessary bearings and distances for the proposed "split". 
3.2.39.  Plat, final: The map, plan or record of subdivision, and any accompanying materials as described in article V. 
3.2.40.  Plat, preliminary: A map showing the salient features of a proposed subdivision, including topographical data, submitted to the planning commission for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
3.2.41.  Principal building: The building situated or to be placed nearest the front property line and the use of which conforms to the primary use permitted by the zone classification in which it is located. 
3.2.42.  Public use: Use of any land, water, or buildings by a municipality, public body or board, commission or authority, county, state or the federal government, or any agency thereof for a public service or purpose. 
3.2.43.  Regulatory flood: A flood which is representative of large floods known to have occurred generally in the area and reasonably characteristic of what can be expected to occur in a particular stream. The regulatory flood generally has a frequency of approximately 100 years determined from an analysis of floods on a particular stream and other streams in the same general region. 
3.2.44.  Residential: The term "residential" or "residence" is applied herein to any lot, plot, parcel, tract, area, or piece of land and/or any building used, and zoned, exclusively for family dwelling purposes or intended to be used, including concomitant uses specified herein. 
3.2.45.  Reserve strip: A strip of land adjacent to a public street or similar right-of-way which has been reserved for the purpose of controlling access to the public way. 
3.2.46.  Right-of-way line: The outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, dedication or by the official right-of-way. 
3.2.47.  Setback: The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. When two or more lots under one ownership are used, the exterior property line so grouped shall be used in determining offsets. 
3.2.48.  Site: An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed. 
3.2.48.1.  Site plan: A map showing the salient features of a proposed planned development as defined in article VIII, including topographical data, submitted to the planning commission for purposes of consideration. 
3.2.49.  Street: A public right-of-way affording primary access to abutting property. For the purposes of these regulations, the term shall also mean avenue, boulevard, road, land and other public ways. 
3.2.50.  Street, arterial: Shall mean a street of exceptional continuity that is intended to carry the greater portion of through-traffic from one area of the county to another. All streets with this designation shall be included on the thoroughfare plan element of the comprehensive plan. 
3.2.51.  Street, collector: Shall mean those streets which are neither local streets nor arterial streets. Their location and design are such that they are: of exceptional continuity; serve as routes passing through residential areas; serve as means of moving traffic from local streets and feeding it into arterial streets. 
3.2.52.  Street, cul-de-sac: Shall mean a short local street having but one end open for vehicular traffic, the opposite end being terminated with a permanent turn-around. 
3.2.53.  Street, dead end: Shall mean a street not intersecting other streets at both ends, and distinguished from a cul-de-sac by not being terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
3.2.54.  Street, local: Shall mean streets which provide only access to adjacent properties and by nature of their layout do not serve vehicles passing through the area with neither origin nor destination within the area. 
3.2.55.  Street, marginal access: Shall mean a minor service street which parallels and which is immediately adjacent to an arterial street (frontage road). 
3.2.56.  Street, width: Shall mean the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of a street. 
3.2.57.  Surveyor: A person who determines or delineates the form, extent, position, distance or shape of a tract of land by taking linear and angular measurements, and by applying the principles of geometry and trigonometry. 
3.2.58.  Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires rigid location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground; provided, however, that utility poles, fences and walls (other than building walls) shall not be considered to be structures. 
3.2.59.  Subdivider: Any person, firm or corporation who or which divides for sale, rent or lease or develops any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined. It also includes the developer of any planned development that is not subdivided but remains in one ownership as defined in article VIII. 
3.2.60.  Subdivision: All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate, to the act or process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
3.2.61.  Townhouse: A building containing two or more attached single-family dwelling units separated by lot lines, with no common related areas. 
3.2.61.  Use: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which either lands or a building is or may be occupied or maintained. 
3.2.62.  Waterfront: Any site shall be considered as waterfront property provided any or all of its lot lines abut on or are contiguous to any body of water including creek, canal, river, or any other body of water, natural or artificial, including marshlands, not including a swimming pool, whether said lot line is front, rear, or side. 
3.2.63.  Yard: An open space on a platted lot which lies between the building setbacks and nearest lot or street line. 
3.2.64.  Yard, front: That area of open space to the front of the platted lot, the area immediately adjacent to the street side of the lot. If streets bound on two sides of the lot, the narrower portion fronting on a street shall be declared the front. (See lot line, front ). 
3.2.65.  Yard, rear: That area of open space that is opposite the area delineated as the front. That area of open space which has the greatest distance from the street. (See lot line, rear ). 
3.2.66.  Yard, side: That area of open space that is immediately adjacent to the side lot lines. (See lot line, side ). 
3.2.67.  Zoning ordinance: An officially adopted ordinance by the governing authority that regulates the manner, type, size and use to which a piece of property may be put. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 4.1. - Five-step review. 
The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consists of five separate steps. These are: 
(a)  Review of sketch plan by planning commission. 
(b)  Review and approval of preliminary plat by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
(c)  Review and approval of preliminary plat by governing authority 
(d)  Review and approval of final plat by Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
(e)  Review and approval of final plat by governing authority. 
Step (a) may, and step (c) shall, be completed prior to making any street improvement, installing any utilities or other land disturbing activities. Step (e) shall be completed prior to the sale of any lots in the proposed subdivision. The site proposed to be subdivided must be zoned in the appropriate residential, commercial, industrial, planned development or other zoning district prior to the completion of step (b). 
Sec. 4.2. - Review procedure. 
The following procedure shall be followed in the submission, review, and action upon all subdivision plats: 
4.2.1.  Sketch plan review procedures: Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the secretary of the planning commission a simple sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan may be a simple free-hand drawing. Included with the sketch plan should be a sketch map, which shows the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area. The purpose of the sketch plan is to assist the subdivider prior to extensive site planning for the preparation of the preliminary plat and enable the subdivider to become familiar with the regulations affecting the land to be subdivided. The secretary of the planning commission shall review and approve, disapprove, or approve with modification the sketch plan within 15 days from the meeting at which it is presented. Pertinent comments and recommendations shall be noted in the minutes of the planning commission meeting. 
4.2.2.  Preliminary plat procedures: Application for preliminary approval of a subdivision plat shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning commission at least 25 days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date of the planning commission. The plat of the subdivision shall be submitted in six black-line or blue-line prints and shall be such as to meet the minimum requirements contained herein, as well as one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the planning commission. Any preliminary plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of the subdivider (or subdivider's designee) to whom notice of hearing may be sent; and no preliminary plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon, notice of time and place of which shall be sent to said address not less than five days before the date of the hearing. 
(1)  The planning commission may request additional copies of the plat and supplemental information. The above mentioned copies shall be distributed as required by section 5.2.4 of this ordinance and additionally as deemed necessary by the secretary of the planning commission. The person or agency, to which a copy of the preliminary plat is directed, shall review the preliminary plat and indicate any required changes or comments on the plat and submit to the planning commission prior to the formal presentation of the preliminary plat. The local governing authority shall receive a copy for review and information. 
(2)  The secretary of the planning commission shall examine the preliminary plat to determine if it meets all requirements of these regulations, has approval of the health department, and/or the state environmental protection division, has been reviewed and approved by the Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District, and that the design of the roadways, drainage structures, public water and sewerage systems and other facilities related to the subdivision have been reviewed and approved by the designated engineer of the planning commission or other designated official. 
(3)  If water and or sewerage systems, not connected to a municipal system, are to be installed, the subdivider is to indicate who will own the system(s), who will operate the system(s) and what assurance will be given to the governing authority for continued operation. 
(4)  The planning commission shall act on the preliminary plat within days after formal submission and having received confirmation of all necessary approvals as described in 4.2.2.(2) above. Failure of the planning commission to act within 45 days after formal submission of the complete preliminary plat shall be deemed to constitute approval and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand; provided, however, that the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent in writing to the extension of such period. The action of the commission shall be recorded in the minutes of the commission meeting. 
(5)  The planning commission shall vote to recommend approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat to the governing authority. In the event a preliminary plat is disapproved the grounds for such disapproval shall be noted in the minutes of the planning commission and a copy of such minutes provided to the subdivider. Failure of a subdivider to initiate any development within 18 months from the approval of the preliminary plat by the governing authority will require the preliminary plat to be resubmitted to the planning commission for approval. The developer shall not initiate action to change any of the existing conditions reported on the preliminary plat as required by paragraph 5.2.2 until the preliminary plat has been approved. 
(6)  Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat by the governing authority shall not constitute approval of the final subdivision plat. Preliminary approval shall constitute approval of the proposed widths and alignments of streets, location of other required infrastructure, and the dimensions and shapes of lots. Application for approval of the final plat will be considered only after the requirements for final plat approval as specified herein have been fulfilled and after all other specified conditions have been met. Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the planning commission, the subdivider may proceed to comply with the other requirements of these regulations and the preparation of the final subdivision plat. 
4.2.3.  Reserved. 
4.2.4.  Final plat procedure: After completion of the physical development of public water and sewer, drainage, and roadway base and curb and gutter as shown on the approved preliminary plat, the subdivider may submit to the secretary of the planning commission 12 copies of the final plat, and one electronic copy in a format acceptable to the planning commission, prepared in accordance with the provisions of these regulations along with the required certificates executed by the appropriate officials. Application for approval of a final plat shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning commission, along with a bond or letter of credit for an amount necessary to complete any remaining improvements, at least ten days prior to the regularly scheduled meeting date of the planning commission. 
Until a final plat of a subdivision has been submitted to, reviewed and approved and signed by the planning commission and the governing authority, the clerk of the county superior court shall not record the plat of such subdivision, nor shall the owner or agent of such subdivision transfer title to any lot within the subdivision by reference to the subdivision plat. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval in contiguous sections satisfactory to the governing authority. 
(1)  The installation of streets, drainage systems and water and sewerage systems shall be in compliance with the governing authority's standard Specifications for Materials and Installation Procedures on file with the planning commission and the governing authority's flood regulations. The elevation of fill and the installation of streets drainage systems, and water and or sewerage systems shall be certified by the developers registered engineer as being in compliance with applicable requirements before approval of the final plat. 
4.2.5.  Final approval: Final approval of the plat shall be by the governing authority. 
4.2.6.  Certification by planning commission secretary: The secretary of the planning commission shall certify for recording all plats approved by the planning commission and the governing authority and all plats found to be exceptions under section 4.3 of this ordinance without referral to the governing authority. The planning commission shall retain copies of such plats as information. 
Sec. 4.3. - Sketch plans and preliminary plats not required. 
Subdivisions which do not involve: platting, construction or opening of new streets; new or improvements to municipal, public or community water, or sewer facilities; or improvement of existing streets shall be reviewed for compliance by the planning commission staff and a recommendation forwarded to the governing authority as a final plat. Such plat shall comply in all respects with Flemington's subdivision regulations. Sketch plans and preliminary plats may not be required in such cases, but construction drawings of selected improvements may be required by the planning commission. Final approval shall be made by the governing authority. 
(Amd. of 3-12-2013) 
Sec. 4.4. - Federal Housing Administration approval. 
In the event the subdivider plans to secure approval of the subdivision design by the Federal Housing Administration, it is suggested that such approval be secured after submission to and approval of a preliminary plat by the planning commission. 
Sec. 4.5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, adopted Aug. 11, 2015, repealed § 4.5, which pertained to approval of subdivision in flood prone area. 
ARTICLE V. - PLAT REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 5.1. - Sketch plan. 
5.1.1.  Scale: The sketch plan should include a narrative report that describes the proposed plan. Any drawings of the plan should generally be drawn at a scale of not less than 200 feet to one inch. 
5.1.2.  Vicinity map: The sketch plan shall include a vicinity map at a scale not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to surrounding development. 
5.1.3.  Other requirements: The sketch plan shall show: 
(1)  Proposed name of subdivision. 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer or designer. 
(3)  All names and addresses of all property owners of the site. 
(4)  All names and addresses, as listed by the county assessor, of all owners of the land adjacent to the site. 
(5)  North indicator. 
(6)  Date of preparation. 
(7)  Total acreage in the tract to be subdivided. 
(8)  Existing and proposed uses of land throughout the subdivision. 
(9)  The location and data of each percolation test, soil boring and well on the land in question. 
(10)  Sheet size shall be up to 30 inches by 42 inches. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
(11)  Tentative street and lot arrangement. 
(12)  Approximate rights-of-way. 
(13)  Typical lot area and approximate number of lots. 
(14)  Existing uses of land surrounding the subdivision. 
(15)  Topography by contour at vertical intervals of not more than five feet. 
5.1.4.  Subdivision of part of property: The subdivider shall submit a sketch plan of such subdivider's entire tract even though such subdivider's present plans call for the actual development of only a part of the property. 
Sec. 5.2. - Preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and meet the minimum standards of design set forth in these regulations and shall include the information listed below. Both electronic and paper copies of all plats shall be provided to the planning commission for review. 
5.2.1.  General conditions: 
(1)  Full name of subdivision. 
(2)  Name, address and telephone number of petitioner and architect, surveyor, engineer and designer. 
(3)  All names and addresses of all property owners on the site. 
(4)  All names and addresses of all deed record owners of the land adjacent to the site. 
(5)  Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true or grid north. 
(6)  Vicinity map at a scale of not less than one inch equals one mile showing the relationship of the subdivision to the surrounding area. 
(7)  Acreage to be subdivided. 
(8)  A written legal description (metes and bounds with all bearings and distances) of the acreage to be subdivided. 
(9)  Proper identification of the boundaries of the tract to be subdivided with all bearings and distances indicated. The boundary survey shall be to such a degree of accuracy that the error of closure is not greater than 1:10,000. 
5.2.2.  Existing conditions: 
(1)  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than one-foot intervals based on mean sea level. 
(2)  Zoning district classification of land to be subdivided and adjoining land. 
(3)  In case of resubdivision, a copy of the existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon. 
(4)  Location of natural features such as streams, lakes, swamps, land subject to flood based on a 100-year flood frequency, and land subject to floodway restrictions on the property to be subdivided. 
(5)  Identification of the limits of flood zones and limits of floodways if applicable. In all cases the flood zone of the property in question shall be shown. 
(6)  Location of existing adjoining property lines and existing buildings on the property to be subdivided. 
(7)  Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads, and utility lines either on or adjacent to the property to be subdivided. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or right-of-way and show location of poles or towers. 
(8)  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the street or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
(9)  The acreage of each drainage area affecting the proposed subdivision. 
(10)  All elevations shall refer to mean sea level datum where public water and/or public sewers are to be installed. 
(11)  Locations of city limit lines and county lines, if applicable. 
5.2.3.  Proposed conditions: 
(1)  Layouts of streets, roads, alleys, public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations, grades, and cross sections. 
(2)  Profile of proposed streets showing natural and finished grades. 
(3)  Detailed layout of all lots, including building setback lines; dimensions on lots; lot and block numbers, all easements with width and use. 
(4)  Construction drawings of sanitary sewers (if applicable) with grade, pipe size, location of manholes, and points of discharge, percolation tests, soil borings and wells as specified by the health department. 
(5)  Construction drawings of storm sewer system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlets. Storm sewers shall be sized to accommodate runoff in accordance with the drainage ordinance. 
(6)  Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls, cribbing, planting, anti-erosion devices, or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of the proposed work together with the provisions to accommodate the drainage area of land tributary to the site, and address the ability of the downstream system to accommodate the estimated runoff. 
(7)  Construction drawings of sewage collection system and/or disposal system. 
(8)  Construction drawings of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants and valves. Also, all drawings must include a system for a nonpotable reuse system, which shall include reuse water mains, valves, fittings, and hydrants. 
(9)  Designation and plan for the use of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(10)  Designation of proposed use of all lots to be used for other than single-family residential (if any). 
(11)  Proposed major contour changes in areas where substantial cut and/or fill is to be done. 
(12)  A timing schedule indicating the anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the time of exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control measures. 
(13)  Total number of lots, total acreage, and total length of new streets. 
(14)  Specifications relative to materials for construction of roadways, drainage systems, and water and sewerage systems. 
(15)  Size and elevations of driveway pipes and proposed location of all driveways. 
(16)  Parking facilities for multifamily and other planned developments where the site is not subdivided, but remains in one or common ownership. 
(17)  Landscaping as required by landscape ordinances. 
(18)  Show benchmark including location, description and elevation. 
(19)  The proposed location of all utilities, such as gas and electricity, along with the plan for street lighting as approved by the electric utility that will provide electrical service. 
5.2.4.  Review and approval: The preliminary plat shall be considered complete and may be recommended for approval by the planning commission only after review and approval of the following: 
(1)  The engineer for the planning commission, or the local governing authority, shall review and approve the subdivision plans and all design calculations including, but not limited to, drainage calculations, roadway design, water systems, and sewerage systems. 
(2)  The state environmental protection division and/or the health department shall review the water supply and sewage disposal facilities to be provided on all preliminary plats. In addition, it shall make determinations in all matters concerning the public health, as specified herein. Such determinations and recommendations shall be forwarded to the planning commission in writing. 
(3)  The Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District shall review the preliminary subdivision plat and make comments and determinations regarding slopes and soil erosion, drainage and water runoff, floodplain areas and other related areas. The district shall forward in writing to the planning commission comments and/or recommendations and approval or disapproval. 
(4)  The Environmental Protection Division if required for other than water and sewer approvals. 
5.2.5.  Fees: The subdivider shall at the time of submission of the plan, pay a filing fee, the amount of which is determined by and payable to the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission and credited to the general fund of the planning commission to cover administrative cost of processing the preliminary and final plats. No part of the filing fee shall be returned. 
5.2.6.  Drafting standards: All preliminary plats shall be drafted or drawn using commonly accepted standards of the industry. All lines shall be clean and crisp. All lettering shall be clean, crisp and legible. No letter or number shall be less than 0.06 of an inch in height, and all plats shall be submitted in electronic form as required by the planning commission. 
Sec. 5.3. - Final plat. 
If the final plat is drawn in two or more sections, each section shall be accompanied by a key map showing the location of the several sections. The final plat shall contain the following specific information: 
(1)  Name of owner of record. 
(2)  Name of subdivision, date, north arrow, graphic scale and revision dates. 
(3)  Name and registration number, and seal of registered surveyor and civil engineer. 
(4)  Name of counties or cities in which subdivision is located and location map. 
(5)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on the ground the location, bearings, and length of every street and alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line, and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, point of tangency, and other data for curved property lines and curved streets, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice. 
(6)  Names of owners of record of all adjoining land and all property boundaries, water courses, streets, easements, utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided. 
(7)  Exact boundaries and original property lines within the tract of land being subdivided shown with bearings and distances. 
(8)  Streets and alleys, right-of-way, and street names. 
(9)  All easements; location, widths, and purposes. 
(10)  Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, streets and lot and block numbers. 
(11)  Parks, school sites, or other publics open spaces, if any. 
(12)  All dimensions shall be to the nearest 1/100 th of a foot and angles to the nearest second. 
(13)  Accurate description of the location of all monuments and markers. 
(14)  The final plat must be drawn on a medium of good grade using high quality ink that is suitable to the clerk of courts for filing. The maximum sheet size shall be 11 inches by 17 inches unless otherwise approved by the clerk of courts. 
(15)  Utility easements, widths, and location of pipes from centerline of roadway: 
(a)  Water: 
(b)  Gas; 
(c)  Sanitary sewer; 
(d)  Storm drainage; 
(e)  Electrical lines; 
(f)  Communication; 
(g)  Nonpotable water reuse. 
(16)  Identification of the limits of flood zones and limits of floodways if applicable. In all cases the flood zone of the property in question shall be shown. 
(17)  The following signed certificates shall appear on the final plat that is submitted to the planning commission by the subdivider: 
(a)  Certificate of accuracy: 
"I hereby certify that this plat is a true, correct and accurate survey as required by the City of Flemington Subdivision Regulations; and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision, and that monuments shown have been located and placed to the specifications set forth in said regulations. 

 
(b)  Certificate of ownership and dedication, individuals: 
"It is hereby certified that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby dedicate all streets, alleys, walks, parks and other sites to public or private use as noted. 

 
(c)  Certificate of ownership and dedication, corporation: 
"It is hereby certified that _______, a corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia by, (principles authorized to sign the certificate) is the owner of the property shown and described thereon, and that all streets, alleys, walks, parks, and other sites shown hereon, are dedicated to public or private use as noted. 
(Corporate seal required) 

 
(d)  Certification of approval of the installation and construction of streets, utilities and other required improvements: 
"I do hereby certify (1) that streets, utilities and other required improvements have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to Specifications and Standards adopted by the governing authority in the subdivision/development entitled _______, or (2) that a guarantee of the installations of the required improvements in an amount of _______ or manner satisfactory to the governing authority has been received. 

 
(e)  Certificate of approval by the planning commission: To be placed on an original of the approved final plat by the planning commission representative for recording. 
"The subdivision plat known as _______, and dated ________ has been found to comply with the City of Flemington Subdivision Regulations. 

 
(f)  Certificate of approval by the City of Flemington: 
"I certify that the City of Flemington approved the final plat of the subdivision/development entitled _______ on the ___ day of ________, 20___. 
______________ 
City Clerk, City of Flemington 
5.3.1.  Final plat approval: The governing authority shall approve the final plat after review and approval by the following: 
(a)  The Environmental Protection division or the county health department. 
(b)  The designated engineer of the planning commission or the governing authority. 
(c)  Coastal soil and water conservation district. 
(d)  Georgia Department of Natural Resources when required. 
(e)  Certification by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
5.3.3  Permanent reference points: Prior to the approval of the final plat, all of the subdivision's permanent reference points shall have been placed in accordance with the following requirements: 
5.3.3.1.  Subdivision corner tie: At least two corners of the subdivision shall be designated by state plane coordinates using NAD 83. These corners shall be marked with a monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on the map with a statement identifying this station or monument to an accuracy of 1:10,000. At least one corner of the subdivision shall be tied to some permanent and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable point, physical object or structure. In subdivisions of more than ten lots, the information for this corner tie shall include elevation above sea level. 
5.3.3.2.  Monuments: 
(1)  Monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the subdivision; at the intersection lines of streets and at the intersection of the lines of streets with boundaries of the plat and at the intersection of alleys with the boundaries of the subdivision; at all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of reverse curvature and angle points in the side lines of streets and alleys; and at all angles of an intermediate traverse line. 
(2)  It is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a street to mark angles in the boundary of the subdivision if the angle points can be readily reestablished by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the streets. 
(3)  All required monuments shall be placed flush with the ground where practicable. 
(4)  If the required location of monument is in an inaccessible place, or where the location of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plat and referenced to the true point. 
(5)  All monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half inch in diameter and 36 inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four inches in diameter. 
5.3.3.3.  Control corners: Within each block of a subdivision at least two monuments designed and designated as control corners shall be installed. All control corners shall be constructed of concrete and shall be at least four inches in diameter or square and not less than three feet in length. Each monument shall have imbedded in its top or attached by a suitable means, a metal plate of noncorrosive materials and marked plainly with the point, the surveyor's registration number, the month and year it was installed and the words "control corner." 
5.3.3.4.  Property markers: A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and at least 30 inches in length shall be set at all corners, except those located by monuments. Temporary lot number identification markings (stakes) shall be installed on all lots. Markers shall be placed near the front corner pins and shall remain in place until the subdivision physical development has been completed. 
5.3.3.5.  Accuracy: Land surveys, both within the limits of incorporated areas and beyond shall be at an accuracy of at least 1:10,000. 
5.3.3.6.  Reference elevation: A permanent bench mark elevation referenced to mean sea level shall be established for all subdivisions with 15 or more lots or any subdivision located in/or adjacent to a designated flood zone other than zone "C". 
5.3.3.7.  Drafting standards: All final plats shall be drafted or drawn using commonly accepted standards of the industry. All lines shall be clean and crisp. All lettering shall be clean, crisp and legible. No letter or number shall be less than 0.06 of an inch in height. 
Sec. 5.4. - Final plat electronic submission requirement. 
An electronic copy of a computer aided drafting version of the final plat drawing shall accompany the hard copy submittal of the final plat to the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. The medium of the electronic copy shall be determined by the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. The electronic copy shall contain the following information. Technical details for submission of the electronic copy and layering convention are on file at the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. 
5.4.1.  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately the location, bearing, and length of every street and alley line, lot line, easement, boundary line, and building line whether curved or straight. This shall include the radius, point of curvature, point of tangency, degree of curve and other data for curve property lines and curved streets, to an appropriate accuracy and in conformance with good surveying practice. 
5.4.2.  All property boundaries, water courses, streets, easements, utilities and other such improvements, which cross or form any boundary line of the tract being subdivided. 
5.4.3.  Exact boundaries of the tract being subdivided shown with bearing and distances. 
5.4.4.  Streets, rights-of-way, and street names. 
5.4.5.  Easements locations, widths, and purposes. 
5.4.6.  Lot lines, minimum building setback lines, and lot and block numbers with net and gross square footage of each lot printed inside of the lot lines. 
5.4.7.  Parks, school sites, or other public open spaces, if any. 
5.4.8.  All dimensions shall be to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and all angles to the nearest second. Surveys will be tied into the Georgia State Plane Coordinate system. 
5.4.9.  Flood zones "A", "B", "C" and "V" shall be identified, if applicable, with required base flood elevation for each lot. 
5.4.10.  Identified wetlands. 
5.4.11.  Identify floodway. 
5.4.12.  Residential zoning designation as applicable. 
Sec. 5.5. - Record drawing electronic submission requirement. 
Upon completion of the installation and inspection of the required improvements in a subdivision/development, an electronic copy showing all as-built information of all required improvements must be submitted to the secretary of the planning commission. The information must be reviewed and accepted by the local governing authority prior to the final approval of the required improvements in a subdivision/development. Submitted drawings must be compatible and be coordinated with that information submitted in accordance with section 5.4. - Final plat electronic copy submission requirement. Technical details for submission of the electronic copy and layering convention are on file at the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. The release of any performance bonds or letters of credit, as well as final approval and acceptance of improvements by the local governing authority, shall not be given until the required as-built plans are submitted and approved by the secretary of the planning commission. 
ARTICLE VI. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 6.1. - Required improvements. 
A well designed subdivision or development includes improvements that provide for the safety and security of all citizens, includes adequate open spaces for recreation and circulation, preserves and protects our wetlands, streams and marshes, and promotes the overall public good. A subdivision means little to a prospective lot buyer until such buyer can see actual physical transformation of raw land into lots with all necessary improvements provided. Likewise, a subdivision is not an asset to the community until the necessary improvements have been installed and provide adequate levels of service. In order that prospective lot purchasers may get useable products and new subdivisions may be an asset rather than a liability to the community, the subdivider shall install and/or pay for the improvements required by these regulations necessary to serve the subdivision prior to the approval of the final plat. Any request for an exception to these required improvements must be documented by the developer, and address the reason for the exception and why it meets the spirit and intent of these regulations. 
6.1.1.  Natural gas: When gas lines are located in a street right-of-way, where possible, such lines shall be located outside the portion of the street to be surfaced to prevent having to cut into the paved surface to serve abutting properties. 
6.1.2.  Water supply: All lots, tracts or parcels must be served by a water source. The water source shall be the Flemington municipal water system. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  When the water main is located in the street to serve the abutting lots a water service line shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot before the street is surfaced. The location of each service line shall be marked clearly on the record drawings and submitted to the governing authority. 
6.1.3.  Sanitary sewerage: Subdivisions located in Flemington shall connect to that municipal system. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  When the sewer line is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. The location of each service line shall be marked clearly on the record drawings and submitted to the governing authority. 
6.1.4.  Reserved. 
6.1.5.  Curbs and gutters: Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed along new streets and roadways. Existing public roadways that are included in or are adjacent to the development or subdivision and serve as direct access to the development or to subdivision lots shall be developed and improved to the same curb and gutter and sidewalk standards as new streets. All concrete curbs shall be installed in accordance with the approved plans and standard specifications. All streets designated and shown shall be constructed and surfaced with the requirements of this ordinance and with the details, drawings and specifications as published by the governing authority. A copy of the standard specifications will be kept on file at the planning commission. Higher standards than those required by the standard specifications may be required by the planning commission to provide adequately for unusual soil conditions, extra ordinary traffic volume or other abnormal conditions. Approval of the developers plans by the reviewing engineer and planning commission is required. 
6.1.6.  Street grading and surfacing (local streets): Street grading, base preparation and surfacing of local streets shall be carried out in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. Grading, base preparation, and surfacing of local collection and arterial streets shall be installed in accordance with the standard specifications. Approval of the developer's plans by the reviewing engineer and planning commission is required. 
6.1.7.  Storm drainage: An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, storm sewers, storm drains, drop inlets, bridges, and other necessary appurtenances shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with the plans, standard specifications, and drainage ordinance. Approval of the developer's plans by the reviewing engineer and planning commission is required. 
6.1.8.  Signs: Street name signs shall be installed at all intersections within a subdivision. Traffic control signs shall be installed in accordance with the Uniform Manual of Traffic Control Devices. The planning commission and the governing authority shall approve the location and design. 
6.1.9.  Topsoil: Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
6.1.10.  Sidewalks: Sidewalks shall be installed in all approved subdivisions in accordance with section 7.1.19 of this regulation. 
6.1.11.  Nonpotable reuse water line: A nonpotable reuse water system shall be installed in all approved subdivisions and other planned developments in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the planning commission. 
6.1.12.  Street lights and poles: Installation of street lights and poles shall be done by the developer, and shall be approved by the appropriate electric utility company and the planning commission. A street lighting plan, developed by the appropriate utility company, shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. 
6.1.13.  Electric and other utilities: All utilities and systems (electric, telephone, cable, etc.) shall be placed underground by the developer, and shall be installed as approved by the appropriate utility company and the planning commission. A variance from this requirement may be granted by the planning commission and the local governing authority if unique conditions meeting the requirements in article X exist. 
6.1.14.  Other required improvements: Following a detailed review of the impact of the proposed subdivision or other planned developments described in article VIII on the infrastructure systems of the governing authority, other improvements either on or off the site under development may be required to be installed or paid for by the developer. The planning commission shall determine the need and cost for all other required improvements and shall submit a report to the governing authority for approval. 
Sec. 6.3. - Final plat revisions. 
If it should become necessary to revise a final plat due to a dimensional error, a revised plat shall be submitted to the county clerk of court for final recording after the planning commission has approved and signed the revised plat. 
Sec. 6.4. - Installation guarantee. 
In lieu of requiring the completion of all required improvements prior to the acceptance of a final plat, the governing authority, may at its discretion, accept a bond or guarantee from the subdivider, whereby the subdivider shall guarantee to complete all required improvements by this ordinance or otherwise specified by the planning commission, to the satisfaction of the local governing authority. The amount of the guarantee shall be 120 percent of the construction cost of the required improvements. The developer's engineer shall estimate cost for construction or a copy of the construction contract shall be provided. The amount of the guarantee must be approved as adequate to the local governing authority or representative. The time of guarantee shall be 12 months and shall automatically renew until released by the governing authority. The guarantee shall be in the form of one of the following alternatives: 
(a)  Performance bond. 
(b)  Irrevocable letter of credit and its accompanying agreement. 
(c)  Cash bond and escrow agreement. 
(d)  Such other security arrangements as may be approved by the governing authority's attorney. 
Sec. 6.5. - Inspections. 
All subdivisions within the territorial jurisdiction of the governing authority shall be inspected and approved by the planning commission's engineer or the governing authority's engineer and/or thier authorized representative(s). Sufficient inspections shall be made to insure compliance with the specifications set forth in these regulations. A registered engineer, employed by the developer, shall also certify in writing to the governing authority that he has inspected each and all phases of the development and finds all construction, including but not limited to the installation of all drainage ways, streets, and water and sewerage systems to be in compliance with the approved plans and specifications and the standard specification as set forth in these regulations. 
Sec. 6.6. - Acceptance of improvements. 
Upon completion of all (street, drainage, lighting, signage, water, sewer, etc.) improvements the governing authority may accept the dedication of streets and other improvements. Each portion of these improvements must have also been inspected and approved by the LCPC's engineer or his designated representative. These improvements must also have been constructed in accordance with the standard specifications. Prior to acceptance of the improvements the governing authority must obtain the engineer -of-record's certificate referred to in section 6.5. and a maintenance bond referred to in section 6.8. The acceptance of any improvements by the local governing authority shall be recorded in the official minutes of the local governing authority. 
Sec. 6.7. - Building permits. 
No building permit in a subdivision shall be issued and no building other than a farm building shall be erected on any lot unless the street giving access to the lot upon which the building is proposed to be placed has been accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public street. 
Sec. 6.8. - Maintenance bond. 
A maintenance bond is required for acceptance of the completed paving, curb and gutter, sidewalks, drainage, water and sewer facilities, and other required improvements. The bond shall be written in the amount of 15 percent of the construction cost of the work. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be reviewed and approved by the designated engineer as sufficient to cover maintenance. The maintenance bond shall guarantee the work for a period of two years, from the date of acceptance of the improvements by the local governing authority as shown in section 6.6. 
During the period of the two-year guarantee, any maintenance, replacement or repair required will be the responsibility of the developer. The required improvements will be inspected by the developer at least 30 days prior to the expiration of the maintenance bond. Any required maintenance shall be completed prior to release of the bond. If maintenance is not completed, the bond will be forfeited to the governing authority. Upon the expiration of the two-year period, the governing authority will assume maintenance of the accepted improvements. Prior acceptance by the governing authority shall not relieve the developer of responsibility for subsequent failures occurring within the period of the two-year guarantee. If at any time during the two-year period, the developer fails to make prompt repairs or fails to maintain the road to the satisfaction of the governing authority, the governing authority may inform the developer and utilize bond funds or guarantee funds as needed. 
ARTICLE VII. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 7.0. - Scope. 
The following design standards shall be considered minimum requirements in the platting of all subdivisions. The planning commission and the governing authority may require standards that exceed these minimums. All approved minimum standards shall be on file at the planning commission. 
Sec. 7.1. - Streets. 
7.1.1.  Conformity to existing maps or plans: The location and width of all proposed streets shall be in conformity with official plans and maps and with existing amended plans of the planning commission. 
7.1.2.  Continuation of adjoining street system: The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street system of the surrounding area. Where possible, existing major streets shall be extended to connect with adjacent properties and the use of cul-de-sacs should be avoided, except when no other option is feasible. 
7.1.3.  Access to adjacent properties: It is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary of such property and a temporary turn-around shall be provided, unless the planning commission approves another system for access. Houses fronting on minor streets shall have access from minor streets only. Each subdivision should seek to provide at least two points of access (streets) to existing public streets where feasible, and in a subdivision with, or the potential for, 75 or more lots, two or more access streets shall be provided unless the development can meet the standards for a variance as defined in article X. 
7.1.4.  Street names: Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets, shall bear the assigned name of the existing streets. In no case shall the name of the proposed streets duplicate or be phonetically similar to existing street names, irrespective of the use of suffix, street, avenue, boulevard, drive, place, court, etc. It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by marking, or in any deed or instrument, without first getting approval of the planning commission. The planning commission shall coordinate or cause to be coordinated, with the emergency 911 department for approval of street names. 
7.1.5.  Minor streets: Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through-traffic will be discouraged. 
7.1.6.  Private streets: There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Private streets are allowed in planned developments and quality developments as described in article VIII. 
7.1.7.  Trees: All requirements of the tree protection ordinance must be met, and the landscape and tree planting plan should be submitted with the preliminary plat. 
7.1.8.  Railroads and highways (freeways, expressways): Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
(a)  In residential districts a buffer strip not less than 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be so designated on the plat: 
"This strip is reserved for the planting of trees and shrubs by the owner. The placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
(b)  In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance there from to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
(c)  All other streets, which are parallel to the railroad, when intersecting a street that crosses the railroad at grade, shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
7.1.9.  Reserved strips prohibited: Reserved strips at the terminus of a new street shall be prohibited. 
7.1.10.  Street jogs: Street jogs with centerline offsets by less than 150 feet shall be prohibited. 
7.1.11.  Right angle intersections: Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. 
7.1.12.  Cul-de-sac: A minor street having a permanent dead end or otherwise having an outlet must be provided with a turn-around having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. In no cases shall a cul-de-sac be more than 600 feet in length. Temporary dead-end streets shall not be longer than 600 feet, and shall be provided with a turn-around having a 30-foot radius. 
7.1.13.  Alleys: Service alleys or drives may be required in multiple dwelling, commercial and industrial developments and shall have a minimum surface treatment width of 15 feet, but shall not be provided in one-family and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
7.1.14.  Paving requirements: All streets must be prepared and paved according to the following methods or by equivalent methods that are acceptable to the governing authority: 
(1)  Subgrade. The subgrade shall be 24 inches of compacted subgrade material compacted to 95 percent density. 
(2)  Base. The base shall consist of a graded aggregate base course screened 1½ inches or smaller with a thickness of six inches after being thoroughly compacted and constructed. 
(a)  All materials shall be secured from an approved source and shall conform to Georgia Department of Transportation's minimum acceptable standards for this area. 
(b)  As soon as the base material has been spread and mixed, the base shall be brought to approximate line, grade and cross-section and then rolled with a sheepsfoot roller until the roller walks out and finally with a pneumatic tire or general purpose roller until full thickness of the base course has been compacted thoroughly. Defects shall be remedied as soon as they are discovered. New materials shall be added if necessary and defective portions shall be entirely removed. 
(c)  The base course shall be maintained under traffic and kept free from ruts, ridge and dusting, true to grade and cross-section until it is primed. 
(d)  No base material shall be deposited or shaped when the subgrade is frozen or thawing or during unfavorable weather conditions. 
(3)  Pavement. Wearing surface shall consist of 1 ½ inches thick bituminous aggregate plant mix type "E" or "F" and shall be placed in accordance with the latest edition of the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges. 
(4)  Curb and gutter. Concrete curbs and gutter are required on all new streets. The width of the curb and gutter shall not be less than 24 inches, unless approved by the planning commission and the governing authority. 
7.1.15.  Street right-of-way widths: Minimum street right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
7.1.16.  Sight distance for vertical curves: Where vertical curves are used, the minimum sight distance shall be as follows: 
GENERAL MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS 

 
7.1.17.  Horizontal curves: Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees occurs in the alignment of a marginal access or minor street or road, a curve of reasonable radius shall be introduced. A curve shall be introduced at any change in direction of a collector, industrial or commercial service street or major thoroughfare. On major thoroughfares the state department of transportation or governing authority's engineer shall determine the centerline radius of curvature. On collector, industrial or commercial service streets, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 350 feet. On minor streets, the centerline radius of curvature shall not be less than 150 feet unless the topography of the land to be subdivided makes this impractical. 
7.1.18.  Street grades: Grades on major thoroughfares shall be established or approved by the governing authority engineer. Grades on collector streets shall not exceed eight percent unless topographic conditions make this impractical. Grades on minor residential streets shall not exceed 15 percent, unless topographic conditions make this impractical. All streets should have a minimum grade of not less than 0.30 percent. 
7.1.19.  Sidewalks: Sidewalks must be installed on all streets. All sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with the standards of the Standard Specifications, except where unusual conditions exist which eliminate the necessity for sidewalks and said exceptions are specifically granted by the planning commission and the governing authority. 
MINIMUM SIDEWALK STANDARDS 

 
Where it is deemed necessary for public safety, the planning commission may require either additional sidewalks or wider sidewalks than listed above. 
7.1.20.  Reserved. 
Sec. 7.2. - Easements. 
Easements having a minimum width of 15 feet and located along the side or rear of lot lines shall be provided as required for utility lines and underground mains and cables. Drainage easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width plus an additional 15 feet adjacent to drainage easements with open ditches or the like provided for access and maintenance. 
7.2.1  Access easements: All easements for vehicular access, including ingress and egress, shall have a minimum width of 60 feet. 
Sec. 7.3. - Blocks. 
Block length and widths shall be as follows: 
7.3.1.  Lengths: Block lengths shall not exceed 600 feet nor be less than 300 feet, unless approved by the planning commission and the governing authority. 
7.3.2.  Widths: Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth. Blocks may be one lot in depth where single-tier lots are required to separate residential development from through vehicular traffic or nonresidential uses. 
7.3.3.  Pedestrian ways: Crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the planning commission where it is deemed essential in order to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. 
Sec. 7.4. - Lots. 
All lots shall meet the minimum lot width, depth, and area requirements of the City of Flemington Zoning Ordinance. 
7.4.1.  Setback lines: Setback distances as shown in the adopted zoning ordinance, shall be accepted as the minimum setback required. 
7.4.2.  Building setback lines: A building line meeting the minimum front yard setback requirements of this ordinance shall be established on all lots. 
7.4.3.  Orientation of lot lines: Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
7.4.4.  Lots abutting public streets: Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street on which it has access. 
Sec. 7.5. - Driveways. 
7.5.1.  Permits: It shall be unlawful to begin construction of any driveway and/or alter any driveway abutting on a public street, except those driveways abutting on a state or federal highway, until a building permit for such work has been issued. The Georgia Department of Transportation shall issue permits for those driveways abutting on state and federal highways. 
7.5.2.  Fees: The building permit fee shall be set by the governing authority. 
7.5.3.  Commercial driveways: All commercial driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the most current version of the State of Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
7.5.4.  Details: All work for which a permit has been issued shall be inspected by the designated engineer or his representative and shall comply with the following details and specifications: 
(a)  Pavement shall consist of concrete and/or bituminous plant mix type "E" or "F" and shall have a width of not less than 12 feet. 
(b)  When driveway pipes are required the length of pipe shall not be less than 24 feet. The size and type of pipe shall be designed in accordance with the drainage ordinance. 
(c)  End treatments are required in accordance with the State of Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations for Driveway and Encroachment Control. 
(d)  Pavement will not be required for driveways that abut an existing dirt road. 
Sec. 7.6. - General suitability. 
7.6.1.  Soils: The planning commission shall not approve a subdivision where the soil conditions have been determined not suitable for development purposes of the kind proposed. 
7.6.2.  Flooding: Flood prone areas shall be consistent with all flood insurance regulations. 
Sec. 7.7. - Drainage. 
The drainage system shall be designed in accordance the articles of chapter 38, environment, this section and other codes, standards or manuals as may be applicable. 
7.7.1.  Subdivision in flood prone area: No portion of a subdivision shall be approved which is subject to inundation by a flood of 100 years frequency or less, which fails to conform to the following restrictions: 
7.7.1.1.  Standards for flood prone area uses: All subdivisions must be designed to minimize flood damage; all public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; adequate drainage must be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems must be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into the floodwaters; on site waste disposal system must be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. These additional standards shall also apply to flood prone areas: 
(a)  Fill: 
(1)  Any fill proposed to be deposited in the floodplain must be shown to have some beneficial purpose and the amount thereof not greater than is necessary to achieve that purpose, as demonstrated by a plan submitted by the owner showing the uses to which the filled land will be put and the final dimensions of the proposed fill or other materials. The Federal Emergency Management Agency prior to approval of the final plat must approve any fill in the floodplain. 
(2)  Such fill or other materials shall be protected against erosion by riprap, vegetative cover or bulk heading. 
(b)  Structures (temporary or permanent): 
(1)  All structures shall be designed consistent with all federal flood insurance standards. 
(2)  Structures shall have low flood damage potential. 
(3)  The structure or structures, if permitted, shall be constructed and placed on the building site so as to offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of floodwater. 
a.  Whenever possible, structures shall be constructed with the longitudinal axis parallel to the direction of flood flow; and 
b.  So far as practicable, structures shall be placed approximately on the same flood flow lines as those adjoining structures. 
(4)  Structures shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation which may result in damage to other structures, restriction of bridge openings and other narrow sections of the stream or river. 
(5)  Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be constructed at or above the regulatory flood protection elevation for the particular area or flood proofed. 
(6)  The level of the lowest habitable floor shall not be lower than the 100-year flood level established by FEMA. 
(c)  Storage of material and equipment: 
(1)  The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable, explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life is prohibited. 
(2)  Storage of other material or equipment may be allowed if not subject to major damage by floods and firmly anchored to prevent flotation or readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning. 
(Ord. No. 2015-01, § 1, 8-11-2015) 
ARTICLE VIII. - PLANNED AND QUALITY DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 8.1. - Planned developments. 
In order to prevent creation of traffic hazards, insure the provision of off-street parking and the provision of necessary utilities, plans for planned developments such as manufactured home parks, apartment complexes, commercial complexes, and other developments where the site is not subdivided into lots and public streets shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and approval. In addition, any planned unit development as referenced in the zoning ordinance shall conform to not only these regulations, but also all requirements stated in the zoning ordinance under planned unit development. Such plans shall show the following information: 
8.1.1.  Scale: A plat of the property drawn to a scale of at least 100 feet to one inch. 
8.1.2.  Location: The location of the parcel of land with respect to adjacent rights-of-way. 
8.1.3.  Buildings: The shape, dimensions, and location of all buildings, existing and proposed, on said parcel. 
8.1.4.  Nature of use: The nature (commercial, industrial, etc.) of the proposed uses of the buildings and/or land. 
8.1.5.  Topography: Topography of the site by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet. However one-foot intervals are preferred. 
8.1.6.  Parking: The location and dimensions of off-street parking and loading space and the means of ingress and egress to and from such space. 
8.1.7.  Drainage: The location and size of all proposed utilities and storm drainage facilities in accordance with the drainage ordinance. 
8.1.8.  Other information: Landscaping as required by ordinance and any other such other information as the planning commission may deem necessary because of the physical characteristics peculiar to the particular development. 
8.1.9.  Enforcement of group development requirements: No building permits shall be issued and no connection to a public water system or public sewer system shall be made until the plans for the planned development have been approved by the planning commission and so noted on prints of the development plan. 
8.1.10.  Nonpotable reuse system: The location and size of all reuse water mains, valves, fittings, and hydrants in accordance with the design guide approved by the planning commission, unless the planning commission does not require such a system following an analysis of the reuse demand of the proposed development. 
Sec. 8.2. - Quality developments. 
8.2.1.  Intent: It is not the intent of these regulations to freeze new developments into any single type of design. It is, however, the intent of these regulations to insure that all new developments shall contribute to the building of economically sound, sustainable and desirable areas within the community with all necessary services and facilities. The purpose of the designation of quality developments is to allow the utilization of land while insuring that there are little or no detrimental impacts on the environment, neighboring properties, and the public safety, welfare and interest. The intent is that all quality developments far exceed the minimum standards defined and encourage innovation in development that enhances and improves public safety and welfare. 
8.2.2.  Authority to modify standards: In order to provide the developer with maximum flexibility in the design and character of new subdivisions and other planned developments, the planning commission is hereby authorized to modify the standards and requirements, but not the intent of these regulations and zoning standards, in the case of a plan that exhibits unique quality growth features within a planned unit, which, in the judgment of the planning commission: 
(1)  Provides significant public spaces for circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and 
(2)  Which exhibits unique "quality" features in keeping with state department of community affairs principles, and 
(3)  which address each of the City of Flemington's quality development guidelines, and 
(4)  which provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the comprehensive development plan. 
Any development considered for "quality development" status shall be analyzed using these principles and the guidelines listed below. The following is a list of the City of Flemington's performance guidelines against which all proposed quality developments will be analyzed. 
(1)  Does the proposed development provide an appropriate and significant amount of uplands dedicated to open space, recreational, and other public uses that are available for the use and enjoyment of the residents and users of the development and citizens of the City of Flemington? 
(2)  Will the development as designed minimize impacts to, and preserve, wetlands and floodplains? 
(3)  Has the proposal minimized the impervious surfaces in order to minimize stormwater runoff, and does it include the use of measures such as low impact design or other strategies to reduce the quantity and improve the quality of all runoff? 
(4)  Are the connectivity of open spaces and wetlands maximized in such a way as to create and preserve habit areas for wildlife? 
(5)  Does the design maximize the preservation and protection of large hardwood trees and woodlands in wetlands and uplands? 
(6)  Does the proposal minimize or include mitigation for impacts on the City of Flemington's, and the neighboring governments, infrastructure systems? 
The planning commission shall review the proposed development in accordance with these guidelines and the principles, and may recommend modification of standards and requirements should the proposed development exceed the subdivision regulations and adequately address each of these principles and guidelines. The developer or subdivider shall request the planning commission consider the development for designation as a "quality development" and provide the information required by the planning commission in order to evaluate the request for the designation and the modification of any standards or requirements. 
8.2.3.  Maintenance of spirit of regulations: Any development or subdivision approved under this section shall maintain the objectives, purposes, and intent of these regulations. To this end, the planning commission may recommend modification to the standards and requirements of these regulations and the standards defined in the City of Flemington Zoning Ordinance. 
ARTICLE IX. - TYPICAL DETAILS 

Sec. 9.1. - Details. 
The adopted driveway detail and roadway cross sections shall be adhered to. All other construction details will either conform to details as established by the governing authority in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications and Details. 
Note: The minimum adopted driveway details and roadway cross sections is not set out herein but is on file in the planning commission offices. 
ARTICLE X. - VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 10.1. - Variances. 
When, due to a particular hardship experienced by an owner of a tract of land, such as inadequate size, shape, drainage, etc., it is impractical for a developer to comply with the interpretations of the design requirements of these regulations, the planning commission shall be authorized to recommend variances to such requirements provided the intent and purpose of these regulations are not violated. Such variations, and the reasons for granting them, shall be entered into the minutes of the governing authority. The conditions for granting the variance are as follows: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to this particular piece of property because of its size, shape or topography, and 
(2)  The application of the standards to this particular property would create an unnecessary hardship, and 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved, and 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of the ordinance, and 
Sec. 10.2. - Exceptions. 
In order to promote the public welfare and enhance the safety and health of the public, it may be in the best interests of the governing authority to modify or provide exceptions to certain development and design standards. The planning commission shall be authorized to consider exceptions to such requirements, provided the intent and purpose of these regulations are not violated. All exceptions, and the reasons for granting them, shall be entered into the minutes of the planning commission and also the approving governing authority. 
10.2.1.  Reserved. 
10.2.2.  Reserved. 
10.2.3.  Reserved. 
10.2.4.  Private street exception: Private streets may be considered as an exception by the planning commission and may be permitted by the planning commission with the approval of the City of Flemington if they meet all of the following conditions: 
(1)  Private streets shall meet the requirements of this ordinance regarding preliminary and final plat, as well as receiving all required permits and construction inspection of infrastructure. 
(2)  A property owners' association must be created to maintain all private streets, and be filed with the clerk of superior court. The book and page in which property owners' association covenants, declaration, and restrictions are recorded shall be shown on the final plat of the subdivision and, as a minimum, shall provide for: mandatory and automatic membership in the property owners' association before any individual properties are sold; all owners to have equal access and right to use all shared private facilities; perpetual and continued maintenance of the private streets and any open space; tax liability in the case of default; the method of assessment of dues; maintenance and related costs; and restoration in the event of damage or destruction. 
(3)  Private streets in subdivisions shall be opened and improved according to the design standards established for public streets. 
(4)  A maintenance bond to be renewed every three years with the City of Flemington as the beneficiary is required for the completed paving, curb and gutter, sidewalks, drainage, water and sewer facilities, and other required improvements. The bond shall be written in the amount of 25 percent of the construction cost of the work. The amount of the maintenance bond shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission's engineer as sufficient to cover maintenance. The bond may be released or reduced only if the governing authority accepts any or all improvements for maintenance. If at any time, the property owner's association fails to make prompt repairs or fails to maintain the road and other improvements to the satisfaction of the governing authority, the governing authority may inform the association and utilize bond funds or guarantee funds as needed. 
(5)  All private streets and street name markers shall be maintained by the property owners' association within such subdivisions and the governing authority have no responsibility whatsoever for their maintenance and repair unless dedicated and accepted by the governing authority. 
(6)  All lots or parcels abutting any private street subsequently sold following this exception shall include a disclosure that the street is not a public street, and the street shall be maintained by the owners of the property within such subdivisions and the governing authority have no responsibility whatsoever for their maintenance and repair until and unless improved to approved street standards and dedicated and accepted by the governing authority. 
(7)  This section requires the preservation and maintenance of private streets and other open space through a property owners' association, and if the property owners' association fails to maintain the private streets and common property in a reasonable condition, the governing authority shall serve written notice upon the property owners' association and upon each individual property owner, setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain common open space and private streets in a reasonable condition. The notice shall include a demand that these deficiencies of maintenance are corrected within 30 days of the notice. If the deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days, the City of Flemington, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common open space and private streets from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon the common open space and private streets and maintain it for one year and thereafter until the association is prepared to provide maintenance. The cost of this maintenance by the City of Flemington shall be assessed against the perpetual maintenance bond established and funded by the property owner's association or, if the bond is not sufficient, the cost shall be assessed against all properties within the developments that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space and private streets, and shall become a lien upon the properties. 
(8)  Private streets shall always remain open for police, fire, ambulance, and other vehicles of all government agencies. 
ARTICLE XI. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 11.1. - Filing and recording. 
No plat of the subdivision within the City of Flemington shall be filed or recorded by the clerk of the court until the final plat shall have been submitted to and approved by the governing authority and such approval entered in writing on the final plat by the secretary of the planning commission. 
Sec. 11.2. - Improvements, streets. 
The governing authority or other public authority shall not hereafter accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections, or other public facilities or utilities in any street unless it has been accepted as, opened as, or otherwise received the legal status of, a public street or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the final plat approved by the planning commission. The governing authority may locate and construct or may accept any other street provided that the ordinance or resolution or other measure for such approval be first submitted to the planning commission for its approval or disapproval as provided for in the procedure on plats and, upon approval, any such street shall have the status of an approved street as fully as though it had been originally shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission. 
Sec. 11.3. - Street names. 
No street or road shall hereafter be named on a plat or in a deed or other instrument without approval by the planning commission. The planning commission may, after reasonable notice in a newspaper having general circulation in the county, recommend to the governing authority, a change in the name of any street or road in the county: 
(a)  When there is duplication of names or other conditions which tend to confuse the public; 
(b)  When it is found that a change may simplify marking or identification of streets; or 
(c)  Upon any other good and just reason that may appear to the governing authority. 
After reasonable opportunity for a public hearing and approval of the name change, the governing authority shall issue its certificate designating the change, which shall be recorded with the clerk of the court, and the name shall thereafter be the legal name of the street or road. 
Sec. 11.4. - Schedule of filing fees. 
The schedule of fees as published by the planning commission and the governing authority shall be paid in connection with applications under these regulations. 
Sec. 11.5. - Maintenance of common areas and private facilities. 
(a)  If any development includes private facilities and common areas, a property owners' association must be created to maintain all private facilities and areas, and be filed with the clerk of superior court and, as a minimum, shall provide for: mandatory and automatic membership in the property owners' association before any individual properties are sold; all owners to have equal access and right to use all shared private facilities; perpetual and continued maintenance of the private facilities and any open space; tax liability in the case of default; the method of assessment of dues; maintenance and related costs; and restoration in the event of damage or destruction. 
(b)  Where this article requires or allows the preservation and maintenance of private facilities and other open space through a property owners' association, and if the property owners' association fails to maintain the private streets and common property in a reasonable condition, the governing authority shall serve written notice upon the association and upon the individual property owners, setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain common open space and private streets in a reasonable condition. The notice shall include a demand that these deficiencies of maintenance are corrected within 30 days of the notice. If the deficiencies are not corrected within 30 days, the City of Flemington, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common open space and private facilities from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon the common open space and private facilities and maintain it for one year and thereafter until the association is prepared to provide maintenance. The cost of this maintenance by the City of Flemington shall be assessed against the properties within the developments that have a right of enjoyment of the common open space and private facilities, and shall become a lien upon the properties. 
Sec. 11.6. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan and land-disturbing activity permit. 
If required by the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, a soil erosion and sedimentation control (E. & S.) Plan shall be submitted to the director of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission. The E. & S. Plan may be submitted prior to the time of filing the development's construction or site plans. A copy of the E. & S. Plan shall be submitted as a part of the filing of any construction plans or the site plans when they are required. A land-disturbing activity permit shall be obtained from the Director of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission following or concurrent with, receiving plan approval from the Coastal Soil and Water Conservation District. Land disturbing activities shall not begin prior to the issuance of a land-disturbing activity permit. 
ARTICLE XII. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 12.1. - Filing or recording. 
The filing or recording of a final plat of a subdivision without the approval of the governing authority as required by these regulations, or the filing and recording of any sketch plan or preliminary plat as a "record" plat is hereby declared a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is punishable as provided by law. 
Sec. 12.2. - Recording official. 
The clerk of court shall not accept, file, or record any sketch plan or any preliminary plat as a "record" plat, or any final record plat involving any area subject to these regulations which have not been approved by the governing authority. Should any public official violate the provisions of this section he shall in each instance be subject to the penalty provided in this article and the governing authority shall have such rights and remedies as to enforcement or collection as provided and may enjoin any violations thereof. 
Sec. 12.3. - Transfer of lots in unapproved subdivisions. 
The owner or agent of any land to be subdivided who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat or subdivision of such land before such final plat has been approved by the governing authority and recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in and for the county, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in the discretion of the court; and the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from these penalties. The governing authority may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
Sec. 12.4. - Erection of buildings. 
Any building erected in violation of these regulations shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official or the governing authority's attorney or other official designated by the governing authority may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
12.4.1.  A building or structure shall be substandard when it does not meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code, the National Electrical Code, or the Standard Plumbing Code, or any other code or ordinance of the City of Flemington which shall apply. 
Sec. 12.5. - Street names. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in laying out any new street or road to name such street or road on any plat, by any marking or in any deed or instrument without first getting the approval of the governing authority. Any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in the discretion of the court. 
Sec. 12.6. - Penalties. 
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before such plat has been approved by the governing authority, and recorded in the office of the clerk of the court in Liberty County, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law; and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
ARTICLE XIII. - IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT 

Sec. 13.1. - Guideline. 
The following is a guideline for minimum guarantees that can be accepted: 
13.1.1.  The applicant shall be the developer. 
13.1.2.  The beneficiary shall be the City of Flemington. 
13.1.3.  The governing authority must be able to draw on the letter of credit when a signed statement from the governing authority is shown to the lending institution. Such statement must certify that the developer is in default of the accompanying agreement. The statement must also show the amount of money due as a result of such default. 
13.1.4.  Credit must be automatically extended for an additional period of one year from the present and each future expiration date unless the governing authority is notified not less than 45 days in advance of an expiration date. The letter of credit shall not be withdrawn or reduced until all required improvements are completed and accepted by the local governing authority. 
13.1.5.  The governing authority must be able to draw the outstanding balance of money upon presentation of a signed statement by the governing authority as a cash bond to secure continued adherence to the terms of the agreement. This clause would be utilized in the event the lending institution chooses not to extend the expiration date and improvements are not complete. 
13.1.6.  The lending institution will receive the original letter of credit marked "Cancel" upon tender of payment or upon completion of improvements to the satisfaction of the governing authority. 
13.1.7.  The lending institution must agree to be responsible for the governing authority's court cost and attorney fees in the event the governing authority initiates a suit under the letter of credit. 
13.1.8.  The letter of credit must state that he letter of credit is specifically governed by the Uniform Commercial Code (or similar code) in force in the State of Georgia. 
13.1.9.  An example of an accepted letter of credit is shown on the following page. 
Other types of bonding, guarantees, sureties, other similar security arrangements may be accepted if approved by the governing authority's attorney. 
(BANK LETTER HEAD) 
IRREVOCABLE LETTER OF CREDIT 
Date: 
Letter of Credit: 
Addressed to: City of Flemington 
We hereby establish our Letter of Credit Number _______ in your favor for the account of (Name of Developer), for the sum or sums of U.S. dollars not exceeding a total of (amount of money) available by your drafts at sight on (Name of Bank) accompanied by the following: 
1.  A statement signed by the beneficiary indicating that payment has been requested and is due. 
2.  Certification that the funds are required related to (type of work) RE: (name of subdivision), or required as a cash bond to secure contained adherence to terms. 
Drafts must be negotiated (or presented to drawee bank for payment) on or before (date), or any extended date. 
This letter of credit shall be automatically extended for an additional period of time of one year from the present or each future expiration date unless we have notified you in writing, not less than 45 days before such expiration date, that we elect not to renew this letter of credit. Our notice of such election shall be sent certified mail to the above address. 
All drafts must be marked "Draw under name of bank", Letter of Credit Number: (Number). 
This credit is subject to the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits (1974 Revision) International Chamber of Commerce Brochure No. 290. 
We hereby agree with you that drafts under and in compliance with this credit shall be duly honored on due presentation to the drawee. 
(Bank Officer) 
(Title) 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 14.1. - Administration. 
The secretary of the Liberty Consolidated Planning Commission shall administer this ordinance. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 15.1. - Interpretation. 
The regulations expressed in this document shall be considered as the minimum provisions for the protection of the health, safety, economy, good order, appearance, convenience, and welfare of the general public, 
Sec. 15.2. - Conflict with other laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
Whenever the requirements made under authority of these regulations impose higher standards than are required in any other stature or local ordinance of regulation, provisions of these regulations shall govern. 
Sec. 15.3. - Separability. 
Should any section or provisions of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such a declaration shall not affect the ordinance as a whole, or any other part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Sec. 15.4. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 15.5. - Amendments. 
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any amendment to these regulations prior to its adoption, notice of which shall be given not less than 15 nor more than 30 days prior to the hearing date. The notice of hearing shall be made in a newspaper having general distribution in the area of jurisdiction. 
Sec. 15.6. - Effective date. 
These regulations shall take effect on May 15, 2008, and be applied to all submissions received by the planning commission after this effective date. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of those ordinances that are included herein. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 