THE CODE OF THE CITY OF DOUGLASVILLE 
____________ 
Published in 1993 by Order of the Council 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
DOUGLASVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Charles L. Camp 
Mayor 
____________ 
Michael Greene 
Douglas L. Wright 
Shirley C. Clark 
Harvey K. Persons, III 
Rick Denson 
Charlie L. Styles, Jr. 
Jack Tidwell 
Council 
____________ 
William D. Osborne 
City Manager 
____________ 
Joel Dodson 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Barbara McCravy 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1977 Code, as supplemented through August 20, 1990, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Milton E. Lefkoff, Supervising Editor, and Ronald McLaughlin, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Julie Livingston, Assistant City Attorney, and Ms. Barbara McCravy, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 

 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. O-93-11 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Douglasville, Georgia 
It is Hereby Ordained by the City of Douglasville, Georgia, as Follows: 
Section One. The Code entitled "The Code of the City of Douglasville" published by the Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 90, and Appendixes A and B, each inclusive is adopted. 
Section Two. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before January 4, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are expressly continued in force, provided that no ordinance expressly repealed by a subsequent ordinance shall be revived. 
Section Three. This new Code does not alter or in any way modify the existing zoning ordinance or charter provisions, except to renumber existing chapters and sections. 
Section Four. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or labor on the roads and streets or other public works for not more than 90 days, or a combination thereof. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances. injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section Five. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section Six. This ordinances becomes effective upon adoption. 
Enacted this 21st day of June, 1993. 

 
Attest: 

 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
A Bill to be entitled an Act to provide a new charter for the City of Douglasville; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, vacancies, compensation, expenses, qualifications, prohibitions, conflicts of interest, and suspension and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for oaths, organization, meetings, quorum, voting, rules, and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for a city manager, mayor, and mayor pro tempore and certain duties, powers, and other matters relative thereto; to provide for administrative affairs and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a city clerk, and other personnel and matters relating thereto; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof and other matters relative to those judges; to provide for the court's jurisdiction, powers, practices, and procedures; to provide for the right of certiorari; to provide for elections; to provide for districts; to provide for taxation, licenses, and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for auditing, accounting, budgeting, and appropriations; to provide for city contracts and purchasing; to provide for the conveyance of property and interests therein; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for prior ordinances and rules, pending matters, and existing personnel; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for submission; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to repeal a specific Act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is H.B. No. 968, adopted April 16, 1999 by the General Assembly. H.B. No. 968 repealed the former Charter and replaced it with a new Charter. The former Charter derived from 1972 Ga. Laws (Act No. 850), page 2119; Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3335, §§ 1, 2; Ga. Laws 1984, p. 5137, §§ 1. 2; Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4375, § 1; and Ord. No. 83-6, § 1, adopted June 20, 1983. Amendments to this Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter as adopted by H.B. No. 968. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

Section 1.10. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are reincorporated by the enactment of this charter and are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style the City of Douglasville, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on June 2, 2011, with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries existing on June 2, 2011 are as described below, as to blocks and tracts according to the 2010 United States decennial census: 

 
The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
(Ord. No. O-03-01, § 1, 1-21-03; Ord. No. O-2011-37, § 1, 9-6-11) 
Section 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. These powers shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(2)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(3)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(4)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of regulatory fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions as authorized by Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; to permit and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such regulatory fees and taxes; and to revoke such permits after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(5)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(6)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(7)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(8)  Environmental protection. To protect and preserve the natural resources, environment, and vital areas of the state through the preservation and improvement of air quality, the restoration and maintenance of water resources, the control of erosion and sedimentation, the management of solid and hazardous waste, and other necessary actions for the protection of the environment; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and other public property in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, cable television and other telecommunications, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares fees, assessments regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, public grounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, other public utilities, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for or impose taxes on public utilities and public service companies and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(35)  Special areas at public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of any intoxicating liquors, and the use of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(37)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(38)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Section 2.09. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this Charter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Adjunct appointee means a city employee whose appointment function is secondary to his main job duties. Adjunct appointment titles are appointed by the mayor and council, and such titles may be removed without cause by the mayor and council. 
Appointed employee means a city employee who is appointed by the mayor and council and serves subject to termination without cause, and whose appointment function is his primary job duty. 
Appointed officer means an appointed employee, a contract appointee, or an adjunct appointee. 
Appointed official means an appointed member of a board or commission or authority; unless otherwise provided by law, members of boards and commissions serve at pleasure of the mayor and city council and may be removed without cause. 
City means the municipal corporation known as the City of Douglasville. 
Contract appointee means an employee, a non-employee individual or a business which is engaged to serve a continuing city function prescribed by law, and who is appointed by the mayor and council. All contract appointees other than the municipal court judges shall serve subject to termination without cause. 
Elected official means the mayor or a council member of the City of Douglasville. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 1 , 8-17-15; Ord. No. O-2017-64 , § 1, 10-2-17; Ord. No. O-2018-38 , § 1, 10-15-18) 
Section 2.10. - City council creation; number; election; districts. 
(a)  The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and seven councilmembers. The mayor shall be elected at large by the electors of the city. Councilmembers shall be elected from five districts by the electors of their respective districts. One councilmember shall be elected from each of Districts 1, 4, and 5; and two councilmembers shall be elected from each of Districts 2 and 3. The city council established in this charter shall in all respects be a successor to and continuation of the city governing authority under prior law. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by general law and this charter. 
(b)  For the purpose of electing councilmembers, the City of Douglasville shall be divided into five districts. Those districts shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as 'Plan: douglasvillecity-2012 Plan Type: local Administrator: douglasville city User: bak'. 
(c)  For the purposes of such plan: 
(1)  The term 'VTD' shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Any part of the City of Douglasville which is not included in any district described in subsection (b) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Any part of the City of Douglasville which is described in subsection (b) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 

 
(Ord. No. O-03-01, § 1, 1-21-03; H.B. 1264, § 1, eff. 7-1-12) 
Section 2.11. - City council; terms and qualifications for office. 
The members of the city council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless that person shall be at least 21 years of age and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the city council; each shall continue to reside therein during that person's period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city. Candidates seeking election as councilmember from a district must reside within such district from which they seek election as of the date upon which they qualify to run for office, or, if a write-in candidate, upon the date on which they give notice of their intention of candidacy as required by O.C.G.A. 21-2-133, as now enacted or hereafter amended. 
Section 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies—The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the occurrence of any event specified by the Constitution, Title 45 of the O.C.G.A., or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies—A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment if less than 12 months remain in the unexpired term, otherwise by an election as provided for in Section 5.14 of this charter and Titles 21 and 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Elected officials and appointed officials of the city are trustees and servants of the residents of the city and shall act in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of such residents. 
(b)  Conflict of interest—No elected official or appointed official of the city or any agency or political entity to which this charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of that person's official duties or would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that person's official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; 
(4)  Solicit or accept anything of value, (and for the purpose of this section, the term "thing of value" shall have the meaning provided by Code Section 16-10-2 of the O.C.G.A., as now enacted or hereafter amended) whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to that person's knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in business dealings with the governmental body by which that person is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(6)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which that person has a financial interest. 
(c)  Disclosure—Any elected official or appointed official who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such interest to the city council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a financial interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and that person shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official or appointed official who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Use of public property—No elected official or appointed official of the city or any agency or entity to which this charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(e)  Contracts voidable and rescindable—Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render such contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(f)  Ineligibility of elected official—Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which that person was elected. No former councilmember and no former mayor shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city for which compensation (other than reimbursement for actual expenses) is paid until one year after the expiration of the term for which that person was elected. 
(g)  Political activities of appointed board members and employees—No city employee, and no appointed member of any board, commission or authority created by or exclusively for the City of Douglasville, shall continue to serve in such employment or appointment after qualifying as a candidate for election: (1) for any public office which is inconsistent, incompatible, or in conflict with his continuing duties as a city employee or appointed board member, or (2) for the office of the city's mayor or councilmember. Such determination of inconsistency, incompatibility, or conflict shall be made by the mayor and city council either immediately upon election or at any time such conflict may arise. 
(h)  Penalties for violation: 
(1)  Any elected official or appointed official who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited that person's office or position. 
(2)  Any elected official or appointed official of the city who shall forfeit an office or position as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be ineligible for appointment or election to a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 1, 3-1-04; Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 2 , 8-17-15) 
Section 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
Following the adoption of an authorizing resolution, the city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as may be provided by ordinance. 
Section 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city. 
Section 2.17. - Organizational meetings. 
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting at its first meeting in January of each year. The meeting shall be called to order by the mayor and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the laws of the city and the charter thereof, as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America (so help me God)." 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 2, 3-1-04) 
Section 2.18. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as shall be prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or on call of the mayor pro tempore and two members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to councilmembers shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible as provided by Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.19. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping of a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairs of the city council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Section 2.20. - Quorum; voting. 
Four councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of any measure shall be by voice vote, by electronic vote, or by a show of hands, and the vote shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the minutes. Upon a voice vote, any official who is silent during voting shall be presumed to have voted with the majority. The affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. An abstention from voting shall be counted neither as a vote in favor, nor as a vote against any ordinance, resolution or motion. The vote of the mayor, if the mayor is entitled to vote under the circumstances set forth in section 2.32 of this charter, shall be counted in same manner as the vote of a councilmember. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 3, 3-1-04; Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 3 , 8-17-15; Ord. No. O-2017-13 , § 1, 3-6-17) 
Section 2.21. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember at a regular or special meeting of the city council. An ordinance, or a synopsis of the pertinent provisions of the ordinance, shall be read by the city clerk, the city attorney or assistant city attorney, or the mayor or a council member. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish. Upon enactment of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Section 2.22. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 2.23. - Emergencies. 
(a)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or four councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least four councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
(b)  Such meetings shall be open to the public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of emergency meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible in accordance with Code Section 50-14-1 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 2.24. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.21 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to Section 2.25 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for inspection by the public. 
Section 2.25. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Douglasville, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
Section 2.26. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The city council shall appoint a city manager for a term of one to twenty years and shall fix the city manager's term and compensation by contract. The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of that person's executive and administrative qualifications. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-38 , § 2, 10-15-18) 
Section 2.27. - Removal of city manager. 
The city manager's contract of employment shall reflect that the city manager may be removed from office by the mayor and council for cause or without cause. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 4 , 8-17-15; Ord. No. O-2018-38 , § 2, 10-15-18) 
Section 2.28. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees other than those appointed officers appointed by the mayor and city council, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any employee who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency. The city manager may discipline appointed employees as provided in section 3.10; 
(2)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(3)  Attend all city council meetings, except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline, or removal of the city manager, and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(4)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(6)  Submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(7)  Make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(8)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(9)  Perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city council. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 4 , 8-17-15) 
Section 2.29. - Council's interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under Section 2.15 of this charter, the city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
Section 2.30. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
The mayor shall be elected and shall serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. The mayor shall be a qualified elector of this city and shall have been a resident of the city for 12 months prior to the election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit the office of mayor on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers. 
Section 2.31. - Chief executive officer; delegation of powers. 
The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive power granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive powers contained in this charter. 
Section 2.32. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
As the chief executive of this city, the mayor shall: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as the mayor may deem expedient; 
(3)  Call special meetings of the city council as provided for in subsection (b) of section 2.18 of this charter; 
(4)  Approve or disapprove ordinances, council resolutions, and other measures approved by the city council as provided in section 2.33 of this charter; 
(5)  Provide for an annual audit of all accounts of the city; 
(6)  Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports whenever the mayor deems it expedient; 
(7)  Perform such other duties as may be required by law, this charter, or ordinance; 
(8)  Preside at meetings of the city council; and 
(9)  Vote upon matters before the city council in the following circumstances: 
(A)  Upon the event of a tie vote of the city council upon any ordinance, resolution, question, or matter, except that the mayor shall have no authority to vote in the election of a mayor pro tempore; or 
(B)  In elections by the mayor and city council of all members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city, unless otherwise prohibited by law, even though the vote of the mayor may result in a tie vote and the failure to elect any appointed official or member. Where the mayor's vote in the election of a member of a board, commission, or authority of the city causes a tie vote and results in the failure to elect any person to such office, the mayor shall have the power to appoint any competent person to fill such office until such time as the mayor and city council shall by majority vote elect a person to fill such office. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, §§ 4, 5, 3-1-04; Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 5 , 8-17-15; Ord. No. O-2017-13 , § 1, 3-6-17) 
Section 2.33. - Submission of ordinances, resolutions and council measures to the mayor; veto power. 
(a)  Every ordinance, written resolution and written measure adopted by the city council shall be presented promptly by the city clerk to the mayor. 
(b)  The mayor, within seven calendar days of receipt of an approved ordinance, resolution or other council measure, shall return it to the city clerk with or without the mayor's approval or with the mayor's disapproval. If the ordinance, resolution or other council measure, has been approved by the mayor, it shall become law upon its return to the city clerk; if the ordinance, resolution or other council measure is neither approved nor disapproved, it shall become law at 12:00 noon on the seventh calendar day after its adoption; if the ordinance, resolution or other council measure is disapproved, the mayor shall submit to the city council through the clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance, resolution or other council measure, the date of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. 
(c)  Ordinances, resolutions or other council measures, vetoed by the mayor shall be presented by the clerk to the city council at its next meeting. If the city council then or at its next meeting adopts the ordinance, resolution or other council measure by an affirmative vote of five members, it shall become law. 
(d)  The mayor may disapprove or reduce any item or items of appropriation in any ordinance within seven calendar days from its adoption. The approved part or parts of any ordinance making appropriations shall become law, and the part or parts disapproved shall not become law unless subsequently passed by the councilmembers over the mayor's veto as provided in this section. The reduced part or parts shall be presented to the city council as though disapproved and shall not become law unless overridden by the council as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 6, 3-1-04) 
Section 2.34. - Mayor pro tempore; selection; duties. 
By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore, and the mayor shall have no authority to vote in such election even in the event of a tie vote among the city council. The mayor pro tempore shall preside at meetings of the city council upon the mayor's absence, or upon the mayor's physical or mental disability. The councilmembers by a majority vote shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled or absent; for both the mayor and the mayor pro tempore, disability shall be limited to circumstances where the elected official: (1) is under legal guardianship of his person or property; (2) is involuntarily committed to a mental institution, or (3) has, in writing, declared himself mentally disabled and has not revoked such statement. Any such disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. The mayor pro tempore shall have no veto power, and shall not assume any other duties or powers of the mayor, except that the mayor pro tempore may sign contracts on behalf of the city where the mayor declares that he has a conflict of interest and where council has authorized such contract. When presiding at meetings of the city council, the mayor pro tempore may vote on all matters and in all instances in which he would be authorized to vote if he were not presiding. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 7, 3-1-04; Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 6 , 8-17-15; Ord. No. O-2017-13 , § 1, 3-6-17) 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Section 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, alter, consolidate, or leave vacant all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. By means of example and not limitation, the mayor and city council may establish and fill by appointment the office of police chief, human resources director, city engineer, building official, director of parks and recreation, maintenance and sanitation director, and any other office deemed prudent by the mayor and city council. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department or agency. 
(d)  All appointed officers shall be appointed by the mayor and city council as provided herein. Appointments for vacant positions shall be made from time to time as necessary Appointments shall be made pursuant to nomination by the mayor, announced at a regular city council meeting, and ratification by a majority of the city council at the same meeting or at the next regular city council meeting; provided however, that any such appointed officer position may be filled by the city council without the mayor's nomination where that appointed officer position remains vacant for longer than 60 days after the mayor's first nomination, or where it remains vacant after two unratified nominations by the mayor. The mayor shall make his first nomination for any appointed officer position at a regular council meeting within 90 days of the date when the position became vacant. When the city council fills any appointed officer position without nomination by the mayor, the manner of appointment shall be by nomination from one or more members of the city council, and by voting as provided in Section 2.10, in the form of a written resolution subject to veto by the mayor and override of any veto as provided in section 2.33. 
(e)  Appointments for appointed officers other than the municipal court judges shall remain effective until the earlier of the incumbent's resignation or other removal from office, or the appointment of his successor in office. Terms of office for appointed municipal court judges shall be as provided in section 4.11. 
(f)  All appointed employees shall be evaluated in writing by the city manager not less frequently than quarterly, and the city manager shall provide each such report to the mayor and council. All appointed employees shall be employees at will and subject to termination at any time by the mayor and city council, unless otherwise provided by law or ordinance. The mayor and council may discipline any appointed employee by suspension without pay of more than ten days. Any discipline of an appointed employee by the mayor and shall be by written resolution, and subject to veto and override. Prior to termination of any appointed employee, the subject individual shall be given the opportunity to address the mayor and council in executive session regarding the matter. The city manager may issue discipline other than termination and less than a ten-day suspension without pay to any appointed employee, after giving notice to the mayor and city council; the city manager may issue to any appointed employee a suspension with pay, without prior notice to the mayor and council. The appointed position of any contract appointee or adjunct appointee may be terminated by written resolution of the city council without opportunity to address the mayor and council, as provided in sections 2.10 and 2.33. 
(Ord. No. O-04-07, § 8, 3-1-04; Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 7 , 8-17-15; Ord. No. O-2018-3 8, § 3, 10-15-18) 
Section 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath shall be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  All members of boards and commissions, of the city serve at will and may be removed at any time by a vote of four members of the city council unless otherwise provided by law. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chair and one member as vice chair and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 8 , 8-17-15) 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
The city council and mayor shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for providing for the representation and defense of the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city council and mayor shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal and city records; maintain city council records required by this charter; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. 
Sec. 3.14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-38 , § 4, adopted Oct. 15, 2018, repealed § 3.14, which pertained to position classification and pay plans. 
Section 3.15. - Personnel policies. 
All employees serve at will and may be removed from office at any time unless otherwise provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

Section 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Douglasville. 
Section 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such associate judges as the mayor and council may appoint from time to time. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and shall possess all qualifications required by law. All judges shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by contract. 
(d)  Judges serve fixed terms as provided herein and may be removed from office prior to the expiration of their terms only as provided by law. Judges shall serve an initial term expiring on June 30, 2020, and thereafter shall serve terms of one year. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor or city clerk, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of that person's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.19 of this charter. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-38 , § 5, 10-15-18) 
Section 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as set by the chief judge, and the court may meet in special session at the discretion of the presiding judge. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-38 , § 5, 10-15-18) 
Section 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for twelve months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by state law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. Each judge of the municipal court shall have the authority to issue search warrants as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-38 , § 5, 10-15-18) 
Section 4.14. - Certiorari. 
The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Douglas County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Section 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to municipal courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

Section 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.11. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in odd-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. 
(b)  There shall be elected the mayor and councilmembers from Wards 4 and 5 and Ward 2, Post 2, at the election held in 2015 and at every other election thereafter. The remaining councilmembers' seats shall be filled at the election held in 2013 and at every other election thereafter so that a continuing body is created. 
(H.B. 1264, § 2, eff. 7-1-12) 
Section 5.12. - Nonpartisan elections. 
Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
Section 5.13. - Election of councilmembers by plurality vote; election of mayor by majority vote. 
The person receiving a plurality of the votes cast for the office of councilmember shall be elected. The person receiving the majority of the votes cast for the office of mayor shall be elected. 
Section 5.14. - Special elections; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of the mayor or a councilmember shall become vacant as provided in Section 2.12 of this charter, the mayor and city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within 12 months of the expiration of the term of that office, the mayor and city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5.15. - Other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
Section 5.16. - Removal of elected officials. 
(a)  The mayor and councilmembers may be removed from office for any one or more of the causes provided in Title 45 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(b)  Removal of an elected official pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Following a hearing at which an impartial panel shall render a decision. In the event an elected official is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such official shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. The city council shall provide by ordinance for the manner in which such hearings shall be held. Any elected official sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Douglas County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Douglas County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Douglasville. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 9 , 8-17-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-39, § 9 , adopted Aug. 17, 2015, amended § 5.16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 5.16 pertained to removal of officers. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Property tax. 
The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Section 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
Section 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, or professions for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.13. - Regulatory fees; permits. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require businesses or practitioners doing business within this city to obtain a permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable regulatory fee for such permit as provided by general law. Such fees shall reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.14. - Franchises. 
(a)  The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(b)  If no franchise agreement is in effect, the city council has the authority to impose a tax on gross receipts for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, electric membership corporations, cable television and other telecommunications companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. 
Section 6.15. - Service charges. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
Section 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax or fee allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city permits for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
Section 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
Section 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Section 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 6.22. - Lease-purchase contracts. 
The city may enter into multiyear lease, purchase, or lease-purchase contracts for the acquisition of goods, materials, real and personal property, services, and supplies, provided the contract terminates without further obligation on the part of the municipality at the close of the calendar year in which it was executed and at the close of each succeeding calendar year for which it may be renewed. Contracts must be executed in accordance with the requirements of Code Section 36-60-13 of the O.C.G.A., or other such applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
Section 6.23. - Fiscal year. 
The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
Section 6.24. - Preparation of budgets. 
The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and plans. 
Section 6.25. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The operating budget may contain items of capital expenditure, or the city manager, in his or her discretion, may also prepare a separate capital budget. The budget may be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget together with any separate capital budget which may be prepared, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 6.26. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend any operating or capital budget proposed by the city manager, except that a budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget and any separate capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than five days prior to the beginning of the fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt an operating budget by such date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the then current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned. Adoption of a budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.24 of this charter. After adoption of a budget, the city council may subsequently amend that budget or enact such supplemental budgets as may be necessary, and changes in appropriations may be made as provided in Section 6.28. 
(c)  The amounts set out in the adopted operating budget and any separate capital budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriations for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable unless the budget is amended as by law provided. 
(Ga. Laws 1999, p. 4559, § 1) 
Section 6.27. - Tax levies. 
The city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
Section 6.28. - Changes in appropriations. 
The city council or the city finance committee may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget or any capital budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting, but any additional appropriations may be made only by the city council and only from an unexpended surplus. 
(Ga. Laws 1999, p. 4559, § 2) 
Section 6.29. - Audits. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
Section 6.30. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is in writing and: 
(1)  Is signed by the mayor and authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.19 of this charter; or 
(2)  Is a contract wherein the value of the city's obligation does not exceed $25,000.00 and is signed by the city manager in compliance with such other restrictions upon his authority as the mayor and council shall impose by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-62 , § 1, 9-18-17) 
Section 6.31. - Purchasing. 
The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
Section 6.32. - Sale and lease of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey or lease any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor or city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to sell and convey said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners where such sale and conveyance facilitates the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. Included in the sales contract shall be a provision for the rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place. Each abutting property owner shall be notified of the availability of the property and given the opportunity to purchase said property under such terms and conditions as set out by ordinance. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
Section 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all personnel and officers of this city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect for a period of 365 days before or during which time the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointed officers required or desired and arranging such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition. 
Section 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
Section 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and are not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Section 7.15. - Submission. 
It shall be the duty of the governing authority of the City of Douglasville to require the attorney therefor to submit this Act for approval pursuant to Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended. 
Section 7.16. - Specific repealer. 
An Act to create a new charter for the City of Douglasville, approved March 9, 1972 (Ga. L. 1972, p. 2119), as amended, is repealed in its entirety. 
Section 7.17. - General repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Personally appeared before me, the undersigned authority, duly authorized to administer oaths, Bob Snelling, who, on oath, deposes and says that he is the Representative from the 99th District, and further deposes and says as follows; 
(1)  That the attached Notice of Intention to Introduce Local Legislation was published in the Douglas County Sentinel which is the official organ of Douglas County, on the following date: February 25, 1999. 
(2)  That the laws requiring notice of local legislation were further complied with in the manner checked below: 
✓ A copy of the notice of intention was mailed, transmitted by facsimile, or otherwise provided to the governing authority of any county, municipality, or consolidated government whose charter or enabling Act is amended, as required by subsection (b) of Code Section 28-1-14. 

 
Sworn to and subscribed before me, this 5th day of March, 1999. 

 
Approved April 16, 1999 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 

 
  

 
  

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Douglasville" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1977, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Authority to codify, § 2.12. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" mean the City of Douglasville in the County of Douglas and State of Georgia. 
City manager, city clerk, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city manager," "city clerk," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments mean the city manager, city clerk, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the city. 
Code. The words "Code" or "this Code" mean the Code of the City of Douglasville. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. The terms "council" or "this council" or "the council" mean the city council of the City of Douglasville. 
County. The terms "county" or "this county" mean the County of Douglas, Georgia. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically provide otherwise. 
Easement. The word "easement" means a right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; and also a right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in the owner. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" extends and be applied to organizations, associations, companies, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1977, §§ 1-2, 14-32) 
State Law reference— Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this Code or any such ordinance or resolution shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or labor on the roads and streets or other public works for not more than 180 days, or by any one or more of these punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 1-3; Ord. No. O-05-50, § 1, 9-19-05) 
Charter reference— General penalty, § 6.03. 
Cross reference— Minimum bond requirements for Code violations other than Uniform Traffic violations, § 1-10. 
State Law reference— Organization of work gangs by cities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-4. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Douglasville to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 hereof. 
(Code 1977, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1977, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Parenthetical and reference matter. 
The matter in parentheses at the ends of sections is for information only and is not a part of the Code. Citations to the 1977 Code of the city (Code 1977) and to later ordinances indicate only the source and the text may or may not be changed by this Code. Reference matter not in parentheses is for information only and is not a part of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1977, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1977, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Miscellaneous ordinances and actions not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city. 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the mayor and council to any person, firm or corporation. 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same. 
(11)  An ordinance regulating zoning and subdivisions in the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law and is not inconsistent with the Code. 
(13)  An ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof. 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific streets or intersections, such as ordinances designating one-way streets, no parking areas, truck routes, stop intersections, yield intersections, intersections where traffic is to be controlled by signals, etc. 
(15)  Any ordinance relating to soil erosion. 
(16)  Any ordinance establishing or imposing any rates, charges or fees for utility services or connections. 
All such actions and ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
(Ord. of 4-4-77, § 3) 
Sec. 1-10. - Minimum bond requirements for Code violations other than Uniform Traffic violations. 
Code violations of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, without a state or local bond schedule shall now carry a bond as set below: 
(1)  First offense ..... $ 75.00 
(2)  Second offense ..... 150.00 
(3)  Third and subsequent offense with a mandatory court appearance ..... 200.00 
(Res. No. R-94-1, 1-18-94; Ord. No. O-04-01, § 1, 1-20-04) 
Cross reference— General penalty; continuing violations, § 1-3. 
Sec. 1-11. - Failure to appear in court. 
No person or entity, properly cited or officially notified or subpoenaed to appear in the municipal court, shall fail to appear without good cause. Failure to appear shall constitute an offense for which a warrant may be issued by the municipal court judge, and which may be punished as provided in section 1-3. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-59, § 1, 12-15-14) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— City government, art. II. 
Cross reference— Administration of pouring outlet requirements, § 10-158; animal control shelter committee, § 18-231 et seq.; plan review committee, § 22-433; civil emergencies, ch. 30; council of defense, § 30-66 et seq.; emergency management director, § 30-91 et seq.; community development, ch. 34; planning commission, § 34-36 et seq.; development authority, § 34-71 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; administration of flood chapter, § 46-61 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 62; Douglasville-Douglas County Parks and Recreation Board created, § 62-1; city advisory recreation board, § 62-3; parks and recreation activity committee, § 62-4; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; taxation, ch. 78; administration of hotel-motel excise tax, § 78-46; utilities, ch. 86; zoning enforcement officer, app. A, § 1100; board of zoning appeals, app. A, § 1200 et seq.; administration of subdivision regulations, app. B, § 40. 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Elections superintendent. 
The city clerk is hereby appointed and shall serve as municipal superintendent of elections held by the city, and shall have all powers enumerated for such municipal superintendents in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 
(Code 1977, § 2-1) 
Cross reference— Sale of alcoholic beverages during elections, § 10-7. 
Sec. 2-2. - Chief registrar. 
The city clerk is hereby appointed and shall serve as the chief registrar and shall have and exercise all the powers enumerated for such registrar in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-120 et seq. 
(Code 1977, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-3. - Use by city of county registration lists; registration of electors by registrar; duties of registrar. 
(a)  Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125(d), the mayor and council of the City of Douglasville hereby provide that the county registration list of electors shall be used as the registration list of electors in all city elections. Any person who is registered as an elector with the board of registrars of the county shall be eligible to vote in a municipal primary or election held in the City of Douglasville, Georgia, provided that such person meets all of the qualifications of a person seeking to vote in a municipal primary or election as determined by the provisions of the Constitution of the state and the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
(b)  The county registrar shall carry out the functions necessary for municipal registration and shall maintain all registration cards. His office shall be deemed the main registration office. 
(c)  The county registrar shall perform all duties required of him under the Georgia Municipal Election Code (O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq.). 
(Code 1977, § 2-2.1) 
Sec. 2-4. - Books of accounts to be kept. 
Complete and accurate books of accounts of the city shall be kept by the city finance director. 
(Code 1977, § 2-3; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 1, 6-21-99) 
Sec. 2-5. - Receipt of money; credit card payments. 
(a)  Generally. All money and checks payable to the city shall be received by the city finance director, who shall, immediately upon receipt thereof, enter the same into the proper book or record of account. The city finance director shall serve as clerk to the board of tax assessors, shall mail and deliver all tax and license fee notices to the persons liable for the payment therefor, shall issue all tax fi. fas. on delinquent taxes, shall receive all fines and forfeitures from the municipal court. 
(b)  Acceptance of credit card payments. 
(1)  Acceptance authorized. Any and all departments of the city are authorized but not required to accept any sums due the city including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, occupation taxes, fines, forfeitures, penalties, license fees, permit fees and registration fees, to be paid by the use of credit cards, including debit cards. The city finance director, with the approval of the city manager, shall establish the procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. The council may authorize the mayor to enter into agreements with financial institutions and credit card issuers to facilitate the acceptance of credit card payments by the city. 
(2)  Administrative fees. A credit card agreement may provide for the acceptance of the credit card payments from the credit card company and financial institution at a discount from the face amount of the payment or for the withholding of administrative fees, by the credit card company and financial institution, from the face amount of the payment. Such discounted fee is granted in exchange for the improved governmental cash flow, reduction of city administrative expenses and increased public convenience as a result of credit card payments. 
(3)  Surcharge. A surcharge equal to the administrative fees charged by the credit card issuer to the city shall be imposed upon any person making a payment by credit card, when such surcharges are permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. 
(4)  Cancellation of agreement. Any agreement with a credit card issuer or financial institution for the acceptance of payments via credit shall contain a provision that the agreement may be canceled at any time by the city. 
(5)  Liability for payments not received. No person making payment by credit card to the city is relieved from liability for the underlying obligation except to the extent that the city actually receives final payment of the obligation in cash or its equivalent. If final payment is not made by the credit card issuer or other guarantor of payment in the credit card transaction, the underlying obligation for the money due is not extinguished. All applicable penalties, interest and collection fees on the unpaid amount shall be due from the person making the payment by credit card. Such penalties, interest and fees on an unpaid amount shall accrue from the date the unpaid obligation was first due under the applicable statute or ordinance. The city shall follow the collection procedures for the unpaid amount that would have otherwise been applicable had the credit card payment not been attempted. 
(Code 1977, § 2-4; Ord. No. O-96-49, § 1, 10-7-96; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 2, 6-21-99) 
Sec. 2-6. - Disbursement of money. 
All money disbursed by the city in any amount more than $100.00 shall be by check drawn upon the proper account and entered in the proper book by the city finance director. All checks shall be signed and countersigned by two of the following: the mayor, the city manager, and the finance director. Exceptionally, the chief of police is authorized to serve as one of the two city signatories for any check expending confiscated assets funds. Notwithstanding the above requirements, the council may approve contracts authorizing individuals to sign or endorse checks, drafts, instruments, and orders payable to the city, and to waive presentment, demand, protest, and notice of protest or dishonor of any checks, instruments, drafts or other evidences of indebtedness. 
(Code 1977, § 2-5; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 3, 6-21-99; Ord. No. O-04-28, § 1, 7-6-04; Ord. No. O-06-17, § 1, 6-19-06) 
Sec. 2-7. - Separate accounts. 
The funds of the city shall be deposited in the official city depository, in a general fund or in such other special and separate accounts as may be authorized by the mayor and council. It shall be the duty of the city finance director to deposit such funds in the proper accounts upon the receipt thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 2-6; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 3, 6-21-99) 
Sec. 2-8. - Contracts. 
All contracts to which the city is a party shall be in writing. When authorized to do so by the council, the mayor may sign any contract on behalf of the city, and the same shall be attested to by the clerk and such authorization by the council shall be spread upon the minutes of the council. The city manager shall have limited concurrent authority to sign contracts on behalf of the city as provided in section 2-154, without further authorization from the council. The personnel director is authorized to sign contracts on behalf of the city concerning deferred compensation as provided in section 2-175 without further authorization from the council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-7; Ord. No. O-98-37, § 1, 4-20-98) 
Sec. 2-9. - Bill of accounts. 
All bills of accounts for materials used in the regular course of business by the city shall be paid by the city finance director out of the general funds of the city; provided that all bills of accounts in excess of $1,000.00 shall have the prior approval of the mayor and council before such payment is made. 
(Code 1977, § 2-8; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 4, 6-21-99) 
Sec. 2-10. - Supervision and control of public property. 
The mayor and council shall have the general supervision and control of all property owned by or under the control of the city. The city manager shall, consistent with the official actions of the mayor and council, administer the day to day management of all city property, including but not limited to any real property, personal property, licenses, franchises and contractual rights held by the city. Except as expressly approved in advance by the city manager or by the mayor and council, no individual councilmember, by virtue of his office, shall: 
(1)  Have franking privileges; 
(2)  Make excessive use of any city-owned office equipment; 
(3)  Remove any city record from the building where it is housed, nor from its normal place of keeping; or 
(4)  Direct use of the government access television channel. 
(Code 1977, § 2-9; Ord. No. O-96-41, § 1, 8-19-96) 
Sec. 2-11. - Unlawful use of city property—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to use, possess, occupy or enter upon any real or personal property of the city when such is restricted or prohibited by ordinance or resolution. Any person violating this section, or any ordinance or resolution adopted under this section, shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable under section 6.03 of the Charter of the City of Douglasville. 
(Code 1977, § 2-10) 
Sec. 2-12. - Same—Personal use of city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any officer of the city or other person to use or take from its place of keeping, any of the tools, equipment, motor vehicles, or other personal property or any fixtures, for the purpose of using the same otherwise than provided by the rules of the mayor and council or for the personal use or benefit of such officer or other person. 
(Code 1977, § 2-11) 
Sec. 2-13. - Penalty for neglect of duty. 
Any officer or employee of the city who is guilty of neglect or failure to perform the duties prescribed or required of him by the provisions of this Code or the mayor and council or who shall be guilty of any misconduct in office shall forfeit his right to hold such office and shall be immediately removed from office by the mayor and council, if, after a public hearing of the charges against such officer or employee at such officer's or employee's request, such failure to perform duty, neglect of duty, or misconduct in office is not justified under all of the circumstances of the case. This provision is cumulative and shall not bar any other punishment or penalty provided by this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 2-12) 
Sec. 2-14. - Police officers to attend sessions of municipal court; exceptions; compensation. 
(a)  All police officers that are members of the police department of the City of Douglasville shall attend each session of the municipal court held for the City of Douglasville unless such attendance is excused by the judge or the chief of police. 
(b)  Police officers that are on duty during the time the municipal court is in session shall not be required to be in attendance of the court unless their attendance and appearance are necessary for the court to carry out the proceedings before it at that session. 
(c)  Each police officer, except the chief of police, the clerk of the municipal court, and police officers on duty during the court session, shall be paid the sum of $20.00 per court session attended by such officer. 
(Code 1977, § 2-13) 
Charter reference— Recorder's court, art. VI. 
Sec. 2-15. - Safety and loss control policy. 
(a)  Purpose; appointment of safety officer. The City of Douglasville has a sincere concern for the safety and welfare of its employees as well as the public it serves. The city realizes its obligation, as an employer, and as a government service organization, to provide the safest possible working conditions for employees and to provide a safe environment for the public that uses its services; furthermore, when unnecessary accidents occur, they are an indication of wasteful and inefficient operation. The city believes that most accidents can be prevented. In accordance with that conviction, there is hereby appointed an employee to serve in the capacity of safety officer who shall develop and administer an occupational safety program for city employees. 
(b)  Duties of safety officer. The safety officer will: 
(1)  Analyze accident causes, cost and other pertinent factors for use in accident prevention. 
(2)  Consult with and advise administrative officials and department heads on accident prevention. 
(3)  Identify hazardous work locations and practices and recommend corrective actions as they relate to the operation and maintenance of motorized equipment. 
(4)  Develop and conduct safety training courses, review and evaluate safety suggestions, plan and administer on-the-job training courses required to meet these needs. 
(5)  Organize special classes to train supervisors and other personnel in technical aspects of vehicle operation and maintenance aids for conduct of on-the-job training courses, and maintain current information programs available in local educational institutions. 
(6)  Maintain records of training courses completed and prepare suitable certificates or other forms of recognition for employees who satisfactorily complete courses. 
(7)  Coordinate all safety and training programs, prepare and maintain records pertaining to accidents, causes, cost and corrective actions taken and issue a report monthly and yearly. 
The appointment of a safety officer does not relieve department heads and supervisors of a basic responsibility; that of expanding their management and supervisory practices to incorporate safety engineering principles in all supervisory efforts. 
(c)  Responsibility of department heads and supervisors. Department heads and supervisors at all levels of the city work force are directed to make safety a matter of continuing concern, equal in importance to all other operational considerations. They are expected to cooperate with and assist the appointed safety officer to implement the policies of the office; and to develop and administer an effective department safety program. Their responsibility encompasses the adoption of work standards designed to attain the only goal acceptable to management and work force alike; that is, a work environment free of potential hazards or work procedures that may produce injuries and property damage. To reach that goal, management and supervisory personnel must: 
(1)  Provide informed leadership and adequate supervision of the city work force; 
(2)  Provide adequate job training and continuing safety instructions to all employees; 
(3)  Develop reasonable, practical safe job procedures for city operations, and enforce them; 
(4)  Secure prompt and adequate medical care to minimize the severity of injuries and safeguard the physical and mental welfare of employees; and 
(5)  Continuously review work practices and conditions of the work environment to seek improvement. 
(d)  Employee cooperation. All employees are charged with responsibility for cooperation with and support of safety program objectives. All employees are expected, as a condition of employment, to adopt the concept that the safe way to perform a task is the most efficient and only acceptable way to perform it. 
(e)  Maintenance of safety records; criterion for performance evaluation. Safety records shall be measured along with all other phases of supervisor and employee performance. It is absolutely essential that such records be complete and accurate and that all accidents be fully reported. 
(Code 1977, § 2-14) 
Sec. 2-16. - Review committee of Disabilities Act compliance. 
The mayor and council hereby establish a review committee to review the city's programs, services and facilities for compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. The review committee shall be composed of staff and citizen members and shall file a written evaluation of such with the mayor and council. 
(Res. No. R-92-37, 6-1-92) 
Sec. 2-17. - Enforcement of ordinances. 
All sworn police officers and all sworn code compliance officers of the City of Douglasville shall have authority to enforce all provisions of the City Code and all other lawful ordinances of the City of Douglasville, and are authorized to issue citations for this purpose. The concurrent enforcement authority of all such officers shall not be construed to be limited by any City Code provision or ordinance which provides for enforcement by the officers of one department or by those of any other department. The mayor and council may provide for enforcement of certain ordinances by other officers of the city by adoption of appropriate policies or job descriptions which include these duties. The mayor and council may provide for enforcement of certain ordinances by other entities by means of contracts. 
(Ord. No. O-02-31, § 2, 8-5-02; Ord. No. O-2018-9 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 2-18. - Appointments to boards and commissions. 
All persons, other than other council members, being considered for appointment to any board or commission established by city ordinance shall, prior to appointment, submit to the city clerk such personal and professional background information as shall be required by the mayor and city council. Unless otherwise provided by law, all incumbent appointees to boards and commissions created pursuant to ordinance shall continue to serve after expiration of any term of office until earlier of such time as the appointee has: 
(a)  resigned; or 
(b)  been removed from office; or 
(c)  been replaced by a successor appointee. 
(Ord. No. O-07-46, § 1, 8-6-07; Ord. No. O-2017-95 , § 1, 12-18-17) 
Sec. 2-19. - Applicants and recipients of public benefits; requirements. 
All applicants and recipients of public benefits as defined by O.C.G.A. section 50-36-1 shall, as a condition of such application or receipt, comply with the verification requirements of the Systematic Alien Verification Entitlement Program. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-17, § 1, 6-6-11) 
Secs. 2-20—2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Mayor and councilmen generally, § 2.10 et seq.; elections, art. V. 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 30; curfew, § 30-136 et seq. 

Sec. 2-46. - Regular meetings. 
Except as provided herein, the mayor and council shall hold their regular meetings in the auditorium of the Douglasville Conference Center on the first and third Monday nights of each and every calendar month at 6:00 p.m., and a legislative work session meeting shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the Thursday night immediately preceding each regular meeting. The following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)  The first regular meeting in January shall be held on the second Monday in January; 
(2)  The second regular meeting in January shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the Tuesday immediately following the third Monday in January; 
(3)  Whenever July 4 falls on the first Monday in July, the first regular meeting in July shall be at 6:00 p.m. on Tuesday, July 5; and 
(4)  The first regular meeting in September shall be held at 6:00 p.m. on the Tuesday immediately following the first Monday in September. 
The mayor and council may reschedule any regular meeting and any legislative work session meeting, including those listed as exceptions in this section, by ordinance or resolution. 
(Code 1977, § 2-25; Ord. No. O-2013-10, § 1, 2-18-13; Ord. No. O-2014-11, § 1, 2-3-14; Ord. No. O-2015-35, § 1 , 8-17-15; Ord. No. O-2017-44 , § 1, 7-17-17) 
Sec. 2-47. - Parliamentary rules; debate limited; reading from papers. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, Robert's Rules of Order shall be the official authority for rules governing the conduct of meetings of the mayor and council. 
(b)  In all meetings of the mayor and council - whether in legislative work sessions, regular voting meetings, or special meetings - and whether or not any motion has been made - no elected official shall speak on the same issue more than once in one day nor longer than ten minutes at one time, provided however: (1) brief questions and brief suggestions shall not be counted against the ten-minute time limit; (2) no elected official may transfer any speaking time to another; and (3) if an amended motion is offered, that presents a new speaking opportunity to all elected officials other than the maker of the amended motion. 
(c)  No elected official shall read aloud from papers during any council meeting—whether in legislative work sessions, regular voting meetings, or special meetings—and whether or not any motion has been made—without special permission of the council. 
(d)  A motion to table any matter shall be construed as a motion to postpone to a certain date, unless the movant specifies otherwise. As such, a motion to table shall require a second and is debatable. 
(e)  Whenever the mayor and council shall consider appointment of more than one candidate to a single post as an appointed official, prior to any motion or nomination on the issue by any council member, the city manager shall administer a (non-binding) straw vote by written ballot containing all anticipated candidates, and thereafter shall announce in the same meeting the name of each voting elected official and the name of candidate chosen by that elected official in the straw vote. If the straw vote results in one candidate having a plurality of ballot votes, then that candidate shall be the single automatic nominee, without need for a motion or second, for a binding vote of the elected officials on the issue of that appointment. If the straw vote does not result in one candidate having a plurality of ballot votes, or if the automatic nominee fails to win appointment upon the first binding vote thereon, then thereafter any council member may move to appoint a single candidate, and the chairman shall call for a second, and call for a binding vote to appoint or not. The mayor and council shall not entertain more than one nomination per binding vote. 
(Code 1977, § 2-26; Ord. No. O-05-39, § 1, 6-20-05; Ord. No. O-05-53, § 1, 9-19-05; Ord. No. O-2016-45, § 1 , 10-3-16) 
Sec. 2-48. - Standing, special committees. 
The mayor shall appoint such standing and special committees as may be necessary for the proper conduct and administration of the business of the city as may be necessary from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 2-27) 
Sec. 2-49. - Vote of council. 
In all matters coming before the mayor and council in any meeting, the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers present and voting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion, and those elected officials voting aye and those elected officials members of council voting nay shall be spread upon the minutes by the clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 2-28; Ord. No. O-2016-45, § 2 , 10-3-16) 
Sec. 2-50. - Training and travel expenses for elected officials. 
(a)  Pre-approved events for all elected officials. 
(1)  The city shall pay reasonable expenses for travel, meals, registration, parking, and training materials incurred in connection with attendance of elected officials at: 
a.  Any training session for elected officials which is: 
i.  Conducted and attended by an elected official at a location outside Douglas County; and 
ii.  A training session for which completion is sponsored by the Carl Vinson Institute; and 
iii.  Completed for credit by the elected official. 
b.  The annual convention of the Georgia Municipal Association. 
c.  The annual Mayor's Day winter meeting of the Georgia Municipal Association. 
d.  A mediation or arbitration for a city legal matter or city legal claim, or a civil judicial hearing or trial where the city is a party, or at a deposition in a matter where the city is a party if the elected official is the deponent, if the location of the mediation, arbitration, hearing, trial or deposition is outside Douglas County. 
e.  Any meeting of any agency, commission, board or authority where the attending elected official is a member by virtue of law or due to appointment by the mayor and council. 
f.  Any event sponsored by the Douglas County Chamber of Commerce, Inc. and held outside Douglas County. 
(2)  The city shall pay ticket expense for attendance of the elected official and a guest at the following local civic events: 
a.  The annual gala hosted by the Cultural Arts Council Douglasville/ Douglas County, Inc.; and 
b.  The annual banquet hosted by the Douglas County Chamber of Commerce, Inc. 
(b)  Additional preapproved events for the mayor. The city shall pay reasonable expenses for travel, meals, registration, parking, and training materials incurred in connection with attendance of the mayor at: 
(1)  All meetings within the State of Georgia sponsored by the Atlanta Regional Commission or the Georgia Department of Community Affairs or the Georgia Municipal Association; and 
(2)  All meetings within or outside of the State of Georgia sponsored by the Douglas County Chamber of Commerce, the National League of Cities, or the United States Conference of Mayors. 
(c)  Use of city vehicles, vehicle allowance, mileage reimbursement, and other modes of transportation. 
(1)  Mayor. The mayor shall have daily use of a city-owned vehicle for city business purposes, with fuel, maintenance and all related expenses paid by the city, or the mayor may elect to receive a monetary vehicle allowance as provided in the compensation ordinance. The mayor shall use the city-owned automobile only as authorized in the compensation ordinance. 
(2)  Councilmembers. For automobile travel to and from and at any event specified in paragraph (a)(1) councilmembers shall be entitled to use of a fueled city-owned vehicle or for mileage reimbursement on a personal vehicle at the rate then allowed by the Internal Revenue Service for business expense. Where elected officials carpool to or from events outside Douglas County and specified in paragraph (a), reimbursement for mileage shall be paid for not more than one vehicle for the carpool group. 
(3)  Other modes of transportation. Elected officials may utilize air travel, train travel, mass transit, rental cars or other modes of travel at the expense of the city while traveling for any purpose allowed by paragraph (a)(1) or (b), so long as adequate funds are budgeted for training by the subject elected official prior to the expenditure. The mayor need not consume his monetary vehicle allowance before incurring expenses for other modes of travel. 
(d)  Amount of meal expense. Meal expense for elected officials attending or in route to or from events specified in paragraphs (a) and (b), and those events specially approved by the mayor and council for attendance, shall be paid at the rate of $38.25 for each of the first and last days of any such trip, and at the rate of $51.00 per day for other days of any such trip. The number of such days for which meal expense is payable shall be limited to one plus the number of days for which the city pays lodging expense for that trip for the subject elected official. Meal expense is payable without regard to whether: 
(1)  any meal was actually consumed or paid for by the elected official; 
(2)  the city has also paid for any meal through a registration fee; or 
(3)  the official's meal is actually paid for or provided by another individual or entity. 
(e)  Number of days for paid lodging expense. For each day of any event specified in paragraphs (a) and (b) where the event is located at least 50 miles from Douglas County, the city shall pay a day of actual lodging expenses for the elected official. As additional lodging expense, where the event site is located: 
(1)  One hundred to 200 miles from Douglas County and the elected official attends at least one day of the event, the attending elected official shall be entitled to one additional day of actual lodging expenses to be paid by the city; or 
(2)  More than 200 miles from Douglas County and the elected official attends at least one day of the event, the attending elected official shall be entitled to two additional days of actual lodging expenses to be paid by the city. Where elected officials share lodging accommodations, payment for lodging by the city shall be for not more than one room for the group. 
(f)  Pre-emption. This section is intended to be pre-emptive and to be a full and complete statement of the entitlement of any city-elected official to: 
(1)  Expenses for routine work as an elected official, and 
(2)  Expenses for travel, meals, lodging, registration, parking, and training materials incurred in connection with any event described in paragraphs (a) and (b). 
This section is not intended to preclude reimbursement to elected officials for actual extraordinary expenses incurred in connection with official work other than the events described in paragraphs (a) and (b), and such reimbursements may be approved from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(g)  Failure to incur or attend. Except as provided in paragraph (d) for meal expense, no elected official shall request, receive, or retain reimbursement for expenses not actually incurred. No elected official shall request, receive, or retain compensation for any event specified in subparagraph (a)(1) where the elected official failed to attend. 
(h)  Process for payment. All expenses payable pursuant to this section 20-5 shall be processed by submission and approval of travel forms. The elected official shall initiate the approval process for payment for any training event by filing a signed travel request form with the city manager or the finance director not later than 15 days in advance of the first day of the proposed training event, detailing all anticipated reimbursable expenses. All lodging shall be paid for by the city with a city check or purchasing card, utilizing tax exemption forms. The city's petty cash shall not be used in connection with training expenses. Within 30 days after completion of any training event, the attending elected official shall submit to the city manager or the finance director a signed final travel form, confirming days and partial days of attendance at the training and stating all actual expenses, attaching the official event schedule and attaching all receipts or other proof of expenses, except for meal expenses. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-15 , § 1, 3-6-2017; Ord. No. O-2017-92 , § 1, 12-4-17; Ord. No. O-2017-93 , §§ 1, 2, 12-4-17; Ord. No. O-2018-47 , §§ 1, 2, 11-5-18; Ord. No. O-2019-11 , § 1, 3-18-19) 
Sec. 2-51. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency thereof and, for this purpose, may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-96-41, § 2, 8-19-96) 
Sec. 2-52. - Council interference with administration. 
The city council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately. 
(Ord. No. O-96-41, § 3, 8-19-96) 
Sec. 2-53. - Financial administration. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases shall have the indicated meanings for purposes of this section. 
(1)  Amendment period means the period of time between the initial annual adoption of a budget ordinance and adoption of the next succeeding budget amendment ordinance for any one fund, or the period of time between adoption of any budget amendment ordinance and adoption of the next succeeding budget amendment ordinance for any one fund, regardless of the content of the ordinance, the purpose for its adoption or the departments affected. 
(2)  Budget means a plan of financial operation embodying an estimate of proposed expenditures during a budget period and the proposed means of financing them. 
(3)  Budget period means the fiscal year or the period for which a budget is proposed or a budget ordinance is adopted. 
(4)  Capital budget means a budget for a capital project fund; adoption of a separate capital projects budget is optional, and is appropriate when acquisition or construction of a capital project will extend beyond a single fiscal year and the financing sources are provided by more than one fund; this budget is project-oriented, rather than period-oriented and may span a multiple-year budget period. 
(5)  Capital projects fund means a fund used to account for financial resources to be used for the acquisition or construction of major capital facilities other than those financed by resources from proprietary type activities which are accounted for in enterprise funds or those financed with funds held by the city in a trustee capacity. 
(6)  Cash balance means the cash, current assets (readily convertible into cash) and quick assets (converted in to cash as part of normal operations) owned at any specific point in time. 
(7)  Cash reserve means a specified amount of cash, current assets or quick assets within any fund which may not be transferred or appropriated, except by ordinance of the city council specifically referencing the cash reserve and reciting the special need for such transfer or appropriation. 
(8)  Drug fund means the special revenue fund maintained from revenues generated from forfeitures pursuant to Chapter 13 of Title 16 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and from other similar sources. 
(9)  Fixed asset means an asset of a physical, permanent or long-term nature. 
(10)  Fund means a fiscal accounting entity with a self-balancing set of accounts recording cash, receivables, and other financial resources, together with all related liabilities and residual equities or balances, and changes therein, which is segregated for the purpose of carrying on certain activities or attaining certain objectives in accordance with special regulations, restrictions, or limitations. 
(11)  Fund balance means the difference between fund assets (including cash, receivables and other monetary assets, but not including fixed assets) and fund liabilities (including debts and accounts payable). 
(12)  General fund means the fund used to account for all financial resources except those required to be accounted for in another fund. 
(13)  Legal level of control means the lowest level of budgetary detail at which a designated staff member may not reassign resources without approval of the city council. 
(14)  Line item means any detail within a departmental budget for any fund. 
(15)  Operating budget means a collection of budgets including the general budget and budgets for all funds other than the capital fund and the drug fund. 
(16)  Sanitation fund means the enterprise fund maintained to account for sanitation operations, financed and operated in a manner similar to a private business enterprise, and intended to provide services to the general public on a continuing basis, the cost for which is financed or recovered primarily through user charges. 
(17)  Special revenue fund means a fund used to account for the proceeds of specific revenue sources, other than those for major capital projects or those held by the city in a trustee capacity, that are legally restricted to expenditure for specified purposes. 
(b)  Fiscal year; budgets. 
(1)  Fiscal year. The city's fiscal year and budget period shall be from July 1 of every year through and including the following June 30. 
(2)  Drug fund budget. On or before May 1 of every year, the police chief shall submit to the city manager a proposed drug fund budget for the ensuing fiscal year for approval as a special revenue fund at the time for annual approval of the City's operating budget 
(3)  Operating budget. On or before the Thursday immediately preceding the first Monday in June of every year, the city manager shall submit to the mayor and council an operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year, which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and open for public inspection. The operating budget shall be adopted, after a public hearing, on a date at least five days in advance of the ensuing fiscal year. The amounts set out in the adopted operating budget shall constitute the annual appropriations, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriation or allotment thereof for any department to which it is chargeable unless the budget is amended. 
(4)  Capital fund budget. The mayor and council may adopt a capital fund budget at any time during the fiscal year. 
(c)  Approval of capital fund expenditures. Each capital fund expenditure over $25,000.00, whether budgeted or not budgeted, shall be brought before the mayor and council at a regularly scheduled meeting and approved before such expenditure shall be made. 
(d)  Operating budget, amendments, transfers, appropriations. 
(1)  Ordinance adoption required. All amendments to the budget and appropriations ordinance shall be by ordinance. Any increase in appropriation to a department, whether due to a change in anticipated revenues appropriated to a department, or due to a transfer of appropriations among two or more departments, shall require an amendment to the budget appropriations ordinance. 
(2)  Drug fund. For the drug fund, the chief of police may make transfers for any line item within the budget. 
(3)  For the operating budget, budget transfers between departments shall require city council approval. Except as provided in this subsection, the legal level of control for the operating budget shall be at the department level; transfers between line items within a department may be approved by the city manager with the following restrictions: 
a.  The city manager may not transfer assets into or from any line item for expenditures for electric service, natural gas, telephone service, or water and sewer service where the city or any constituent organization is the customer; and 
b.  The city manager may not transfer assets into or from any line item for expenditures for employee wages or related expenses for fringe benefits, including FICA taxes, health insurance premiums, life insurance premiums, workers' compensation costs, or pension costs; and 
c.  The city manager may not transfer more than $25,000.00 into or from a line item within any department within any one amendment period. 
d.  The city manager may not transfer assets into or from any line item for expenditures for travel, training or attendance at civic events by any elected official. 
(Ord. No. O-00-68, § 1, 6-19-00; Ord. No. O-05-24, § 2, 5-16-05; Ord. No. O-2018-32 , § 1, 8-20-18; Ord. No. O-2018-47 , § 3, 11-5-18) 
Secs. 2-54—2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LEGISLATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference— City legislation, § 2.11. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-76. - Introduction of resolutions and ordinances. 
(a)  All ordinances introduced at any meeting of the mayor and council shall be in writing. An ordinance, or a synopsis of the pertinent provisions of the ordinance, shall be read to the mayor and council by the city clerk, the city attorney or the councilmember introducing the ordinance, before the same shall be adopted and declared to be in force and effect. 
(b)  All resolutions shall not be required to be in writing when introduced at any meeting of the mayor and council. However, the same, if passed and adopted, shall be entered upon the minutes of the meeting at which they were adopted. 
(Code 1977, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-77. - Criminal background investigations. 
(a)  Whenever a criminal background investigation is required by any ordinance of the City Code or the Personnel Policies and Procedures Ordinance for an applicant for a permit or license or for employment, this process shall include but not be limited to a search of the database for the Georgia Crime Information Center (GCIC) and that for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) to obtain criminal history record information (CHRI). The applicant shall supply to the city all necessary information and consents for such investigations and complete such forms as the city may require. 
(b)  GCIC and FBI records investigations shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35(a)(1.2), and the applicant shall submit to fingerprinting. Information obtained and handled for any purposes pursuant to this subsection shall comply with all Georgia laws and the Federal Privacy Act. No information given as part of the request for a criminal history and no record obtained pursuant to this section may be entered on any database. No information given or obtained pursuant to this section shall be subject to the provisions of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide his fingerprints in the manner directed by the city. 
(d)  The applicant shall bear the cost of the charge by the GBI and the FBI for the CHRI history at their latest rate, and shall arrange for fingerprinting through the Georgia Applicant Processing Service (GAPS). 
(e)  Upon receipt of the fingerprints, the CHRI's and the appropriate fees, the city will transmit said CHRI reports to the chief of police and the city's finance director, who shall render a "fitness determination," concerning whether the record applicant has been convicted or is under pending indictment for specified disqualifiers. 
(f)  A person who has consented to the city for a CHRI based on fingerprinting record may request and receive a copy of the criminal history record report from the city at no additional charge. Should the person seek to amend or correct the record, he or she shall be responsible for contacting the GCIC as to Georgia records or the FBI concerning records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-10 , § 1, 3-4-19) 
Secs. 2-78—2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AMENDMENTS TO CODE 

Sec. 2-96. - Effect. 
Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to "The Code of the City of Douglasville, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Code 1977, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-97. - Manner. 
All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-49) 
Sec. 2-98. - Language. 
Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _____ of The Code of the City of Douglasville is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1977, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-99. - New material. 
(a)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of the City of Douglasville is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered _____, which reads as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) of this section, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: 
"It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of The Code of the City of Douglasville, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(Code 1977, § 2-51) 
Sec. 2-100. - Repeal. 
All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1977, § 2-52) 
Sec. 2-101. - Subject to general penalty. 
In case of the amendment by the city council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-3 of this Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Code 1977, § 2-53) 
Sec. 2-102. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In the preparation of a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1977, § 2-54) 
Secs. 2-103—2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management director, § 30-91 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-131. - City clerk, duties. 
In addition to all other duties prescribed in the City Charter and this Code, the city clerk shall serve as the chief clerical employee of the city. The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the mayor and council and make such reports to them as they may direct and deem necessary, and shall perform such other and additional duties as may from time to time be assigned to the city clerk by the mayor and council. The city may employ one or more assistant city clerks who shall assist the city clerk as needed in all official functions, and shall have all the powers and duties of the city clerk. The city clerk is authorized and appointed to receive, accept and acknowledge civil process for lawsuits and other legal proceedings and to verify pleadings for purposes of lawsuits on behalf of the city. The city clerk and the police department records supervisor are authorized to certify copies of official city records. 
(Code 1977, § 2-66; Ord. No. O-96-40B, § 1, 8-19-96; Ord. No. O-99-19, § 5, 6-21-99; Ord. No. O-01-41, § 1, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-2015-4, § 1 , 1-20-15; Ord. No. O-2017-74, § 1 , 10-2-17) 
Charter reference— City clerk generally, § 2.10. 
Sec. 2-132. - Assistant city attorneys. 
(a)  Generally. Under the authority of and by virtue of article III, section 3.12 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created the office of chief assistant city attorney and such assistant city attorneys as shall be employed from time to time. 
(b)  Chief assistant city attorney. The chief assistant city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. Other assistant city attorneys shall be non-appointed, regular service employees or independent contractors. The chief assistant city attorney shall assist the city attorney and other counsel for the city in representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as provided by the mayor and council. The chief assistant city attorney is authorized and appointed to receive, accept and acknowledge civil process for lawsuits and other legal proceedings and to verify pleadings for purposes of lawsuits on behalf of the city. All assistant city attorneys, including the municipal court solicitor, are authorized to settle bond forfeiture matters with bonding companies in municipal court for not less than five percent of the face amount of any bond, plus court costs. 
(c)  Municipal court solicitor. The municipal court solicitor shall be a contract appointee, serving at the pleasure of the mayor and council, and shall have the duties and powers authorized by O.C.G.A. title 15, chapter 18, article 5 for a prosecuting attorney. The city attorney and the chief assistant city attorney are authorized to assist or to substitute for the municipal court solicitor in the performance of those duties. 
(Code 1977, § 2-67; Ord. No. O-01-41, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-26, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. O-08-007, § 1, 2-4-08; Ord. No. O-2012-37, § 1, 8-6-12; Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 1 , 9-21-15) 
Sec. 2-133. - City attorney. 
(a)  Office created. Under the authority of and by virtue of article III, section 3.12 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created the office of city attorney. 
(b)  Term of office. The city attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(c)  Duties. The city attorney shall represent and defend the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; shall advise the council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as provided by the mayor and council. The city attorney is authorized and appointed to receive, accept and acknowledge civil process for lawsuits and other legal proceedings and to verify pleadings for purposes of lawsuits on behalf of the city. The city attorney is authorized to settle bond forfeiture matters with bonding companies in municipal court for not less than five percent of the face amount of any bond, plus court costs. 
(Ord. No. O-01-41, § 3, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-08-007, § 1, 2-4-08) 
Secs. 2-134—2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference— City manager, § 3.04. 

Sec. 2-151. - Office created. 
Under the authority of and by virtue of article III, section 2.28 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created the office of city manager. 
(Code 1977, § 2-76; Ord. No. O-01-41, § 4, 6-18-01) 
Sec. 2-152. - Term of office. 
The city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 2-77) 
Sec. 2-153. - Responsibility. 
The city manager shall devote his time and attention to the affairs of the city and shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city over which he has jurisdiction. 
(Code 1977, § 2-78) 
Sec. 2-154. - Powers and duties. 
Subject to the control, direction and supervision of the mayor and council, the city manager shall have the power and it shall be his duty to: 
(1)  See that all laws and ordinances and the provisions of the city charter are enforced. 
(2)  See that the business and affairs of the city are efficiently organized and handled. 
(3)  Exercise administrative control over all regular departments and divisions of the city, provided that the city manager shall not have or exercise any control over the planning and zoning commission, or other special board, commission, committee, authority or body set up under any general law or any ordinance or agreement of the mayor and council. 
(4)  Be [a] personnel officer and responsible for enforcing the city personnel ordinance. He shall with the advice and consent of the mayor and council hire and remove all employees, except for those designated as appointed employees. Nothing in this subsection shall prevent the mayor and council from creating, abolishing, consolidating, altering or modifying departments. 
(5)  Attend the meetings of the mayor and council, with the right to take part in all discussions, but have no vote. 
(6)  Recommend to the mayor and council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient. 
(7)  Prepare and submit to the mayor and council an annual budget. 
(8)  Keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(9)  Make and execute on behalf of the city appropriate contracts, without further authorization from the mayor and council, where: 
a.  The city's obligations are limited to the payment of money, the furnishing of routine city services, and/or the furnishing of city property or facilities; 
b.  The value of the city's obligation does not exceed $25,000.00; 
c.  The contract is not a multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contract as provided in O.C.G.A. section 36-60-13; 
d.  The contract does not bind any succeeding council to pay funds in the event of non-appropriation; and 
e.  The term of the contract is no longer than 18 months; provided however, this time limitation shall not apply to contractual rights to use the city's intellectual property, such as its trademark and proprietary images. 
(10)  Submit to the mayor and council such reports as he may deem necessary or as may be required of him by the mayor and council. 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be required by this Code, or ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council. 
(12)  Give bond in the penal sum fixed by the mayor and council, payable to the city and its successors and assigns, for the benefit of the city, and for the use and benefit of the public to secure and indemnify the city and each and all of the public, by reason of his default, misfeasance, malfeasance and/or nonfeasance in the performance of his duties. The premium of such bond shall be paid by the city. 
(13)  Receive, accept and acknowledge civil process for lawsuits and other legal proceedings and verify pleadings for purposes of lawsuits on behalf of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 2-79; Ord. No. O-98-37, § 2, 4-20-98; Ord. No. O-01-41, § 5, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-02-35, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. O-2013-28, § 1, 6-18-13; Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 2 , 9-21-15; Ord. No. O-2017-73 , § 1, 9-18-17) 
Sec. 2-155. - Assistant city manager. 
Under the authority of and by virtue of article III, section 3.10 of the Charter of the city, there is hereby created the office of assistant city manager. The assistant city manager shall be an appointed employee. The assistant city manager shall assist the city manager and shall have all the powers and duties of the city manager, including those authorized and imposed by section 2.28 of the Charter of the city and section 2-154 of this division. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-47, § 1 , 10-5-15) 
Secs. 2-156—2-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERSONNEL SYSTEM[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to engage personnel, § 1.03(w); organization and personnel, art. III. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-171. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish a system of personnel administration to serve the city. The system herein established shall be consistent with the following merit principles: 
(1)  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge and skills, including open competition of qualified applicants for initial appointment. 
(2)  Establishing pay rates consistent with the principle of providing comparable pay for comparable work. 
(3)  Training employees, as needed, to assure high quality performance. 
(4)  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting inadequate performance and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected. 
(5)  Assuring fair treatment of applicants and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, creed, national origin or ancestry, sex or religion. 
(Code 1977, § 2-91) 
Sec. 2-172. - Policies adopted by reference. 
The personnel policies and procedures of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, attached to Ordinance No. O-03-23, be adopted and remain in force and effect, as may be amended by the mayor and council of the City of Douglasville. 
(Ord. No. O-03-23, § 2, 6-16-03) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-23, § 1, adopted June 16, 2003, repealed the city's former personnel policies and procedures ordinance, Ord. No. O-90-47, adopted Dec. 5, 1990, as amended. Section 2 of Ord. No. O-03-23 adopted and enacted a new personnel policies and procedures ordinance which has not been included within this Code, but may be found attached to Ord. No. O-03-23, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 2-173. - Classified service generally. 
(a)  The classified service of the city shall be a permanent service to which this article shall apply and shall include all employees serving in continuing positions in the city, now existing or hereafter established, except the following: 
(1)  Members of the city council and other elected offices. 
(2)  Appointed officers. 
(3)  Persons employed to conduct a temporary or special inquiry, investigation or examination on behalf of the city council or a committee thereof. 
(4)  Volunteer personnel who receive no regular compensation from the city. 
(5)  Persons employed to work less than full time. 
(6)  Temporary positions scheduled for less than one year's duration unless specifically covered by the action of the city council. 
(7)  Persons performing work under contract for the city who are not carried on the payroll as employees. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as precluding the city council from filling any excepted positions in the manner in which positions in the classified service are filled. 
(Code 1977, § 2-92; Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 3 , 9-21-15) 
Sec. 2-174. - Agreements authorized. 
(a)  The city council is authorized and empowered to enter into reciprocal agreements, upon such terms as may be agreed upon, for the use of equipment, materials, facilities, and services with any public agency or body for purposes deemed of benefit to the public personnel system. 
(b)  The personnel officer, acting in behalf of the city council, may cooperate with other governmental agencies charged with public personnel administration responsibilities in conducting or validating personnel tests, recruiting personnel, training personnel, establishing lists from which eligibles shall be certified for appointments and for the interchange of personnel and their benefits. 
(Code 1977, § 2-93) 
Sec. 2-175. - Deferred compensation. 
(a)  The city council hereby adopts the Georgia Municipal Association Deferred Compensation Program and its attendant investment options, hereby appoints the board of trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit system as plan administrator and hereby establishes the City of Douglasville Deferred Compensation Plan for the voluntary participation of all eligible city employees, elected officials and independent contractors. 
(b)  The personnel director is hereby authorized to execute for the city, individual participation agreements with each employee requesting the same, and to act as the contract administrator of the plan representing the city, and to execute such agreements and contracts as are necessary to implement the program. It is implicitly understood that other than the internal incidental expenses of collecting and disbursing the employee's deferrals and other minor administrative matters, that there is to be no cost to the city for the program. 
(c)  The city council hereby appoints the board of trustees of the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit system as plan administrator. 
(Res. No. R-92-38, 6-15-92) 
Sec. 2-176. - Political activity. 
(a)  No employee of the city shall be an officer of a political party or hold political office during his employment. 
(b)  No employee shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions or services for any political party from any other employee. 
(c)  Any employee who wishes to accept or seek election or appointment to political office shall resign from the city upon indicating such intention by formal declaration or other evidence of candidacy. 
(d)  Nothing in this section contained shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in, and support, a political party, to vote as he chooses, to express privately his opinions on all political subjects and candidates, to maintain political neutrality, and to attend political meetings after working hours. 
(e)  Any employee who, as a normal and foreseeable incident to his principal job or position, performs duties in connection with an activity financed in whole or in part by federal loans or grants, is subject to the provisions of the Hatch Political Activities Act which prohibits the following: 
(1)  Use of official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering with an election or nomination for office, or affecting the result thereof. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly coercing, attempting to coerce, commanding or advising any other such officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute any part of his salary or compensation or anything else of value to any party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purposes. 
(3)  Active participation in political party management or in political campaigns. 
(Code 1977, § 2-94) 
Sec. 2-177. - Acts prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report with regard to any test, certification or appointment made under any provision of this article or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of this article and policies. 
(b)  No person shall, directly or indirectly, give, render, pay, offer, solicit, or accept any money, service or other valuable consideration for any appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion to, or any advantage in, a position in the city government service. 
(c)  No employee of the personnel department, examiner, or other person shall defeat, deceive or obstruct any person in his right to examination, eligibility, certification or appointment under this article, or furnish to any person any special or secret information for the purpose of affecting the rights or prospects of any person with respect to employment in the city government service. 
(d)  An employee shall not solicit any gifts, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns, or individuals with whom he or she has official relationships or business of the city government, where such donation would be for the benefit of another, except where the employee has the written permission of the city manager, naming the employee, naming the potential beneficiary, and limiting the authorization to a time certain not to exceed six months in duration. 
(Code 1977, § 2-95; Ord. No. O-07-20, § 1, 3-19-07) 
Sec. 2-178. - Appointed employees, non-appointed employees, adjunct appointees. 
The following named positions shall be appointed employee positions within city employment: city manager, assistant city manager, police chief, chief assistant city attorney, finance director, city clerk, parks and recreation director, community and development services director, and court services administrator. All other employee positions of city employment shall be non-appointed positions, although some non-appointed employees may be adjunct appointees, as defined by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-42 , § 1, 7-3-17) 
Secs. 2-179—2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERSONNEL OFFICER 

Sec. 2-196. - Duties generally. 
The personnel officer shall be responsible for the city personnel administration system and shall direct all of its administrative and technical activities. His duties shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Encourage and exercise leadership in the development of effective personnel administration practices within the city. 
(2)  Investigate from time to time the operation and effect of this article and the policies made thereunder and to report his findings and recommendations to the city council. 
(3)  Establish and maintain comprehensive personnel records for each employee in the government service including for each employee his classification, pay rate, date of employment and other relevant data. 
(4)  Advise the city council on matters affecting the most effective use of manpower resources. 
(5)  Make an annual report to the city council regarding the status of the personnel administration program. Such report shall be submitted at least two months prior to beginning of each fiscal year. 
(6)  Foster and develop programs for the improvement of employee effectiveness, including training, safety, health, welfare, supportive services and other appropriate areas. 
(7)  Apply and enforce this article and the policies thereunder and to perform any other lawful acts which may be necessary to carry out the purpose of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 2-104) 
Sec. 2-197. - Rules, regulations. 
The personnel officer shall draft or cause to be drafted the personnel rules and regulations for the city. Such rules shall become effective upon passage of an appropriate resolution of the city council. Adequate public notice of proposed personnel rules and regulations, of additions or changes therein, shall be given to all interested parties prior to the time they are adopted. If requested by any of the affected parties, a public hearing on such personnel rules and regulations shall be held. The rules and regulations shall then be submitted for adoption by resolution of the city council. The rules and regulations shall have the force and effect of law and may be amended in accordance with the above procedures. The policies shall provide: 
(1)  The classification of all positions, based on duties, authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate provisions for reclassification of any positions warranted by changed circumstances. 
(2)  A pay plan for classified service positions. 
(3)  Announcement of employee vacancies and acceptance of applications for employment. 
(4)  Preparation and administration of examinations, if appropriate. 
(5)  Establishment and use of eligibility lists, if appropriate. 
(6)  Establishment of promotion policies and procedures. 
(7)  Transfer, promotion and reinstatement of employees. 
(8)  Performance evaluations of employees, including those on probationary periods. 
(9)  Grievance and appeal procedures. 
(10)  Separation of employees from the classified service by resignation, suspension, dismissal, layoff, or incapacity to perform required duties. 
(11)  Establishment of hours of work, holidays, vacations, leave regulations and procedures. 
(12)  Outside employment of municipal employees. 
(13)  Establishment of a probation period for all employees prior to final appointment. 
(14)  Development of employee morale, safety and training programs. 
(15)  Such other matters as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this order. 
(Code 1977, § 2-105) 
Sec. 2-198. - Payroll administration. 
The personnel officer or his authorized agent shall be responsible for the certification of the payroll vouchers that the persons named therein have been appointed and employed in accordance with the provisions of this article and the policies thereunder. The city disbursing or auditing officer shall not make or approve or take any part in making or approving any payment for personnel service to any person holding a position in the city unless said payroll voucher or account of such pay bears the certification of the personnel officer or his authorized agent. 
(Code 1977, § 2-106) 
Secs. 2-199—2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 1 , adopted Nov. 2, 2015, repealed Div. 3 §§ 2-216—2-223, which pertained to personnel appeals board and derived from Code 1977, §§ 2-114—2-121; Ord. No. O-01-41, § 7, adopted June 18, 2001; and Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 4, adopted Sept. 21, 2015. 

Secs. 2-216—2-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-246. - Workers' compensation self insurance fund. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 34-9-150 et seq., the City of Douglasville hereby agrees to become a member of the Georgia Municipal Association Workers' Compensation Self Insurance Fund established pursuant to that code chapter. 
(b)  The city hereby agrees to subscribe to and abide by the intrastate agreement, bylaws, rules and regulations of the fund and rules and regulations of the insurance commissioner of the state related to such fund. 
(c)  The mayor of the city is hereby authorized to execute the application and any other documents necessary to enroll the city as a member in such fund. 
(d)  The effective date of this section shall be March 1, 1983. 
(Code 1977, § 2-133) 
Sec. 2-247. - Health and dental insurance benefits for elected employees. 
For elected officials who initially take office on or before January 8, 2016, the city shall pay for the cost of the group health and dental insurance premiums for all elected officials receiving retirement benefits from the city as it would for an active service employee, who meet all of the following prerequisites: 
(1)  The retiree has at least ten years of service with the city. 
(2)  The retiree has reached the age of 55 when he leaves active service with the city and elects to immediately begin receiving a retirement benefit, so that there is no lapse in health insurance coverage. 
The retired elected official shall be responsible to pay the full cost of dependent coverage at the regular premium rate of a city employee. 
The city reserves the right to amend, limit or significantly alter insurance coverage or premiums payments provided for employees and retirees at the discretion of the mayor and council. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-55, § 1 , 12-7-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-55, § 1 , adopted Dec. 7, 2015, amended § 2-247 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 2-247, pertained to health insurance benefits for elected employees, and derived from Ord. No. O-93-47, adopted Dec. 20, 1993. 
Secs. 2-248—2-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-266. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
State agency means the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia. 
(Code 1977, § 2-146) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-267. - Statement of purpose. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible, under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal security administration, to the employees and officials thereof and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this division, the benefits of the system of old-age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act and amendments thereto, including Public Law No. 734 of the 81st Congress, and as provided for in Act No. 295, Georgia Laws 1951, approved February 21, 1951. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2-147) 
Sec. 2-268. - Execution of agreements. 
The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the state agency to secure coverage of employees and officials as provided for in this division. 
(Code 1977, § 2-148) 
Sec. 2-269. - Withholdings authorized. 
Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided by this division are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1977, § 2-149) 
Sec. 2-270. - Appropriations. 
There shall be appropriated from the general fund of the city such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expense, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in this division. Such fund shall be paid over to the state agency in accordance with regulations established by such agency. 
(Code 1977, § 2-150) 
Sec. 2-271. - Records and reports. 
The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2-151) 
Sec. 2-272. - Exclusion from provisions. 
There is hereby excluded from the provisions of this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 2-152) 
Secs. 2-273—2-295. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PROCUREMENT OF PROFESSIONAL SERVICES FOR FEDERAL TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-59, § 1 , adopted Dec. 21, 2015, repealed the former Art. VII, §§ 2-296—2-299, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. VII pertained to energy commission and derived from Code 1977, §§ 2-176—2-179. 

Sec. 2-296. - Generally. 
Except as provided in (2) and (3) below, the City of Douglasville shall use the competitive negotiation method for the procurement of engineering and design related services when Federal Aid Highway Program (FAHP) funds are involved in the contract (as specified in 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2)(A)). The solicitation, evaluation, ranking, selection, and negotiation shall comply with the qualifications-based selection procurement procedures for architectural and engineering services codified under 40 U.S.C. 1101-1104, commonly referred to as the Brooks Act. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-59, 1 , 12-21-15) 
Sec. 2-297. - Requirements for competitive negotiation procurement. 
In accordance with the requirements of the Brooks Act, the following procedures shall apply to the competitive negotiation procurement method: 
(1)  Solicitation. The solicitation process shall be by public announcement, public advertisement, or any other public forum or method that assures qualified in-state and out-of-state consultants are given a fair opportunity to be considered for award of the contract. Procurement procedures may involve a single step process with issuance of a request for proposal (RFP) to all interested consultants or a multiphase process with issuance of a request for statements or letters of interest or qualifications (RFQ) whereby responding consultants are ranked based on qualifications and request for proposals are then provided to three or more of the most highly qualified consultants. Minimum qualifications of consultants to perform services under general work categories or areas of expertise may also be assessed through a prequalification process whereby statements of qualifications are submitted on an annual basis. Regardless of any process utilized for prequalification of consultants or for an initial assessment of a consultant's qualifications under an RFQ, a RFP specific to the project, task, or service is required for evaluation of a consultant's specific technical approach and qualifications. 
(2)  Request for proposal (RFP). The RFP shall provide all information and requirements necessary for interested consultants to provide a response to the RFP and compete for the solicited services. The RFP shall: 
a.  Provide a clear, accurate, and detailed description of the scope of work, technical requirements, and qualifications of consultants necessary for the services to be rendered. The scope of work should detail the purpose and description of the project, services to be performed, deliverables to be provided, estimated schedule for performance of the work, and applicable standards, specifications, and policies; 
b.  Identify the requirements for any discussions that may be conducted with three or more of the most highly qualified consultants following submission and evaluation of proposals; 
c.  Identify evaluation factors including their relative weight of importance in accordance with subparagraph (3)a. of this section; 
d.  Specify the contract type and method(s) of payment to be utilized in accordance with § 172.9; 
e.  Identify any special provisions or contract requirements associated with the solicited services; 
f.  Require that submission of any requested cost proposals or elements of cost be in a concealed format and separate from technical/qualifications proposals as these shall not be considered in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase; and 
g.  Provide a schedule of key dates for the procurement process and establish a submittal deadline for responses to the RFP which provides sufficient time for interested consultants to receive notice, prepare, and submit a proposal, which except in unusual circumstances shall be not less than 14 days from the date of issuance of the RFP. 
(3)  Evaluation factors. The following considerations shall be utilized in determining evaluation factors: 
a.  Criteria used for evaluation, ranking, and selection of consultants to perform engineering and design related services must assess the demonstrated competence and qualifications for the type of professional services solicited. These qualifications-based factors may include, but are not limited to, technical approach (e.g., project understanding, innovative concepts or alternatives, quality control procedures), work experience, specialized expertise, professional licensure, staff capabilities, workload capacity, and past performance. 
b.  Price shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. All price or cost related items which include, but are not limited to, cost proposals, direct salaries/wage rates, indirect cost rates, and other direct costs are prohibited from being used as evaluation criteria. 
c.  In-state or local preference shall not be used as a factor in the evaluation, ranking, and selection phase. State licensing laws are not preempted by this provision and professional licensure within a jurisdiction may be established as a requirement which attests to the minimum qualifications and competence of a consultant to perform the solicited services. 
d.  The following non-qualifications based evaluation criteria are permitted under the specified conditions and provided the combined total of these criteria do not exceed a nominal value of ten percent of the total evaluation criteria to maintain the integrity of a qualifications-based selection: 
1.  A local presence may be used as a nominal evaluation factor where appropriate. This criterion shall not be based on political or jurisdictional boundaries and may be applied on a project-by-project basis for contracts where a need has been established for a consultant to provide a local presence, a local presence will add value to the quality and efficiency of the project, and application of this criteria leaves an appropriate number of qualified consultants, given the nature and size of the project. If a consultant outside of the locality area indicates as part of a proposal that it will satisfy the criteria in some manner, such as establishing a local project office, that commitment shall be considered to have satisfied the local presence criteria. 
2.  The participation of qualified and certified disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) sub-consultants may be used as a nominal evaluation criterion where appropriate in accordance with 49 CFR Part 26 and the City of Douglasville's FHWA-approved DBE program. 
(4)  Evaluation, ranking, and selection. The following process shall be utilized for evaluation, ranking and selection: 
a.  Consultant proposals shall be evaluated by the City of Douglasville based on the criteria established and published within the public solicitation. 
b.  While the contract will be with the prime consultant, proposal evaluations shall consider the qualifications of the prime consultant and any sub-consultants identified within the proposal with respect to the scope of work and established criteria. 
c.  Following submission and evaluation of proposals, the City of Douglasville shall conduct interviews or other types of discussions and determine three of the most highly qualified consultants to clarify the technical approach, qualifications, and capabilities provided in response to the RFP. Discussion requirements shall be specified within the RFP and should be based on the size and complexity of the project as defined in City of Douglasville written policies and procedures (as specified in § 172.5(c)). Discussions may be written, by telephone, video conference, or by oral presentation/interview. Discussions following proposal submission are not required provided proposals contain sufficient information for evaluation of technical approach and qualifications to perform the specific project, task, or service with respect to established criteria. 
d.  From the proposal evaluation and any subsequent discussions which have been conducted, the City of Douglasville shall rank, in order of preference, at least three consultants determined most highly qualified to perform the solicited services based on the established and published criteria. 
e.  Notification must be provided to responding consultants of the final ranking of the three most highly qualified consultants. 
f.  The City of Douglasville shall retain acceptable documentation of the solicitation, proposal, evaluation, and selection of the consultant accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 18.42. 
(5)  Negotiation. The following process shall be utilized for negotiation: 
a.  Independent estimate. Prior to receipt or review of the most highly qualified consultant's cost proposal, the City of Douglasville shall prepare a detailed independent estimate with an appropriate breakdown of the work or labor hours, types or classifications of labor required, other direct costs, and consultant's fixed fee for the defined scope of work. The independent estimate shall serve as the basis for negotiation and ensuring the consultant services are obtained at a fair and reasonable cost. 
b.  Elements of contract costs (e.g., indirect cost rates, direct salary or wage rates, fixed fee, and other direct costs) shall be established separately in accordance with § 172.11. 
c.  If concealed cost proposals were submitted in conjunction with technical/qualifications proposals, only the cost proposal of the consultant with which negotiations are initiated may be considered. Concealed cost proposals of consultants with which negotiations are not initiated should be returned to the respective consultant due to the confidential nature of this data (as specified in 23 U.S.C. 112(b) (2) (E)). 
d.  The City of Douglasville shall retain documentation of negotiation activities and resources used in the analysis of costs to establish elements of the contract in accordance with the provisions of 49 CFR 18.42. This documentation shall include the consultant cost certification and documentation supporting the acceptance of the indirect cost rate to be applied to the contract (as specified in § 172.11 (c)). 
( Ord. No. O-2015-59, 1 , 12-21-15) 
Sec. 2-298. - Exceptions to competitive negotiation procurement. 
(a)  Small purchases. The small purchase method involves procurement of engineering and design related services where an adequate number of qualified sources are reviewed and the total contract costs do not exceed an established simplified acquisition threshold. The City of Douglasville may use the state's small purchase procedures which reflect applicable state laws and regulations for the procurement of engineering and design related services provided the total contract costs do not exceed the federal simplified acquisition threshold of $150,000.00 (as specified in 48 CFR 2.101). When a lower threshold for use of small purchase procedures is established in state law, regulation, or policy, the lower threshold shall apply to the use of FAHP funds. The following additional requirements shall apply to the small purchase procurement method: 
(1)  The scope of work, project phases, and contract requirements shall not be broken down into smaller components merely to permit the use of small purchase procedures. 
(2)  A minimum of three consultants are required to satisfy the adequate number of qualified sources reviewed. 
(3)  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with state small purchase procedures; however, the allowability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the federal cost principles. 
(4)  The full amount of any contract modification or amendment that would cause the total contract amount to exceed the established simplified acquisition threshold would be ineligible for federal-aid funding. The FHWA may withdraw all federal-aid from a contract if it is modified or amended above the applicable established simplified acquisition threshold. 
(b)  Noncompetitive. The noncompetitive method involves procurement of engineering and design related services when it is not feasible to award the contract using competitive negotiation or small purchase procurement methods. The following requirements shall apply to the noncompetitive procurement method: 
(1)  The City of Douglasville may use their own noncompetitive procedures which reflect applicable state and local laws and regulations and conform to applicable federal requirements. 
(2)  The City of Douglasville shall establish a process to determine when noncompetitive procedures will be used and shall submit justification to, and receive approval from, the FHWA before using this form of contracting. 
(3)  Circumstances under which a contract may be awarded by noncompetitive procedures are limited to the following: 
a.  The service is available only from a single source; 
b.  There is an emergency which will not permit the time necessary to conduct competitive negotiations; or 
c.  After solicitation of a number of sources, competition is determined to be inadequate. 
(4)  Contract costs may be negotiated in accordance with the City of Douglasville noncompetitive procedures; however, the allowability of costs shall be determined in accordance with the federal cost principles. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-59, 1 , 12-21-15) 
Sec. 2-299. - Additional procurement requirements. 
(a)  Common grant rule. 
(1)  The City of Douglasville must comply with procurement requirements established in state and local laws, regulations, policies, and procedures which are not addressed by or in conflict with applicable federal laws and regulations (as specified in 49 CFR 18.36). 
(2)  When state and local procurement laws, regulations, policies, or procedures are in conflict with applicable federal laws and regulations, the City of Douglasville must comply with federal requirements to be eligible for federal-aid reimbursement of the associated costs of the services incurred following FHWA authorization (as specified in 49 CFR 18.4). 
(b)  Disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) program. 
(1)  The City of Douglasville shall give consideration to DBE consultants in the procurement of engineering and design related service contracts subject to 23 U.S.C. 112(b)(2) in accordance with 49 CFR part 26. When DBE program participation goals cannot be met through race-neutral measures, additional DBE participation on engineering and design related services contracts may be achieved in accordance with the City of Douglasville's FHWA approved DBE program through either: 
a.  Use of an evaluation criterion in the qualifications-based selection of consultants (as specified in § 172.7(a) (1) (iii) (D)); or 
b.  Establishment of a contract participation goal. 
(2)  The use of quotas or exclusive set-asides for DBE consultants is prohibited (as specified in 49 CFR 26.43). 
(c)  Suspension and debarment. The City of Douglasville must verify suspension and debarment actions and eligibility status of consultants and sub-consultants prior to entering into an agreement or contract in accordance with 49 CFR 18.35 and 2 CFR part 180. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-59, 1 , 12-21-15) 
Secs. 2-300—2-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - E 9-1-1 ADVISORY COMMITTEE[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Civil emergencies, ch. 30. 

Sec. 2-326. - Established. 
An E 9-1-1 advisory committee is hereby established. 
(Code 1977, § 2-186) 
Sec. 2-327. - Members. 
The E 9-1-1 advisory committee shall be composed of seven members as follows: 
(1)  A member of the board of commissioners of county to be named by the committee. 
(2)  The mayor or city councilmember of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, to be named by the mayor and approved by resolution by the council. 
(3)  The chief of the county fire department or a representative appointed by the chief of the fire department. 
(4)  The chief of the police department or a representative appointed by the chief of police. 
(5)  The county sheriff or a representative appointed by the sheriff. 
(6)  A private citizen who resides in the county and who is elected to a two-year term by the E 9-1-1 advisory committee at the first meeting of every other year. 
(7)  A private citizen who resides in the City of Douglasville and who is elected to a two-year term by the E 9-1-1 advisory committee at the first meeting of every other year. 
(Code 1977, § 2-186) 
Sec. 2-328. - Terms. 
The members of the E 9-1-1 advisory committee shall serve in two-year staggered terms with the board of commissioner's representative, city council representative and the fire department representative initially serving a three-year term to expire on December 31, 1991, and two-year terms thereafter to expire on odd numbered years. The city police department representative, the sheriff's department representative and the two private citizens will serve two-year terms with the first term to expire on December 31, 1990, and two-year terms thereafter that expire on even numbered years. 
(Code 1977, § 2-186) 
Sec. 2-329. - Removal. 
All members of the E 9-1-1 advisory committee shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and the board of commissioners and may be removed with cause by a joint resolution by the city council and the county board of commissioners. 
(Code 1977, § 2-186) 
Sec. 2-330. - Meetings; reports; compensation. 
The E 9-1-1 advisory committee shall meet at least once every 60 days and shall make written reports of each meeting to the city council and the county board of commissioners. The E 9-1-1 advisory committee shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1977, § 2-187) 
Secs. 2-331—2-340. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 2-341. - Mission statement. 
The mission of the convention and visitors bureau (CVB) is to solicit convention and meeting groups, tourists, tour groups and special events, and to aid other local organizations in creating, executing, and promoting events and activities which will attract visitors to the city. 
The CVB is to represent all segments of the hospitality industry which includes lodging and meeting facilities, special events, restaurants, recreational facilities and events, historic attractions and events, cultural facilities and activities, and other social functions which are attractive to visitors. The CVB is to design, produce, maintain and distribute a variety of brochures and other collateral materials to promote the attractions, accommodations and facilities of the city, thereby increasing awareness of tourism in the area. The CVB is to strive to obtain support and acceptance from the citizens of the city and the county, the Atlanta area news media, and the local business community. The CVB is to participate with the Georgia Department of Industry, Trade and Tourism and various national, state and regional associations whose goals are to promote tourism and attract visitors. 
(Res. No. R-98-95, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 2-342. - Membership. 
The convention and visitors bureau shall have an advisory board made up of representatives from various segments of the community. The purpose of the advisory board is to offer guidance and counsel to the executive director, within the organizational structure of the city, and for the executive director to share information regarding CVB activities and events with the members of the board. Board members should be committed to keep abreast of developments in tourism and local issues and to attend regular meetings. 
The CVB advisory board shall be made up of ten representatives as follows: Three representatives from the lodging industry; two representatives from the restaurant industry; two representatives from the retail industry; one city representative; one cultural arts council representative; and one chamber of commerce representative. Every effort shall be made to secure representatives from the local community. Additional community representatives may be added at the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
Advisory board members shall be appointed by the mayor and city council with the initial terms staggered with half the members serving one-year terms and the other half serving two-year terms. Subsequent terms will all be for two years. The CVB executive director and future advisory boards shall make recommendations to the mayor and city council for appointments to the advisory board. Board members shall serve until their successors are appointed. Board members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for authorized expenses. 
(Res. No. R-98-95, 11-2-98) 
Secs. 2-343—2-360. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - CODE OF ETHICS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-59, § 1, adopted June 5, 2000, did not specifically amend this Code. Hence, its inclusion as §§ 2-361—2-365 was at the discretion of the editor to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 2-361. - Purpose. 
Declaration of policy. It is the policy of the City of Douglasville that the proper operation of democratic government requires that public officials be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, a code of ethics for all city officials is adopted. 
This article has the following purposes: 
(1)  To encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  To establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interest of the city; 
(3)  To require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interests in manners affect the city; and 
(4)  To serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
It is the intent of this article that city officials shall avoid any action, whether or not specifically prohibited by section 2-364 of this article, which might result in, or create the appearance of the following: 
(1)  Using public office for private gain; 
(2)  Impeding government efficiency or economy; or 
(3)  Affecting adversely the confidence of the public in the integrity of the government. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to political contributions, loans, expenditures, reports or regulation of political campaigns. 
(Ord. No. O-00-59, § 1, 6-5-00; Ord. No. O-2013-51, § 1, Exh. A, 11-18-13) 
Sec. 2-362. - Scope of persons covered. 
The provisions of this article shall be applicable to the City of Douglasville mayor, all members of the city council, the board of adjustments and appeals, the zoning board, the downtown development authority, the historic preservation commission, the convention and conference center authority, the convention and visitors bureau, the development authority of the city, the personnel appeals board, the ethics board, and all advisory commissions and committee members. 
(Ord. No. O-00-59, § 1, 6-5-00; Ord. No. O-2013-51, § 1, Exh. A, 11-18-13) 
Sec. 2-363. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
Accident or automobile accident means an incident where a driving official's act or omission in driving or operating a city-owned vehicle contributes or may contribute to a result which includes property damage, personal injury or death. 
City official or official , unless otherwise defined, means the City of Douglasville mayor, all members of the city council, the board of adjustments and appeals, the zoning board, the downtown development authority, the convention and conference center authority, the convention and visitors bureau, the development authority of the city, the personnel appeals board, the ethics board, and all advisory commissions and committee members. 
Controlled substance means and includes the substances defined as "controlled substances" in the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, O.C.G.A. 16-13-20 and 16-12-21(4) as said Act shall appear from time to time. 
Confirmed positive result means, after an initial test for drugs or alcohol is found to be positive, the laboratory's additional tests pursuant to laboratory testing guidelines which confirm that the initial positive indication was correct. 
Driving official shall mean an official in the course of operating a city-owned motor vehicle, whether on official business or personal business. 
Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council or any board or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
Disclose means to notify the city clerk and the mayor and city council promptly and in writing, of the fact and nature of any interest or other pertinent fact which creates a conflict of interest for a city official. 
Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
Financial interest means a known interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity, or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  Funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment in goods, products or nonprofessional services; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of the for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Financial interest in real property means an interest in real property which is an equitable or legal ownership with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
Immediate family means spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official. 
Medical review officer means a properly licensed physician who reviews and interprets the results of drug tests and evaluates those results together with medical history and any other relevant biomedical information to confirm positive results. 
Thing of value means any item, consideration, or benefit other than those exempted under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-2(a)(2). Thing of value shall not include the following: 
(1)  Food or beverage consumed at a single meal or event; 
(2)  Legitimate salary, benefits, fees, commissions, or expenses associated with a recipient's non-public business, employment, trade, or profession; 
(3)  An award, plaque, certificate, memento, or similar item given in recognition of the recipient's civic, charitable, political, professional, or public service; 
(4)  Food, beverages, and registration at group events to which all members of the council, board or commission are invited; 
(5)  Actual and reasonable expenses for food, beverages, travel, lodging, and registration for a meeting which are provided to permit participation or speaking at the meeting; 
(6)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business; 
(7)  Any gift with a value less than $100.00; 
(8)  Promotional items generally distributed to the general public or to city officials; 
(9)  A gift from a member of the city official's immediate family; or 
(10)  Food, beverage, or expenses afforded city officials, members of their immediate families, or others that are associated with normal and customary business or social functions or activities. 
Use or abuse with regard to drugs, controlled substances or alcohol shall mean consumption while driving a city-owned vehicle, or so recently before driving a city-owned vehicle that it is less safe for the official to drive. 
(Ord. No. O-00-59, § 1, 6-5-00; Ord. No. O-2013-51, § 1, Exh. A, 11-18-13; Ord. No. O-2014-45, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 2-364. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  Reserved. 
(b)  Improper use of city communication devices. No city official shall make use of city-owned computers or city-owned electronic communication devices in a manner that: (i) is hateful, bullying, or harassing toward any person or group, and (ii) is expressly based on race, religion, color, age, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, or disability; the penalties for violation of this subsection shall be limited to censure, written or oral reprimand, and request for resignation. 
(c)  Improper use of social media. No city official shall make use of electronic social media in a manner that: (i) identifies the official by association with the city and purports to be in the person's official capacity with the city, and (ii) is hateful, bullying, or harassing toward any person or group, and (iii) is expressly based on race, religion, color, age, national origin, gender, sexual orientation, or disability; the penalties for violation of this subsection shall be limited to censure, written or oral reprimand, and request for resignation. 
(d)  Unearned per diem or expenses. No city official shall draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend some portion of the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(e)  Use of public employees. No city official shall use the attorney or attorneys who are employed or appointed by the city for personal or private business without paying just compensation. No city official shall use his superior position to request or require an employee to: 
(1)  Do clerical or other work on behalf of his family, business, social, church, or charitable or fraternal interests; 
(2)  Purchase goods and services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; or 
(3)  Work for him personally without offering just compensation. 
(f)  Special favors for others. No city official shall grant or make available to any person or entity any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. No city official shall ask or require any city employee to grant or make available to any person or entity any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large or to exercise any discretionary authority except in accordance with established law. 
(g)  Open meetings. Meetings of the city council and all other city boards, commissions, and agencies shall be conducted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 50, Chapter 14, as amended, and Title 36, Chapter 80, Section 1, as amended, as it applies to municipalities. 
(h)  Use or abuse of drugs, controlled substances or alcohol while operating a city-owned vehicle. 
(1)  Drug and alcohol use prohibited while driving. Alcohol or controlled substance use by a driving official shall be prohibited. Abuse of prescribed drugs by a driving official shall be prohibited. This shall include the use or possession of controlled substances, the abuse of prescription medications, the possession of prescription medications by anyone other than the person for whom the medication was prescribed, and the use or abuse of alcohol, while driving a city-owned vehicle. 
(2)  Prescription drug use. Any official using prescription medication while driving or just before driving a city-owned vehicle shall do so in strict accordance with medical directions. It is the official's responsibility to notify the prescribing physician of the driving the official is planning to do and to ensure that the physician approves the use of the prescription medication while the official is driving. 
The abuse and/or inappropriate use of legally prescribed drugs, including driving when the official knows or should know that he is potentially impaired due to prescription drug use, shall be prohibited and shall be deemed a violation of this policy. 
(3)  Testing required after an accident. The occurrence of an automobile accident resulting in property damage, bodily injury or death, shall constitute reasonable cause for drug and alcohol testing of a driving official, promptly after the accident. A driving official shall take a drug and alcohol test whenever, while driving a city-owned vehicle, the driving official is involved in an automobile accident resulting in property damage, bodily injury or death. Such testing shall be required regardless of whether there is other evidence of use of alcohol or drugs by the driving official. 
Immediately after such an accident, the subject driving official shall contact the city manager, who will arrange for prompt testing. Additionally, it shall be the duty of every official who witnesses an accident where another official is driving a city-owned vehicle, to promptly notify the city manager of any such accident. 
Driving officials shall, at the time of testing, provide the testing laboratory with a list of those prescriptions and over-the-counter medications the official recently has used. The list of medications shall be kept confidential until there has been a test result. The list of medications shall be disclosed only to the medical review officer, who will determine whether the positive result was due to the lawful and medically approved use of any of the listed medications. 
(4)  Consent for testing. Before a drug and/or alcohol test is administered, or after a test for convenience, a driving official involved in an automobile accident will be asked to sign a consent form authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to the City of Douglasville, the medical review officer and to the public generally. The consent form shall provide a space for the official to acknowledge that he has been notified of the requirements of this policy. If the driving official is not conscious or is unable to consent for other reasons after an accident and immediately prior to testing, then the driving official will be deemed to have consented to testing by virtue of having elected to drive the city-owned vehicle. 
(5)  Refusal to consent or to test. An official who refuses to sign the required consent form or to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test as required shall be deemed to have violated this policy. An official who fails to appear at the designated collection site to submit to a required drug and/or alcohol test when so directed by the mayor, the mayor pro tempore or the city manager shall be deemed to have refused to submit to the test shall be deemed to have violated this policy. A "no show" shall include any attempt to adulterate a test sample or otherwise frustrate, impair, or otherwise impede the testing process. 
(6)  Testing laboratory guidelines. All testing procedures shall be administered and accounted for by an approved laboratory and/or medical facility operating in compliance with the National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) or College of American Pathologists (CAP) guidelines. 
Urine samples shall be provided in a private restroom stall or similar enclosure so that officials may not be viewed while providing the sample, unless circumstances require monitored testing. Outer garments, bags, briefcases, purses, or other containers will not be permitted into the test area. The water in the commode shall be colored with dye to protect against dilution of test samples. If the drug and/or alcohol test is to be conducted using a specimen other than urine (e.g. hair, saliva, blood, etc.), the sample shall be collected in a manner consistent with the privacy of the official and the need to minimize the possibility of adulteration and/or mislabeling of the sample. 
Whenever an initial test for drugs and alcohol is found to be positive, the laboratory will then carry out additional tests pursuant to laboratory testing guidelines to confirm that the initial positive indication was correct. If the second procedure also indicates the presence of drugs or alcohol, the test result is considered a Confirmed Positive Result. 
(7)  Results of testing. Any results of an official's drug and alcohol screening shall be non-confidential. A confirmed positive result for use or abuse of controlled substances, drugs or alcohol for a driving official shall be evidence of violation of this article X. 
(8)  Violations. Each of the following shall be a violation of this article X: 
(i)  The use or abuse of controlled substances, drugs or alcohol by a driving official, without regard to whether such conduct results in an automobile accident; 
(ii)  Failure by a driving official to promptly report an automobile accident in which the driving official was involved; 
(iii)  Failure by a witnessing official to promptly report an automobile accident in which a driving official was involved; 
(iv)  Failure by a driving official to submit to and cooperate with drug and alcohol testing after an accident; and 
(v)  Failure by a driving official to sign the consent form for drug and alcohol testing after an automobile accident in which the driving official was involved. 
(Ord. No. O-00-59, § 1, 6-5-00; Ord. No. O-02-28, § 1, 7-1-02; Ord. No. O-04-36, § 1, 8-16-04; Ord. No. O-2013-51, § 1, Exh. A, 11-18-13; Ord. No. O-2014-45, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Sec. 2-365. - Administration. 
(a)  Ethics board . The ethics board shall consist of three persons: a post one member appointed by the mayor, a post two member appointed by the council, and a post three member appointed by the two members above named. The post one and post two members shall each serve four-year terms; the post three member shall serve an initial term of three years for the appointment prior to April 1, 2014, and at the end of such initial term, the post three member shall serve four-year terms. The members of the ethics board shall select one of their number to serve as chairman for a term ending each year on December 31. The chairman shall be a voting member in all respects. All members shall be residents of the city. Members shall serve until expiration of their appointed term, and may be reappointed, but shall not serve after expiration of their term and before a successor is appointed. 
(b)  Standing and time for filing complaints . Any complaint alleging a violation of this article shall be filed within 90 days of the occurrence of the violation alleged. A complaint alleging a violation of this article may be filed only by: 
(1)  An individual who is a at least 18 years old and a resident domiciled in the city at the time of filing; or 
(2)  An applicant who has sought any decision or exercise of discretionary authority by the city within the 90 days immediately preceding filing of the complaint. 
(c)  Receipt of complaints; attorney representation . All complaints against city officials shall be type-written and signed and verified by the applicant, and filed with the city clerk. All complaints shall be filed and signed by an attorney licensed to practice law in Georgia and representing the applicant. All complaints shall state, clearly and with particularity, the sections and subsections of this article alleged to have been violated, the name of the city official alleged to have violated this article, and substantially all facts and sources of information pertinent to the allegations. The applicant shall be represented by a licensed Georgia attorney, at his own cost, at all stages of the complaint process; where the applicant's attorney withdraws from representation of the applicant, the applicant shall cause a replacement attorney to file a written notice of representation for the applicant within five business days after withdrawal; failure to comply with this requirement shall be grounds for dismissal of the complaint. The respondent city official may be represented by an attorney at law, but may not be represented by the city attorney nor any attorney employed by the city. 
(d)  Processing of complaints . Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city clerk shall forward a copy of the same to the mayor, to all council members, to the respondent city official(s) alleged to have violated this article, and to each member of the ethics board, and its chairman shall schedule a hearing date for the ethics board within 30 days of dispatch of the city clerk's notice, for which the respondent city official shall be given at least five days' advance notice. All meetings of the ethics board other than deliberations shall be subject to the provisions open meetings act, and the city clerk shall facilitate the ethics board in perfecting all necessary notices and postings for such purpose. 
(e)  Hearing of the ethics board . The ethics board shall review the complaint and hold a hearing and such deliberations as are necessary and advisable to investigate the matter and to render a finding. The ethics board shall be empowered to conduct preliminary probable cause investigations, and to dismiss any complaint without a full hearing where there is no reasonable evidence to go forward, or the ethics board may proceed to full hearing initially and take evidence. The ethics board may seek and receive legal assistance from the city attorney. Any applicant shall have the right to be present at the public hearing upon the matter. Any respondent city official shall have the right to be present at all public hearings upon the matter, to be represented by legal counsel, to cross-examine witnesses and to present evidence to the board. The ethics board shall disregard hearsay evidence, except as permitted by law, and witnesses shall give testimony under oath. 
(f)  Decisions of the ethics board . Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint and deliberation thereon, the ethics board shall render its decision, in writing and signed by all members, to the city clerk. In no event shall the written decision of the ethics board be rendered later than 20 calendar days after the initial hearing date concerning the matter scheduled by the chairman. If the board finds, by a preponderance of the evidence, that allegations of the complaint have been sustained and that a violation of the standards of conduct of this article has occurred, then the ethics board shall forward to mayor and city council a written "finding of violation," which shall specify the section and subsection of this article violated and the conduct of the respondent city official(s) which caused the violation, and shall include a recommendation for any appropriate sanctions against the city official(s) found to be in violation. If the board fails to make a "finding of violation" by a preponderance of the evidence, that allegations of the complaint have been sustained and that a violation of the standards of conduct of this article has occurred, then the ethics board shall forward to mayor and city council a "finding of no violation," and the matter shall be dismissed. Provided, however, that a "finding of no violation" on any complaint by the ethics board shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent city official. The city clerk shall notify the mayor, all council members and the respondent city official of any decision of the ethics board. 
(g)  Penalty imposed . Upon receipt by the city clerk of a written "finding of violation," the mayor and city council shall schedule the matter for a public hearing upon the issue of sanctions. The mayor and city council may, in their sole discretion, make such inquiry and take such evidence upon the matter as they deem relevant to the issue of an appropriate sanction, and thereafter shall either impose a penalty authorized by this article or make a finding that, notwithstanding the "finding of violation" by the ethics board, no penalty is appropriate. Any respondent city official may make a statement or offer evidence to the mayor and council relevant to the issue of an appropriate penalty. The mayor shall have no vote, except in the case of a tie vote by the council. No respondent city official shall vote or participate in the process for imposition of sanctions with regard to any "finding of violation" for which he or she has been found to be in violation. 
(h)  Penalties available . Any persons violating any provisions of this article are subject to: 
(1)  Censure; 
(2)  Written or oral reprimand; 
(3)  A fine greater than $100.00 but less than $500.00; 
(4)  Request for resignation; or 
(5)  Removal from office pursuant to Section 5.16 of the city charter. 
(i)  Right to appeal . Any final decision by the mayor and city council pursuant to this article for city council members or the mayor shall be reviewable by the Superior Court of Douglas County. The review by the superior court shall be limited to an inquiry of whether there was any evidence before the ethics board which supported the decisions of the ethics board and the mayor and city council. Provided however, no failure or refusal of the ethics board or the mayor and council to take action pursuant to this article shall be reviewable by the superior court. 
(j)  Bar against subsequent complaints . Where a complainant files a complaint for which the ethics board fails to make a "finding of violation" or for which the mayor and council fail to determine that any penalty is appropriate, the complainant shall be barred from filing any subsequent complaint against the same respondent city official for a period 12 months after termination of the original complaint proceeding. Where a complainant files a complaint for which the ethics board fails to make a "finding of violation" or for which the mayor and council fail to determine that any penalty is appropriate, the complainant shall be barred from filing any subsequent complaint against the same respondent city official alleging substantially the same facts and circumstances as the basis for the subsequent complaint. 
(k)  Respondent's attorney fees . For any complaint the city shall pay reasonable attorney fees not to exceed $5.000.00 for representation and defense of the respondent city official before the ethics board and before the mayor and council. Defense attorney fees up to $5,000.00 shall be approved or disapproved as to reasonableness by the city attorney; reasonable defense attorney fees in excess of $5,000.00 may be approved only by the mayor and council, in their sole discretion, upon request of the respondent city official. 
(l)  Additional regulations . This article shall be cumulative to any other ordinance, resolution or act now existing. Specifically, this chapter is in addition to Section 2.14 of the charter of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-00-59, § 1, 6-5-00; Ord. No. O-04-36, §§ 2, 3, 8-16-04; Ord. No. O-2013-51, § 1, Exh. A, 11-18-13) 
Secs. 2-366—2-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-381. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Identity Theft Prevention Program." 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-382. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-383. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Douglasville. 
Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonable foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunication companies. 
Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and driver's license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-384. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include sanitation services. 
(c)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: none. 
(d)  However, the processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(e)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(f)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-385. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, such as a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-386. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by (for example, the director of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created, or by the director of information technology) on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-387. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-388. - Sources and types of red flags. 
All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
(b)  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
(c)  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
(d)  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
(a)  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
(b)  Identification of which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
(c)  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
(d)  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
(e)  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
(a)  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The social security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
(b)  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
(c)  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
(d)  Other information provided such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services is associated with fraudulent activity. 
(e)  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
(f)  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
(g)  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
(h)  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
(i)  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
(a)  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
(b)  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
(c)  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
(d)  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). 
(e)  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
(f)  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
(g)  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  [Notice regarding possible identity theft or phishing.] Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-389. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, the finance director deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the finance director shall convey this information to the city manager who may, in his or her discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account; 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector before the end of the next working day of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer's account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, the finance director deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may, in his or her discretion, determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-390. - Updating the program. 
The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experience with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-391. - Program administration. 
The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identity new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the city manager, at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
(a)  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
(b)  Service provider arrangements; 
(c)  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
(d)  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-392. - Outside service providers. 
In the event the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 1, 10-20-08) 
Secs. 2-393—2-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES FOR CONSUMER REPORTS 

Sec. 2-401. - Short title. 
[This article shall be known as the] "Treatment of Address Discrepancies Policy." 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 2, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-402. - Purpose. 
Pursuance to 16 CFR 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 2, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-403. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
City means the City of Douglasville. 
Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. section 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 2, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-404. - Policy. 
In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
(a)  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. section 5318(1); 
(b)  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
(c)  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 2, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-405. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 2, 10-20-08) 
Sec. 2-406. - Methods of confirming consumer address. 
The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. O-08-058, § 2, 10-20-08) 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 26; human relations, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Posting generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, tack, nail, attach or in any other manner fasten signs, bills, circulars, posters, notices, papers, or other advertising matter of any description to any pole, tree, structure or any other property, public or private, without the permission of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1977, § 3-1) 
Sec. 6-2. - Removing posters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, tear down, deface or destroy any poster, handbill or other kind of advertisement when the same has been lawfully posted while the same is still of value. 
(Code 1977, § 3-2) 
Secs. 6-3—6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILLS 

Sec. 6-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition thereto, shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public, and shall mean and include any other copyrighted material. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1977, § 3-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-32. - Distributing in public places. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. No person shall hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-22, 14-61) 
Sec. 6-33. - Placing on vehicles. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-21, 14-62) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
Sec. 6-34. - Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-20, 14-63) 
Sec. 6-35. - Distributing where properly posted. 
No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agent," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-19, 14-64) 
Sec. 6-36. - Distributing at inhabited private premises. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant, or other person then present in or upon such private premises. In case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as provided in this section, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States Postal Service nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1977, §§ 3-17, 3-18, 14-65) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, adopted May 4, 1998, amended Ch. 10, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; businesses, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58; safety of public areas, § 58-11; alcoholic beverages in parks, § 62-42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent or outlet manager means that person who does or will actually manage or operate an alcoholic beverage store on a day-to-day basis; an agent or outlet manager may be the same or different from the owner and licensee of the store. 
Applicant means an owner or owners of a store which has applied for an alcoholic beverage license. 
Brewpub means an establishment as provided in O.C.G.A. sections 3-5-20 et seq. authorized to manufacture, pour and wholesale malt beverages as provided therein. 
Business location or location of the business means the location or proposed location of a retail or wholesale alcoholic beverage outlet. 
Clerk means the clerk of the City of Douglasville. 
Council means the Douglasville City Council. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 24 percent alcohol by volume. 
Event permit means a time-limited local permit to pour alcoholic beverages at a city location other than any premises where the permittee is or may be licensed to pour alcohol regularly. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation. 
Grocery store means an establishment which has an occupation tax certificate showing its dominant line of business as "grocery store", that being the retail sale of a general line of food products, and which has at least 85 percent of its total retail floor space reserved for the sale of food and other nonalcoholic items, and which conducts all of its sales inside a building operating as a hotel, which hotel contains all of the retail floor space for the grocery store. 
Growler means a bottle made of glass or other material customary to the malt beverage industry, provided that the bottle is capable of being sealed with a screw cap or flip top and then sealed for the purpose of complying with open container laws, and further provided that the bottle does not exceed 64 ounces and is filled by a licensee or employee of the licensed establishment with beer from a keg. 
Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the juice of apples, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to flavored or carbonated cider. For purposes of this ordinance, hard cider shall be deemed a malt beverage. The term does not include "sweet cider." 
Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests. Motels meeting the qualifications for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. 
Licensee means the owner or owners of a store which has been issued an alcoholic beverage license. 
Liquor means spirituous liquor or distilled spirits. 
Lounge means a separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to a restaurant operated as part of a hotel, the dining rooms for such restaurant being located in the same building with the hotel or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Such restaurant must have an adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 80 guests, where meals are regularly served to such guests for pay in addition to that charged for sleeping accommodations; provided, that in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of its connected restaurant. A hotel may be licensed to pour alcoholic beverages in its lounge. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Measured means measured by way of the nearest travelled road, street or highway from the front entrance of an outlet to the property line of an involved institution. 
Minor means any person under the age of 21 years. 
O'Neal Plaza means the outdoor city-owned pedestrian walkway located at the north terminus of Price Avenue, bounded on the north by the southern edge of the sidewalk adjacent to the south side of Broad Street, bounded on the east by the rear of the performance stage, bounded on the south by the northern edge of the sidewalk adjacent to the north side of Church Street, and bounded on the west by the eastern edge of City Hall at 6795 Church Street and that of the City Welcome Center at 6694 Board Street. 
Outlet means a store for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Owner means a legal owner or all the collective legal owners of a store which has applied for or been issued an alcoholic beverage license; for purposes of background investigations, council approval of applicants, and other licensing requirements, owner shall mean: (a) the sole proprietor; or (b) if the owner is a corporation, all individual stockholders owning at least 20 percent of the corporate stock, or the registered corporate agent if there is no individual stockholder owning 20 percent or more of the corporate stock; or (c) if the owner is a partnership, all individual partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership, or if there is no individual partner owning 20 percent or more of the partnership, then the managing partner. 
Plaza East means the outdoor city-owned pedestrian walkway between the buildings on the north and south, and bounded on the west by O'Neal Plaza, and bounded on the east by a line running perpendicular to Church Street at the western land line of 6643 Church Street. 
Plaza West means the outdoor city-owned pedestrian walkway between the buildings on the north and south, and bounded on the east by O'Neal Plaza, and bounded on the west by a line running perpendicular to Church Street at the eastern land line of 8460 Courthouse Square East. 
Pour means sell for beverage purposes, "sell for consumption on the premises," "sell by the drink," and "allow patrons to bring their own liquor, wine or malt beverages for the purposes of mixing drinks and/or consuming same on the premises." The sale of "mixes or set-ups" or advertising to "bring your own" or the possession by patrons in the premises of liquor, wine or malt beverages, shall be prima facie evidence of pouring. Pour also includes any serving or consumption of alcohol at a licensed pouring establishment, whether the consumer is a member of the general public or a guest at a private party, and whether the alcohol is provided for pay or for free. 
Pouring outlet means any place where liquor, wine and/or malt beverages are poured or proposed to be poured and shall mean only the indoor premises of a restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge, except as otherwise permitted by section 10-1.2 of this article. 
Private club means any nonprofit organization under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence for at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license pursuant to this article. 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members. 
(3)  Owns, hires or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use or its members, which building or space has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment, and which is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and quests. 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where substantial meals are regularly and actually prepared and served, excluding periods for holidays, vacations and redecorating; having adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and personnel and a minimum seating capacity of 25 persons at tables or booths, excluding bar stools or similar seating, or a minimum of 375 square feet for indoor seating; and wherein the principle business is the serving of such meals, which, excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages, accounts for at least 51 percent of the gross revenue of the business. Such meals shall be available commencing at least two hours after the regular opening hour of the business and continuing until at least two hours prior to the regular closing hour of the business. 
State law. Unless the context demands otherwise, the words and terms used in this article shall have the same definitions and meanings as state law where used in O.C.G.A. Title 3. 
Video game room or electronic and video game room means any establishment having more than three electronic or video games available for patron use, or any such establishment with electronic or video games sufficient to accommodate more than three patron users simultaneously. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 24 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-99-9, § 1, 4-19-99; Ord. No. O-02-23, § 1, 6-3-02; Ord. No. O-03-16, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-06-05, § 1, 3-6-06; Ord. No. O-07-11, § 1, 2-19-07; Ord. No. O-2015-7, §§ 1, 2 , 2-2-15; Ord. No. O-2015-17 , §§ 1—3, 5-4-15; Ord. No. O-2017-51 , § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. O-2017-53 , §§ 1—5, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 10-1.2. - Outdoor pouring. 
It shall be unlawful to pour any alcoholic beverage outside the indoor structure of any properly licensed restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge, except as follows: 
(1)  Patio pouring. Any restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge licensed for consumption on the premises may serve and allow patrons to consume alcoholic beverages on any porch or open-air patio which is attached directly to the structure of the restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge and for which direct access to the structure is provided by means of a door to the porch or open-air patio, where the porch or open-air patio is surrounded (except for not more than one exit unless otherwise required) by a fence sufficiently high to block the view of seated patron from public view outside the premises but in no event less than three feet in height, and which: 
a.  Is completely opaque and provides a total visual screen from outside the licensed premises; or 
b.  Is lined with planted or potted vegetation not less than three feet in height and spaced not more than 48 inches from the center of one plant to the next. 
(2)  Event permit pouring. 
a.  Licensed property. Any restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge licensed for consumption on the premises may pour and allow patrons to consume alcoholic beverages on the outdoor portion of the lot for any licensed premises for any event of not more than three days in duration where: 
1.  The area for the special event is completely enclosed to prevent patrons from exiting the area in the normal course of business except through the indoor portion of the permanent structure; and 
2.  The area for the special event is completely surrounded, except as otherwise required by fire and safety regulations, by an opaque fence or other screen, not less than six feet in height, providing a total visual screen from outside the licensed premises. 
Event pouring on licensed property shall be allowed only pursuant to a permit issued by the finance director upon the application of a licensee made at least five days in advance of the proposed event, upon payment of an application fee of $100.00, and upon submission of a sketch drawing of the layout of the proposed event showing compliance with the screening requirements of this subsection. No more than five permits for event pouring shall be issued to any licensee for the same licensed premises within any calendar year, and no permit shall be issued for an effective date within 20 days of the effective date of any previous permit for the same licensed premises. 
b.  O'Neal Plaza, Plaza East, and Plaza West. 
1.  Generally. Any person may be approved by the mayor and council for an event permit for pouring of wine and malt beverages on O'Neal Plaza, which may include Plaza East and Plaza West, provided that no such event permit shall be issued unless the applicant shall also secure one of the following: 
(A)  A catered off-premises license from the city or from any other Georgia county or municipality authorized by O.C.G.A. section 3-11-1 et seq.; 
(B)  A non-profit civic organization permit from the Georgia Department of Revenue authorized by O.C.G.A. section 3-9-3 et seq.; or 
(C)  A special event use permit from the Georgia Department of Revenue authorized by O.C.G.A. section 3-14-1. 
2.  Application. The fee for events permits on O'Neal Plaza shall be $250.00 per permit, to be paid at the time of application, and to be refunded if the permit is denied or withdrawn, provided that every applicant having a local regular pouring license authorized by subsection 10-146(a) shall have an annual credit against such permit fees equal to the amount of alcoholic beverage license fees paid to the city by the applicant for any alcoholic beverage license which is current, in good standing, and not in a state of probation or suspension. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant and the type of alcoholic beverage license described in subsection i. to be utilized. 
3.  Requirements and restrictions. 
(A)  After approval by the mayor and council, the finance department shall issue the event permit to the applicant after the applicant has produced a copy of the permit specified in subparagraph i. 
(B)  Throughout the event, the permittee shall maintain on O'Neal Plaza not fewer than four portable signs advising patrons that no alcoholic beverages may be removed from the event area. The police chief shall recommend to the mayor and council the number of certified law enforcement officers which the applicant should employ at the applicant's cost for any event, and the mayor and council shall require an adequate number to be hired as a special stipulation of approval. The permittee shall ensure that no alcoholic beverages are removed from the event area by patrons. Adequate trash receptacles or other facilities for patron disposal of cups and glasses shall be provided by the permittee. 
(3)  Private golf course pouring. Upon the outdoor premises of any privately owned golf course with an indoor restaurant licensed for pouring. 
(Ord. No. O-99-9, § 2, 4-19-99; Ord. No. O-99-41, § 2, 10-4-99; Ord. No. O-09-051, 10-5-09; Ord. No. O-2012-33, § 4, 7-2-12; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 1, 12-16-13; Ord. No. O-2015-17 , § 4, 5-4-15) 
Sec. 10-2. - Drunkenness; drinking in open public places. 
It shall be unlawful to pour alcohol, drink alcohol, or be drunk or intoxicated: 
(1)  In any private place in the city while disturbing others; 
(2)  In any motor vehicle upon the streets, lanes, alleys or public walkways of the city; 
(3)  In any park, publicly owned building or place, except: 
a.  The downtown conference convention and conference center, where alcohol may be poured from 6:00 a.m. until 11:30 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and from 11:00 a.m. until 10:30 p.m. on Sundays; 
b.  Any portion of any alley or walkway directly abutting a restaurant holding a sidewalk cafe permit holding a pouring license and complying with the requirements of section 10-1.2; 
c.  West Pines Golf Course and Clubhouse, where beer and wine, but not liquor, may be poured; consumption of beer and wine at this location is limited to alcoholic beverages sold on the premises during operating hours for the golf course or the clubhouse, and such beer and wine may be poured and consumed anywhere indoors and outdoors on the premises; and 
d.  O'Neal Plaza, Plaza East and Plaza West, in conjunction with event permits, as approved individually by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-01-21, § 1, 4-2-01; Res. No. O-01-95, 9-4-01; Ord. No. O-01-61, § 1, 9-4-01; Ord. No. O-03-09, §§ 1, 2, 11-17-03; Ord. No. O-05-20, § 2, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-06-05, § 2, 3-6-06; Ord. No. O-06-06, § 1, 3-20-06; Ord. No. O-09-010, § 1, 3-2-09; Ord. No. O-2015-17 , § 5, 5-4-15; Ord. No. O-2018-48 , § 1, 11-19-18) 
Sec. 10-3. - Purchases, possession by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase, or for any other person to purchase liquor, malt beverages or wine for a minor. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit false, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain liquor, malt beverages or wine. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to possess liquor, wine or malt beverages. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-4. - Sales to minors. 
No person engaged in or serving or pouring at a business regulated under this chapter shall sell liquor, wine or malt beverages to a minor. No person engaged in a retail business regulated under this chapter shall sell liquor, wine or malt beverages by the package without verifying that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older by means of visual inspection of the buyer's proper identification on every occasion of purchase. For purposes of this section, the phrase "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, a photograph of such person and giving such person's date of birth. "Proper identification" shall include, without being limited to, a U.S. passport, a U.S. military identification card, a state issued driver's license or identification card, or an immigration card. "Proper identification" shall not include any traffic citation, birth certificate, Social Security card, license renewal form, student identification card or credit card. For purposes of purchases from an automated beverage dispenser, "every occasion of purchase" shall mean every assignment of a personal identification number to a patron. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-99-48A, § 1, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-00-13, § 1, 2-22-00; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 1, 4-15-02; Ord. No. O-05-50, § 2, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 10-5. - Sales during elections. 
The wholesale and retail sale of alcoholic beverages, including distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages, shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election. Nothing in this section shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of any polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-6. - Necessity for license. 
It shall be unlawful to manufacture, sell or offer to sell at wholesale or retail within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville any alcoholic beverage without having the appropriate license for such manufacture or sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-7. - Annual license fee. 
In addition to any other business license fees that may be applicable under this Code, the following annual license fees shall be paid for the type of license being acquired as follows: 
(1)  Malt beverages: 
a.  Retail package malt beverage sale ..... $  500.00 
b.  Retail malt beverage sale for consumption on premises ..... 500.00 
c.  Wholesale malt beverage distributor: 
1.  Principal place of business inside city ..... 500.00 
2.  Principal place of business outside city ..... 100.00 
d.  Malt beverage manufacture ..... 500.00 
e.  Brewpub ..... 1,000.00 
f.  Ancillary growler malt beverage tasting ..... 50.00 
(2)  Wine: 
a.  Retail package wine sale ..... 500.00 
b.  Retail wine sale for consumption on premises ..... 500.00 
c.  Wholesale wine distributor ..... 500.00 
d.  Wine manufacturer ..... 500.00 
(3)  Liquor: 
a.  Retail package liquor sale ..... 5,000.00 
b.  Retail liquor sale for consumption on premises ..... 5,000.00 
c.  Wholesale liquor distributor ..... 5,000.00 
d.  Liquor manufacturer ..... 5,000.00 
(4)  Live entertainment at pouring outlets ..... 250.00 
(5)  Additional retail package beer and wine license for same location: If a licensee already holding a retail package liquor license and a retail package beer and wine license for the same location is required, pursuant to the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code or regulations issued thereunder, to obtain an additional retail package beer and wine license for such same location, the council may issue such additional retail package beer and wine license for such same location at a fee to be determined at the discretion of the council, not to exceed $500.00. 
(6)  Late fee. If renewal application is not made by November 15 of each year or if such fees are not paid by December 31 of each year then an additional $500.00 late fee will be assessed against the licensee. 
(7)  Adult entertainment license fee: 
a.  In addition to the foregoing license fees for the sale of alcoholic beverages, a separate adult entertainment license must be obtained annually for each outlet for the sale of liquor, wine and/or malt beverages at which adult entertainers perform or are employed. The annual license fee for an adult entertainment license is $10,000.00. Such license shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall not be prorated or transferred. 
b.  Application for an adult entertainment license shall be in writing and made upon forms approved by the finance director. An initial application shall contain the information mandated by sections 10-8 through 10-16 and shall be subject to the requirements and regulations set forth in sections 10-8 through 10-16. 
c.  Application for renewal of an adult entertainment license shall be made between October 25 and November 15 of each year. The license fee for such renewal shall be tendered with the renewal application. If application for renewal is not made by November 15, a late fee of $1,000.00 will be assessed against the licensee. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 2, 12-16-13; Ord. No. O-2017-51, § 2, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 10-7.1. - Term of license; fees. 
All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Exceptionally, any applicant granted a license after January 31 pursuant to a new initial application for license shall pay a pro-rated licensee fee for the remaining months in the subject calendar year as of the date of application. The prorated fee shall be equal to the total annual fee, divided by 12, times the number of whole months and any partial month remaining in the calendar year at the time of application. But in no event shall the prorated license fee be for less than three months. And in no event shall a prorated license fee be charged for any applicant or owner who has held an alcoholic beverage license at the same location within the 18 months immediately preceding the new application. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-52 , § 1, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 10-8. - Initial application for license. 
The initial application for a license under this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  Each initial applicant shall make written application to the council for the privilege of engaging in the sale of alcoholic beverages using forms approved by the clerk and specifying wholesale, retail sales, brewpub, or consumption on the premises, and specifying liquor or beer and wine. Such initial application shall be accompanied by a certified or cashier's check in the amount of the first year's license fee. Should the initial application be denied, such license fee shall be refunded to the applicant. 
(2)  The application shall be filed with the clerk with a fee of $250.00 per person for investigation of the owners and the proposed agent, and for investigation of the proposed location and for processing of the application. Such fees shall be nonrefundable. Said application fees shall be paid in addition to the license fee. 
(3)  The application shall state: 
a.  For each owner, full name and age, home address, addresses for the immediately preceding ten years, present employer and business address, previous employment in the immediately preceding five years, names of spouse and all children, and complete record of all convictions and guilty pleas for violations of all laws, city, state and federal. 
b.  Full name of the proposed outlet manager, if not the same as applicant, and his age, home address, business address, names of spouse and all children, complete record of all convictions and guilty pleas for violations of all laws, city, state and federal, of both proposed outlet manager and spouse. 
c.  Exact location, street address and otherwise, of proposed business. 
d.  Name and address of owner or landlord and/or resident manager of property proposed for location and whether or not there is a building proposed to be used already erected thereon. 
e.  Trade name, or proposed trade name, of proposed business. 
f.  Name and address of all persons and parties having at least a 20 percent financial interest in the outlet by way of ownership of building or stock, receipt of income from business or otherwise. 
g.  Such other information as may be required by the city council, chief of police, city manager or city attorney, through interrogatories or otherwise. 
(4)  The application shall be sworn to. 
(5)  An application for retail package sale, wholesale or manufacture (but not for consumption on the premises) shall be accompanied by a current certificate from a registered surveyor containing the following information: 
a.  A scale drawing of the building, or proposed building, as situated on the proposed lot. 
b.  The proposed off-street parking facilities available to such building. 
c.  The exact location of such business, including ward, block and lot as shown on the city tax map and street number. 
d.  Both the straight-line distance and the measured distance in lineal feet from the church building or church grounds, school building or school grounds. The requirement of showing the distance from the above shall not exist when the church building, church grounds, school building or school grounds is in excess of 650 feet from the proposed outlet; however, the surveyor's certificate shall so state. 
e.  Such other information as may be required by the council, chief of police, city manager or city attorney, through interrogatories or otherwise. 
(6)  The applicant shall timely file proof of his compliance with advertising requirements with the clerk, before licensing is considered by the council. 
(7)  Approval of an application by the council and/or granting of license by the council may be suspended or revoked if any change in the information supplied, or in the physical layout represented in the plat submitted, occurs without approval of the council. An applicant anticipating any such change shall submit all details thereof to the council. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-03-24, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. O-06-05, § 3, 3-6-06) 
Sec. 10-9. - Incomplete application. 
An application filed and submitted before containing substantially all the information required may be rejected by the council, and an applicant may not refile for a period of six months. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-03-24, § 2, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 10-10. - Residency requirements. 
(a)  All applicants other than a corporation must be a citizen of the United States or a resident alien of the United States. 
(b)  All proposed agents or outlet managers shall be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the State of Georgia for a period of one year immediately preceding application, or a resident alien of the United States who has been lawful resident of the State of Georgia for the three years immediately preceding the application, and shall meet all other qualifications required of license applicants as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  The agent or outlet manager referred to herein shall be the representative for the licensee for the purpose of receiving all communications, notices, services or process or other papers or documents in connection with any matter arising out of or connected with the issuance, holding, suspension, revocation or other action with respect to any city license. The application shall state the mailing address of any agent or outlet manger, and the mailing to that person at said address of any notice required under this chapter or any other law shall be sufficient notice to the owner or licensee. 
(d)  After a licensee has held a license for a continuous period of one year, the requirement of prior Georgia residency for its agent or outlet manager shall be eliminated if the agent or outlet manager is a current Georgia resident. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-03-16, § 2, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-2010-33, § 1, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Sham applicant; de facto applicant or outlet manager. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file, or permit to be filed, an application for license wherein a sham applicant or a sham outlet manager is named. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for a license containing his name as applicant, when such person is not the de facto applicant or the owner; it shall be unlawful for any person to represent to the city that he is the agent or outlet manager for the licensee when such person is not the de facto outlet manager. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his name to be used on an application for license where such person will not be the de facto owner of the license or the de facto outlet manager, as the case may be. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for license, or permit his name to be used in such application, where such application contains a nominal applicant or nominal outlet manager for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this article restricting applicants or managers to persons of good character and without criminal records, or restricting economic interests in outlets, or any other elusive purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-12. - Application containing false information. 
An application containing known false information may result in the disapproval, revocation, suspension or failure to renew the license applied for. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-13. - Surveyor's certificate containing false information. 
(a)  Applicant. It shall be unlawful for any applicant to submit with his application any surveyor's certificate containing known false information and/or measurements. 
(b)  Surveyor. It shall be unlawful for any surveyor to submit, or allow to be submitted, a certificate containing known false information. 
(1)  Violation of this subsection may result in the revocation of the business license of the surveyor submitting the false information. 
(2)  Substantial errors in measured distances, as determined by the city engineer, shall be prima facie evidence that the distances submitted are known to be false. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-14. - Advertisement of application; proof thereof. 
(a)  The finance department shall advertise notice of the applicant's application for license in a local, daily newspaper designated to publish sheriff's advertisements for the county, once a week for two weeks, which advertisement shall appear after filing the application and before the public hearing on such application. The advertisement shall be in a form prescribed and prepared by the finance department and shall contain the name of the applicant, the purpose of the application, the proposed location of the business, the name of its owner, and the name of the proposed agent. 
(b)  The applicant shall also, at least three days after filing the application, erect at the proposed location a sign not less than 24 inches by 36 inches in size, with letters of at least 2½ inches on the front door of the building proposed to be used, if facing the right-of-way of the city street upon which such building fronts, otherwise, within three feet of such right-of-way, or upon a prominent place on the lot where the building is proposed to be constructed, facing the street. The sign shall be captioned as provided in section 10-38, 10-77, or 10-105, designating the name and address of the applicant, the name of the proposed agent, type of license and date of application, and no other advertisement or wording. Such sign shall be prepared by finance department and shall remain posted by the applicant until final action by the council on the application. 
(c)  The cost of such preparation and advertising, both newspaper and sign, will be borne by the applicant, and shall be $250.00, paid to the finance department at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-03-24, § 3, 7-8-03) 
Sec. 10-15. - Action upon application. 
Within seven days from the time the application is filed, the clerk shall notify the chief of police, who shall investigate the character of the applicant, the agent and the reputation of the location, and make a full report to the council. The clerk shall also refer such application, together with any objections filed, to the council. The council shall, after investigation of the applicant, the agent and the proposed location, grant or deny the license applied for. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-16. - Conditional approval of application; withholding of license; suspension of license. 
(a)  The council may approve an application subject the city's receipt of documentation and/or the applicant's compliance with required formalities, and may withhold recommendation for issuance of a license until such requirements are complete. 
(b)  Where an irregularity or deficiency in the application, including plat requirements, off-street parking facilities, etc., occurs or is discovered, a license may be suspended by the council pending correction of the irregularity. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-17. - Considerations and guidelines for granting or denying license. 
The city council, in making its final determination upon an initial application, may be guided by the following factors as to whether or not to grant such license: 
(1)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business. 
(2)  The proximity of churches, hospitals, schools, public parks, community centers, and the like. 
(3)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(4)  Whether the proposed location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(5)  The criminal record of the applicant and outlet manager and their general good character and reputation and their financial responsibility; provided that nonpayment of state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence as to lack of financial responsibility. 
(6)  Report of the chief of police. 
(7)  Consideration of information required in the application and whether requirements as to notice and advertisement have been met. 
(8)  Such other evidence as may be presented to the city council. 
(9)  Whether any previous license issued for the applicant, outlet manager or for the location has been suspended or revoked. 
(10)  Whether the applicant holds any other license for the sale of alcohol. 
(11)  The history or reputation of the proposed location of the outlet for gambling, illegal sex acts, fighting or other acts of violence, and/or other violations of the law. 
(12)  Whether the type and number of schools, churches, libraries or public recreation areas in the vicinity of the place of business of the licensee causes minors to frequent the immediate area, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances as provided in this section. 
(13)  The location for which the license is sought, as to traffic congestion, general character of neighborhood, and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(14)  The number of licenses already granted for similar business in the trading area of the proposed location. 
(15)  Any circumstances which may cause minors to congregate in the vicinity of the proposed location, even though there is compliance with the minimum distances as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-98-78, § 1, 11-2-98) 
Sec. 10-18. - Grounds for denial of license. 
(a)  Prohibited locations. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the following areas of the City of Douglasville: 
(1)  Within a measured 300 feet of any church grounds, for licenses other than retail consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Within a measured 600 feet of any school grounds or college campuses, except: 
(i)  Licenses for consumption on the premises for liquor, beer and wine may be issued for any pouring outlets located within 600 feet of any school grounds or college campuses; and 
(ii)  Licenses for package sale of beer and wine may be issued to grocery stores located within 600 feet of any college campuses. 
(3)  In an existing building or establishment having a history of or reputation for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; other violations of the law. 
(4)  No retail liquor package sales shall be permitted in areas of the city zoned CN. 
(5)  No new retail liquor package sales license shall be approved for a location within 2,500 feet of another location: 
a.  Where a retail liquor package sales business is lawfully operating, or 
b.  Which is the receiving location for a retail liquor package sales transfer of license approved within the 12 months immediately preceding filing of the new subject application. 
The distance specified in this subsection (5) shall be measured from the front door of one retail liquor package sales business to the front door of any other retail liquor package sales business. 
(b)  Prohibited persons. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for an outlet with an owner or agent who is: 
(1)  A person who does not meet the residency requirements as set forth in section 10-10. 
(2)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(3)  A person who has been, within the preceding five years, convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or who has been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the City of Douglasville relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of beer, wine or liquor, or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of beer, wine or intoxicating liquors, or taxability thereof. 
(4)  A person whose license under this article has been revoked for cause or who has had a license under this article revoked for cause. 
(5)  A person who is under the age of 21 years or who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(6)  An officer or employee of the City of Douglasville, or members of their immediate families. 
(c)  Multiple agency prohibited. No person shall serve as agent/outlet manager for more than one licensed establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-99-51, § 1, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-03-24, §§ 4, 5, 7-8-03; Ord. No. O-04-17, § 1, 6-7-04; Ord. No. O-06-05, § 4, 3-6-06; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 4-18-11; Ord. No. O-2015-7, § 3 , 2-2-15) 
Sec. 10-19. - Resubmission of application; deferral of action upon litigation. 
(a)  No applicant may submit, and the council shall not act upon an application which is substantially the same as an application submitted within the previous six months. 
(b)  The council may defer action upon any application, the subject matter of which is substantially the same as the subject matter of litigation then pending in the state or federal courts, until such time as such litigation is resolved. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-20. - Time limits on opening business, extension. 
(a)  All outlets licensed under this chapter must, within 90 days after the issuance of a city license, open for business. Failure to open for business shall constitute a forfeiture and cancellation of the issued licenses, and no refund of license fees or business taxes shall be made. Any applicant unable to comply with the time limit of this section may make written request to the council for an extension of time not to exceed 90 days; and the council, at its discretion, may grant or deny the request. 
(b)  Any license issued under this chapter shall automatically be null and void where the licensed business has ceased to operate or has been closed to the public for at least six consecutive months. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-09-010, § 2, 3-2-09) 
Sec. 10-21. - Transferability of licenses. 
(a)  Generally. A separate license shall be required for each alcoholic beverage outlet, and a separate application shall be made for each. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as provided in this section. Where any transfer of license or location is requested and the annual fee for the license has previously been paid, no further license fee, other than the fee for background investigation of any new owner or agent, shall be charged. Where any transfer of license or location is approved by the council, or where any change of agent is approved, such approval shall not entitle the licensee to issuance of any initial license, any interim license, any license or privilege reserved for new licensees, or to any license available only to newly opened outlets. 
(b)  Death of licensee. In case of the death of a licensee, the outlet may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new license, whichever shall first occur, provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for a new license. 
(c)  Transfer of certain ownership interests in a licensed outlet. Where transfer of any ownership interest in any previously licensed outlet results or will result in ownership by any individual, partner or stockholder of any interest of 20 percent or more in the licensed entity where such individual, partner or stockholder previously owned less than 20 percent or no interest in the licensed entity, then the licensee shall immediately inform the clerk of the details of such change and apply for not more than one of the following: 
(1)  A transfer of the license, whereupon the outlet may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of application or until expiration of the existing license or until approval or denial of the transfer by the council, whichever shall first occur, provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed until such time as the licensee shall make application for a transfer; or 
(2)  A new license, whereupon the licensee shall surrender any existing license for the outlet and the outlet shall cease to sell alcoholic beverages until a new license has been approved for that location; all applications shall be accompanied by payment of a new license fee. 
All new owners and agents shall submit to a background check in connection with any application for transfer of an existing license or issuance of a new license, and all such applications shall be accompanied by payment of the background fee of $250.00 per person. 
(d)  Transfer of location. Upon application, the council may approve transfer of a license for a new location within the city for any outlet. Should a transfer of a location be denied, there shall be no pro rata return or refund of any license fee, and any new location shall require a new license under this article. 
(e)  Change of agent. Upon the resignation or removal of an agent for a particular outlet, the licensee shall immediately appoint a new agent and apply to the clerk for approval of the new agent. All such applications shall be accompanied by payment of the background fee of $250.00, and shall be approved or denied by the mayor and city council based on the criteria of sections 10-10, 10-17 and 10-18. 
(f)  Name change. In those instances in which only the name of the establishment holding a license is to change, with no change in the ownership or agent for the outlet, the licensee shall promptly notify the clerk of the change of name, which notation shall be made on the records of the city and forwarded to the license inspector's office for a change on the records of that office. No charge will be made for this name change. 
(g)  Sale or closing of outlet. Immediately upon the sale or closing of an outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to notify the council and surrender the license upon demand. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-2012-37, § 3, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 10-22. - Removing residence from county or otherwise becoming a prohibited person. 
Any licensee or agent/outlet manager who becomes a prohibited person, as defined in section 10-18, shall, within ten days of such event, make such fact known to the council, and shall surrender his license upon demand by the council in such case. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-23. - Renewals of licenses; denial of renewal. 
(a)  All licenses required by this article shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall be renewable administratively upon payment of the appropriate fee, except as is set out in subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Each licensee shall make a written application for renewal on or before November 15 of each year on forms approved by the clerk, and the license fee shall be paid in full no later than December 31 of each year. If the renewal application is not made by November 15 of each year or if such fees are not paid by December 31 of each year then an additional $500.00 late fee will be assessed against the licensee. 
(c)  Such application shall be referred to the chief of police, who shall report on the licensee's activity and the agent's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  If the chief of police reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made administratively, and the matter shall be referred to the council for its consideration. 
(e)  Upon failure of administrative renewal, the council shall afford the licensee a public hearing, and in passing upon the application for renewal, it may be guided by such factors as set forth in sections 10-17 and 10-18 regarding the initial application. 
(f)  After such public hearing, the council may grant or deny the renewal of any license for which application has been made. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-24. - Suspension and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Summary action. There shall be no summary seizure of licenses under this chapter, unless there exists in the city a state of emergency duly declared; after any such seizure, a hearing shall be held as soon as practicable. 
(b)  Action by council. The city council shall have full power of authority to revoke, refuse to renew, suspend or place on probation any licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for violation of this Code, or for the state or federal laws, or when continued operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. Before taking any such action, the council shall require a hearing before it at least five days' notice of which hearing shall have been given to the affected licensee. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-25. - Taxation; levied. 
In addition to the annual license fees imposed and required by this chapter, there is hereby levied and imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages a tax as provided in Articles II, III and IV. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-26. - Payment of fee for reporting; revocable. 
The city may pay to each taxpayer for the service of computing and remitting such taxes collected a fee of three percent of such remittances, such payment to be revocable by the city at any time. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-27. - Right of audit. 
The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records, from each licensee, from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-28. - Failure to make a timely tax report, remittance; penalty. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a licensee liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due, and a further penalty of five percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the maker of such report liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. 
(b)  Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report, shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the business license issued by the city to the wholesale dealer or brewpub operator. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-29. - Sale prohibited when tax not paid. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any alcoholic beverage on which the tax required in this chapter has not been paid to the wholesaler, brewpub operator or distributor or the city. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-30. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of finance director. The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Records required from licensee; form. Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in this city shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The clerk or any person authorized in writing by the clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink and any licensee liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to purchases which are subject to the tax. Reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk, and shall set forth the purchase price for each purchase, the date or dates of purchase, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 1, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 10-31. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglasville. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of the chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee or any other person who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other date required by the city, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in this section. 
(b)  Any default or delinquency of the tax levied under this chapter shall constitute cause for suspension or revocation of license. 
(c)  Should the city council determine that a licensee has been chronically delinquent or chronically in default in the payment of taxes under this article, the council may, when considering the application of such licensee for renewal, consider such delinquency as grounds for nonrenewal. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Secs. 10-32—10-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 10-36. - Necessity for license. 
It shall be unlawful to manufacture, sell or offer to sell at wholesale or retail within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville any malt beverage without having the appropriate license for such manufacture or sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-37. - Classification of licenses; license fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Retail package. Retail beer package store, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages in packages at retail. 
(2)  Wholesale. Wholesale malt beverage distributor, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages at wholesale. 
(3)  Manufacture. Manufacturers of malt beverages, which shall permit only the manufacture, bottling and packaging of malt beverages. 
(4)  Brewpub. Brewpub operator, which shall permit only the manufacture, sale at wholesale and pouring of malt beverages as provided at O.C.G.A. sections 3-5-20 et seq. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in the license schedule in section 10-7. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-38. - Sign posted. 
The sign posted in compliance with section 10-14(b) in connection with any application for a malt beverage license shall be captioned, "malt beverage/wine application pending." 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-39. - General regulations for package sale of malt beverages. 
(a)  The building or proposed building to house a retail outlet for the sale of malt beverages by the package shall meet all requirements of the city building official and traffic engineer. 
(b)  Each outlet for the retail sale of malt beverages by the package shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet a sign in letters at least two inches high, reading as follows: 
"Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Minors Strictly Prohibited" 
(c)  No screen, partition, or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a retail outlet for the sale of malt beverages by the package from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(d)  No package malt beverage sales shall be allowed on Sundays, except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., or on any other days prohibited by state law. 
(e)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages by the package, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this section as if fully set out in this section. 
(f)  Any holder of a license to sell at retail malt beverages by the package shall make an immediate report to, and receive approval by, the council of any change in the interests in the owner or ownership of a malt beverage outlet and/or any change in the information as stated in the original application for license. 
(g)  Automated beverage dispensers. Where the owner of a hotel holds a retail package license for sale of malt beverages, the licensee may make use of an automated beverage dispenser to be placed and maintained in plain view of the front desk of the hotel, provided that: 
(1)  Transfers of malt beverages from the dispenser shall be made only to hotel guests renting a room at the time of sale; 
(2)  Malt beverages from the dispenser shall be accessible to purchasers only through use of a personal identification number assigned to the purchaser by the licensee; 
(3)  Each personal identification number shall be valid for a period of not more than five minutes after assignment, and for only one purchase; 
(4)  Each personal identification number shall be valid for one purchase of no more than two twelve-ounce alcoholic beverage units; and 
(5)  The licensee shall allow purchase of no more than four twelve-ounce alcoholic beverage units to each registered hotel guest in any calendar day. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-98-78, § 2, 11-2-98; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 2, 4-15-02; Ord. No. O-2012-21, § 1, 5-7-12, eff. 11-21-12) 
Editor's note— The amendment to subsection (d) via Ordinance Number O-2012-21, § 1, was approved at a special election held on November 6, 2012. 
Sec. 10-40. - Taxation—Rate. 
(a)  In addition to the annual license fees imposed and required by this chapter, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each wholesale dealer other than brewpubs selling malt beverages within the city an excise tax on such malt beverages so sold, as follows: 
(1)  A tax of $0.004166 per ounce upon malt beverages sold. 
(2)  All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in subsection (1) of this section, but in lieu thereof, there is hereby imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the city an excise tax of $6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the city and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(b)  In addition to the annual license fees imposed and required by this chapter, there is hereby levied and imposed upon each brewpubs selling malt beverages at wholesale within the city an excise tax of $6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 15½ gallons sold by such brewpub operator within the city and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-41. - Same—Method of payment. 
The tax imposed by section 10-40 shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all malt beverages sold within the city and by each brewpub operator on all malt beverages sold at wholesale within the city. Each wholesale dealer selling, shipping, or in any way delivering malt beverages to a retailer in the city shall collect such excise tax at the time of delivery, and shall remit the same together with a summary of all such deliveries on or before the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-42. - Payment of tax; report. 
The summary report made by each wholesale dealer and brewpub operator to the city shall show the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-43. - Growlers. 
(a)  The sale of growlers in compliance with this article is authorized for establishments defined in subsection 10-37(a)(1) authorized to sell alcoholic beverages excluding distilled spirits, by the package. The filling of growlers by means of a capped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or other provisions of this article. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Except as hereinafter provided, consumption on the premises is strictly prohibited. 
(b)  The holder of a package malt beverage license, with or without a package wine license, but in no event with a package distilled spirits license, shall be eligible for an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license to provide samples of growler malt beverages offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. Growler malt beverage sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a growler malt beverage offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with growler malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote growler and malt beverage appreciation and education. Growler malt beverage tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. Growler malt beverage sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day per customer for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed four ounces, and no customer shall consume more than 16 ounces in any two-hour period. Only the licensee or an employee shall open and handle unpackaged malt beverages, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. No open growler container shall be removed from the licensed premises. Not more than two times per week for a period not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary growler malt beverage tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for class participants. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. Growler malt beverage sampling and tasting is only permitted within the designated interior portion of the premises. The annual fee for an annual growler malt beverage tasting license shall be $50.00, and the license shall be issued by the finance director upon payment and request to any holder of a local package malt beverage license which does not also hold a package distilled spirits license at the same location. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-51 , § 3, 8-21-17) 
Secs. 10-44—10-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WINE 

Sec. 10-75. - Necessity for license. 
It shall be unlawful to sell, store or offer to sell at wholesale or retail within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville, wine, without having the appropriate license for such sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this chapter. However, a farm winery, as defined in O.C.G.A. section 3-6-21.1, which is qualified and licensed by the state shall need no city license to manufacture wine or to distribute such wine at wholesale in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 3-6-1 et seq. if the farm winery has given to the council 60 days' written notice of its intention to commence operations in the city and the council has not within such 60-day period adopted a resolution prohibiting the farm winery from commencing operations in the city without a local license. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-76. - Classification of licenses; license fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Retail package. Retail wine package store, which shall permit only the sale of wine in packages at retail. 
(2)  Wholesale. Wholesale wine distributor, which shall permit only the sale of wine at wholesale. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in the license schedule in section 10-7. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-77. - Sign posted. 
The sign posted in compliance with section 10-14(b) in connection with any application for a malt beverage license shall be captioned, "malt beverage/wine application pending." 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-78. - General regulations for package sale of wine. 
(a)  The building or proposed building to house a retail outlet for the sale of wine by the package shall meet all requirements of the city building official and traffic engineer. 
(b)  Each outlet for the retail sale of wine by the package shall post in a conspicuous place within the outlet a sign in letters at least two inches high, reading as follows: 
"Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Minors Strictly Prohibited" 
(c)  No screen, partition, or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a retail outlet for the sale of wine by the package from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(d)  No package wine sales shall be allowed on Sundays, except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m., or on any other days prohibited by state law. 
(e)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of wine by the package, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this section as if fully set out in this section. 
(f)  Any holder of a license to sell at retail wine by the package shall make an immediate report to, and receive approval by, the council of any change in the interests in or ownership of a malt beverage outlet and/or any change in the information as stated in the original application for license. 
(g)  Automated beverage dispensers. Where the owner of a hotel holds a retail package license for sale of wine, the licensee may make use of an automated beverage dispenser to be placed and maintained in plain view of the front desk of the hotel, provided that: 
(1)  Transfers of wine from the dispenser shall be made only to hotel guests renting a room at the time of sale; 
(2)  Wine from the dispenser shall be accessible to purchasers only through use of a personal identification number assigned to the purchaser by the licensee; 
(3)  Each personal identification number shall be valid for a period of not more than five minutes after assignment, and for only one purchase; 
(4)  Each personal identification number shall be valid for one purchase of no more than two twelve-ounce alcoholic beverage units; and 
(5)  The licensee shall allow purchase of no more than four twelve-ounce alcoholic beverage units to each registered hotel guest in any calendar day. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-98-78, § 3, 11-2-98; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 3, 4-15-02; Ord. No. O-2012-21, § 2, 5-7-12, eff. 11-21-12) 
Editor's note— The amendment to subsection (d) via Ordinance Number O-2012-21, § 2, was approved at a special election held on November 6, 2012. 
Sec. 10-79. - Taxation. 
(a)  In addition to the annual wine license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, and a proportionate tax at a like rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  The provisions set forth in sections 10-41 and 10-42, relating to payment and collection of excise taxes re the sale of malt beverages shall be fully applicable concerning the payment and collection of excise taxes re the sale of wine, and shall be enforced as if such provisions were fully restated in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-02-22, § 1, 6-3-02) 
Sec. 10-80. - Waiver of license fee. 
If the applicant for a retail license for the sale of wine by package is also an applicant or holder of a retail license for the sale of malt beverages by package, then the initial annual license fee and subsequent annual renewal fees for the retail package sale of wine shall be waived, provided the applicant or retail licensee has paid the annual fee for the retail package sale of malt beverages, and is not delinquent in the sale of the annual license fee. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Secs. 10-81—10-102. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIQUOR 

Sec. 10-103. - Necessity for license. 
It shall be unlawful to manufacture, sell or offer to sell at wholesale or retail within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville any spirituous liquors or distilled spirits without having the appropriate license for such manufacture or sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this article. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-104. - Classification of licenses; license fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Manufacturers. Manufacturers, which shall permit only the manufacture, bottling and packaging of distilled spirits. 
(2)  Retail package. Retail liquor package store, which shall permit only the sale of liquor in packages at retail. 
(3)  Wholesale. Wholesale liquor distributor, which shall permit only the sale of liquor at wholesale. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be set forth in the license schedule in section 10-7. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-105. - Sign posted. 
The sign posted in compliance with section 10-14(b) in connection with any application for a malt beverage license shall be captioned, "liquor license application pending." 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-106. - General regulations. 
(a)  The building or proposed building to house a retail outlet shall meet all requirements of the city building official and traffic engineer. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Each retail outlet shall post conspicuously within the place of business a sign printed in letters at least two inches high, reading as follows: 
"Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Minors Strictly Prohibited." 
(d)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a retail outlet from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(e)  No package liquor sales shall be allowed except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday, and except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on Sundays. No package liquor sales shall be allowed on any days prohibited by state law. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  No drive-in windows shall be permitted. 
(h)  No percentage leases of buildings for retail liquor outlets shall be permitted. 
(i)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits in this state, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article. 
(j)  The applicant shall make an immediate report to, and receive approval by, the council of any change in the interests in the owner or ownership of the liquor outlet or liquor business and/or any change in the information as stated in the original application for license. 
(k)  A licensee of a retail package liquor outlet under this article shall not operate the business in connection with any other mercantile establishment; provided, this shall not prohibit a licensee from operating in the same building complex with other businesses. No retailer shall sell, offer for sale, display or keep in stock at his place of business where packaged spirituous liquors are offered for sale, any other commodity except the following, all of which may be sold by the retailer at his option: 
(1)  Beverages containing no alcohol and commonly used to dilute distilled spirits; 
(2)  Wines and malt beverages, when properly licensed; 
(3)  Glasses, stirring sticks and similar paraphernalia commonly used in the consumption of alcoholic beverages; 
(4)  Tobacco products; and 
(5)  Packaged ice. 
(l)  Automated beverage dispensers shall not be used in connection with spirituous liquor. 
(m)  The city prohibits the sale, serving or use of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises of any billiard room or any place operated in connection therewith unless the principal business of the establishment is the serving of meals which, excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages, accounts for at least 51 percent of the gross revenue and meets all other requirements of a restaurant as defined section 10-1. Additionally, billiard halls, pool rooms and other similar establishments as defined by O.C.G.A. section 43-8-1 that sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall comply with all the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter unless such rules and regulations are specifically prohibited by the provisions of O.C.G.A. section 43-8-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-02-15, § 4, 4-15-02; Ord. No. O-2012-21, § 3, 5-7-12, eff. 11-21-12) 
Editor's note— The amendment to subsection (e) via Ordinance Number O-2012-21, § 3, was approved at a special election held on November 6, 2012. 
Sec. 10-107. - Taxation. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail liquor license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter or fractional portion thereof, which shall be paid to city on all liquor sold, displayed or stored in the city. 
(b)  The tax shall be paid to the city by the wholesale distributor on all liquors sold to retailers in the city. Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering liquor to any such retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery, and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for liquor sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-108. - Employee identification. 
(a)  Any person who sells alcoholic beverages in a retail outlet for the sale of liquor by the package, shall be at least 18 years of age, and all such persons shall apply to the police department for an alcoholic beverage employee identification card, which card shall expire 12 months after issuance and shall be renewable on or before that time. An alcoholic beverage employee identification card shall be valid for such work at any location within the city having a valid liquor package license. As a prerequisite to issuance of an alcoholic beverage employee identification card for liquor package sales, every applicant shall take and pass an examination, authorized by the chief of police and administered by the police department, designed to assure that the applicant is competent to identify and properly deal with underage and intoxicated customers attempting to purchase liquor. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage employees shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other investigating as may be required by the police department. 
(c)  The police department shall investigate the employee application and report any detrimental information to the chief of police. The chief of police may refuse to issue an employee identification card to any proposed employee who has been convicted of a felony within a period of five years immediately prior to the application for an employee identification card, or who has been convicted on two or more misdemeanors within a period of five years immediately prior to the application for an employee identification card, or who has been convicted within a period of five years immediately preceding the application of any of the following offenses: 
(1)  D.U.I.; 
(2)  Pandering, prostitution or soliciting prostitution; 
(3)  Gambling; or 
(4)  Illegal sale of any controlled substance or narcotic. 
(d)  No licensee, agent or outlet manager shall allow or require any person who works in a retail outlet for the sale of liquor by the package to sell any alcoholic beverages without an alcoholic beverage employee identification card; licensees, agents and outlet managers shall require all such employees to wear or otherwise properly display their alcoholic beverage employee identification cards at all times during working hours. 
(e)  The police chief may provisionally grant an identification card to an applicant, pending investigation and report. Where the report, when received, is unfavorable as set out in subsection (c) of this section, the police chief may revoke the card and demand its return. 
(f)  The chief of police may revoke an identification card should the employee violate any provisions of this article, furnish false or misleading information in the employee's application card or commit conduct adversely affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose card has been revoked, when demand for surrender of a card has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy such card. 
(h)  Each employee shall pay a fee of $25.00 for the local record check and identification card. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-12, § 1, 4-18-11, eff. 7-1-11) 
Secs. 10-109—10-144. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 10-145. - Necessity for license. 
It shall be unlawful to pour or offer to pour any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville without having a pouring license, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this article. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-146. - License for pouring; special sales permits; license fee. 
(a)  Generally. Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Liquor pouring. Outlet for pouring liquor, which shall permit only the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Wine and malt beverage pouring. Outlet for pouring wine and malt beverages, which shall permit only the sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  Brewpub. Outlet for pouring malt beverages, which shall permit only the manufacture, sale at wholesale and pouring of malt beverages as provided at O.C.G.A. § 3-5-20 et seq. The license classified under this subsection is identical to that classified under subsection 10-37(a)(4) of this chapter. 
(b)  Special sales permits: catered off-premises license, nonprofit civic organization permit; special event use permit. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Any holder of a Georgia retail alcoholic beverage license for sales by the drink for consumption on the premises, who additionally holds a valid retail license from any county or municipality in Georgia authorizing the licensee to sell alcohol by the package or by the drink, may be issued a catered event permit to allow off-premises pouring at authorized catered functions at the Douglasville Downtown Conference Center, O'Neal Plaza, Plaza East, Plaza West or at any privately owned residence in the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3. Any holder of a pouring license for wine and malt beverage shall be eligible for catered event permits to pour wine and malt beverage, but not to pour liquor, unless the licensee also holds a liquor license. Catered event permits shall be issued administratively by the city finance department upon compliance with this section and state law; any denial of a catered event permit may be appealed to the city council. The application for any such permit shall include the date, address and time of the event, along with the applicant's state licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. 
(3)  Any nonprofit civic organization eligible for a temporary pouring permit authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-9-3 shall be entitled to a local three-day nonprofit civic organization permit authorizing pouring of alcoholic beverages at a specified location, which may be issued only in conjunction with a state-issued nonprofit civic organization permit. Nonprofit civic organization permits shall be issued administratively by the finance director upon compliance with this article and state law; any denial of a nonprofit civic organization permit may be appealed to the city council. 
(4)  The finance department shall issue a local special event use permit to any holder of a special event use permit issued by the department of revenue. 
(c)  Fees. The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in section 10-7. There shall be no permit fee for any catered event permit, nor for any nonprofit civic organization permit, nor for any special event use permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-54 , § 1, 8-21-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-54 , § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2017, amended § 10-146 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-146 pertained to license for pouring; Sunday sales permit; license fee and derived from Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, adopted May 4, 1998; Ord. No. O-99-41, § 1, adopted Oct. 4, 1999; Ord. No. O-00-98, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2000; Ord. No. O-03-32, § 1, adopted Sep. 15, 2003; Ord. No. O-07-27, § 1, adopted April 16, 2007; Ord. No. O-09-010, § 3, adopted March 2, 2009; Ord. No. O-2012-19, § 1, adopted May 7, 2012; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 3, adopted Dec. 16, 2013; and Ord. No. O-2015-17 , § 6, adopted May 4,2015. 
Cross reference— Interim licenses, interim Sunday sales permits; terms and conditions, § 10-148. 
Sec. 10-147. - Application and qualification for license and permit. 
(a)  Application for pouring licenses shall be the same as, and in accordance with, the requirements applicable to the sale of liquor by the package retail; and all provisions in this chapter pertaining to qualifications and licensing for a retail package liquor license, shall apply and be enforced in the sale of liquor, wine and/or malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  All regulations controlling the sale of liquor by package at retail shall be fully applicable as if set forth in a separate section of this article, and shall govern the sale of liquor, wine and malt beverages for consumption on the premises. 
(c)  No application shall be considered from and no license granted to an applicant whose business location for a pouring outlet is anything other than a restaurant, hotel, private club or lounge. 
(d)  It is the intention of this article that liquor, wine and malt beverages by the drink be sold only at bona fide restaurants, hotels and private clubs under the restrictions herein set out, and not at walk-in bars or sham establishments. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-00-92, § 1, 10-16-00; Ord. No. O-06-05, § 5, 3-6-06; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 4, 12-16-13; Ord. No. O-2017-54 , § 1, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 10-148. - Interim licenses; terms and conditions. 
(a)  Should any applicant applying for an initial brewpub, malt beverage, wine or liquor pouring license under this article, or any applicant for an initial liquor pouring license who already holds a brewpub, malt beverage or wine pouring license under this article, meet the requirements of this article concerning seating capacity, adequate kitchen facilities, personnel and the like, and not be in violation of any other requirements of this chapter or otherwise be ineligible for a license under such factors as listed in sections 10-17 and 10-18, the council may, at its discretion, grant such applicant an interim or probationary pouring license for a term of 180 days. Such interim or probationary license, unless subsequently extended by the council under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section, shall expire at the end of 180 days, and may be revoked for just cause by the council before the end of such 180-day period. 
(b)  If an applicant is granted an interim license, the finance director shall, upon its issuance, schedule a public hearing before the council prior to the expiration of the 180-day period, at which time the council shall consider whether to convert and extend such interim license to a full-term license. In considering whether an interim license shall be extended, the council may consider the factors enumerated in sections 10-17 and 10-18, the actual operating history of the establishment during the probationary period, whether the establishment is complying with the food service percentage requirements as defined by the definition of "restaurant" in section 10-1 and such other information as may be relevant and before the council. 
(c)  If an interim license is extended by the council to a full-term license during the same calendar year as that in which the interim license was granted, no further fee shall be required of the applicant re such license for that calendar year. If an interim license is extended by the council to a full-term license in a subsequent calendar year to the year in which the interim license was granted, the applicant must tender to the finance director the appropriate license fee for the calendar year in which the full-term license is approved before the full-term license will be granted. 
(d)  Should an interim license not be extended to a full-term license by the council, the applicant shall not be entitled to any refund of his initial application fee. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-54 , § 1, 8-21-17) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-54 , § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2017, amended § 10-148 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 10-148 pertained to interim licenses; interim Sunday sales permits; terms and conditions and derived from Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, adopted May 4, 1998; Ord. No. O-00-92, § 2, adopted Oct. 16, 2000; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 2, adopted Dec. 3, 2001; Ord. No. O-05-48, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 2005; and Ord. No. O-06-05, § 6, adopted March 6, 2006. 
Cross reference— License for pouring, Sunday sales permit; license fee, § 10-146. 
Sec. 10-149. - Additional regulations applicable to pouring outlets. 
The following regulations shall apply to pouring outlets: 
(1)  The building or proposed building where pouring will take place shall meet all requirements of the city building official and fire official. 
(2)  No percentage leases of buildings for pouring shall be permitted. 
(3)  Hours: 
a.  No pouring of liquor shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other days except as follows: 
1.  Liquor may be poured on Sundays on the premises, at establishments holding a liquor pouring license, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
2.  On any Monday which falls on a January 1, liquor may be consumed on the premises of any pouring outlet between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
b.  No pouring of malt beverages or wine shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday, nor between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on other days except as follows: 
1.  Malt beverages and wine may be poured on Sundays on the premises, at establishments holding a malt beverages and wine liquor pouring license, between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
2.  On any Monday which falls on a January 1, malt beverages and wine may be consumed on the premises of any pouring outlet between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. 
c.  Should lounges keep their doors open to the public, or allow members of the public to remain on the premises, beyond the prohibited hours of consumption, such conduct shall constitute prima facie evidence that liquor, wine and/or malt beverages are being consumed on the premises in violation of this chapter. 
d.  In no event shall drinks be mixed or sold, nor malt beverages sold, during the prohibited hours, based upon the timely sale of tickets, chits, or other devices. In no event shall alcoholic beverages be poured during prohibited hours at a private party at a licensed establishment. 
e.  No outlet manager, nor other employee of an outlet, shall permit violations of the above sections. 
(4)  Pouring licensees shall not sell, or permit the sale of, liquor or malt beverages by the package, but may sell malt beverages by the pitcher, or wine by the bottle or decanter, for consumption on the premises. 
(5)  Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant in their premises, provided the hotel and the franchisee meet all the requirements of this article. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to employ knowingly in any pouring outlet in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers and musicians, any person who has plead guilty or been convicted of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in drugs, sex offenses, or for any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors. 
(7)  No signs soliciting patrons to bring their own or to "brown bag," affixed to the premises, shall be permitted. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the management of a pouring outlet to maintain a copy of this article at the outlet and to instruct each employee on the terms thereof. 
(9)  The state laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits in this state, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, and especially as relate to retail sale for consumption, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article. 
(10)  A pouring licensee shall supply to the clerk a list of all employees who serve alcohol at the establishment, and the licensee shall immediately report any changes to the list to the clerk. A pouring licensee shall make immediate report to, and receive approval by, the counsel of any change in the interests in or ownership of the pouring outlet and/or any change in the information as stated in the original application for license, including the list of employees. 
(11)  No person already holding a wholesale liquor, wine or malt beverage license shall be granted a pouring license. 
(12)  No malt beverages, wine or liquor shall be poured at any motion picture theaters, skating rinks, health spas, billiard halls, pool rooms or similar amusement establishments, notwithstanding the fact that they may be operated in connection with a restaurant. Malt beverages and wine, but not liquor, may be poured at restaurants in bowling alleys and at restaurants in electronic and video game rooms. 
(13)  The city prohibits the sale, serving or use of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises of any billiard room or any place operated in connection therewith unless the principal business of the establishment is the serving of meals which, excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages, accounts for at least 51 percent of the gross revenue and meets all other requirements of a restaurant. Additionally, billiard halls, pool rooms and other similar establishments as defined by O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 that sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall comply with all the rules and regulations set forth in this article unless such rules and regulations are specifically prohibited by the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq. 
(14)  Every restaurant having a license for consumption on the premises shall, on a continuing basis, serve sufficient meals, the gross revenue from which, excluding the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall account for at least 51 percent of the total gross revenue of the business. A restaurant shall be deemed in violation of this subsection whenever: 
a.  The yearly percentage of sales for meals for the current license period is less than 51 percent; or 
b.  During more than half of the individual months in the current license period, sales for meals have been less than 51 percent. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-98-78, § 4, 11-2-98; Ord. No. O-00-62, § 1, 6-5-00; Ord. No. O-00-92, § 3, 10-16-00; Ord. No. O-02-23, § 2, 6-3-02; Ord. No. O-06-52, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-06; Ord. No. O-07-11, § 2, 2-19-07; Ord. No. O-2012-19, § 2, 5-7-12; Ord. No. O-2017-54 , § 1, 8-21-17; Ord. No. O-2018-48 , § 2, 11-19-18) 
Sec. 10-150. - Entertainment at pouring outlets. 
(a)  Live music, live entertainment, live contests, patron performances, live bands or orchestras, and patron dancing shall be permitted at pouring outlets: 
(1)  Where adequate space exists; 
(2)  Where all fire and safety codes are met; 
(3)  Where the appropriate license fee has been fully paid. 
(b)  No adult dancing or erotic dancing, as said terms are defined in chapter 14, article IV, section 14-101 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglasville, shall be permitted at any pouring outlet. 
(c)  The city council may require a pouring outlet providing music and dancing to provide such security attendance and protection as, in the discretion of the chief of police, is adequate to meet the needs of public safety. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98) 
Sec. 10-151. - Taxation. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed and levied upon every purchase of an alcoholic beverage for beverage purposes by the drink within this city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of such beverage. 
(1)  As used in this section, "alcoholic beverage" means any beverage containing distilled spirits. 
(2)  As used in this section, "purchase price" means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including receipts, credit, property or services of any kind whatsoever, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatever. 
(b)  Every licensee or his agent is authorized and directed to collect the tax imposed in this section from the purchaser of alcoholic beverages by the drink within the licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be required by the clerk, chief of police or city manager to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(c)  The tax imposed by this section shall become due and payable from the purchaser at the time of purchase of any alcoholic beverage by the drink. All amounts of such taxes collected shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the tenth day of each month next succeeding the preceding monthly period. A "monthly period," as used in this subsection, shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
(d)  On or before the tenth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the city clerk in such form as the clerk may prescribe by every licensee liable for payment of tax under this section. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, the amount of tax collected on such drinks, and the gross receipts from the sale of food and meals. 
(e)  On or before the tenth day of every month following each monthly period, a report for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every restaurant licensee for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, with the city clerk in such form as the clerk may prescribe, showing the gross receipts of the business, gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages, gross receipts from the sale of meals, and gross receipts from the sale of non-food items. Such report shall be filed notwithstanding that the licensee may have no liability for taxes due under this section, whereupon such report may be used to verify the licensee's continuing eligibility for licenses as a restaurant. 
(f)  The tax imposed under this section shall be paid by brewpub operators in addition to that imposed on wholesale transactions required in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-98-78, § 5, 11-2-98; Ord. No. O-99-48A, § 2, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-99-51, § 2, 12-20-99; Ord. No. O-2017-54 , § 2, 8-21-17) 
Sec. 10-152. - Employee identification. 
(a)  Any person who works serving liquor, wine and/or malt beverages for consumption on the premises, shall be at least 18 years of age, and all such persons shall apply to the police department for an alcoholic beverage employee identification card, which card shall expire 12 months after issuance and shall be renewable on or before that time. An alcoholic beverage employee identification card for serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall be valid for such work at any location within the city having a valid pouring license. As a prerequisite to issuance of an alcoholic beverage employee identification card for serving alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, every applicant shall take and pass an examination, authorized by the chief of police and administered by the police department, designed to assure that the applicant is competent to identify and properly deal with underage and intoxicated customers attempting to purchase alcohol by the drink. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage employees shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other investigating as may be required by the police department. 
(c)  The police department shall investigate the employee application and report any detrimental information to the chief of police. The chief of police may refuse to issue an employee identification card to any proposed employee who has been convicted of a felony within a period of five years immediately prior to the application for an employee identification card, or who has been convicted on two or more misdemeanors within a period of five years immediately prior to the application for an employee identification card, or who has been convicted within a period of five years immediately preceding the application of any of the following offenses: 
(1)  D.U.I.; 
(2)  Pandering, prostitution or soliciting prostitution; 
(3)  Gambling; or 
(4)  Illegal sale of any controlled substance or narcotic. 
(d)  No licensee, agent or outlet manager shall allow or require any person who serves liquor, wine and/or malt beverages for consumption on the premises, to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverages without an alcoholic beverage employee identification card; licensees, agents and outlet managers shall require all such employees to wear or otherwise properly display their alcoholic beverage employee identification cards at all times during working hours. 
(e)  The police chief may provisionally grant an identification card to an applicant, pending investigation and report. Where the report, when received, is unfavorable as set out in subsection (c) of this section, the police chief may revoke the card and demand its return. 
(f)  The chief of police may revoke an identification card should the employee violate any provisions of this article, furnish false or misleading information in the employee's application card or commit conduct adversely affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for an employee whose card has been revoked, when demand for surrender of a card has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy such card. 
(h)  Each employee shall pay a fee of $25.00 for the local record check and identification card. 
(Ord. No. O-98-41, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. O-00-14, § 1, 2-22-00; Ord. No. O-01-72, §§ 1, 2, 11-5-01; Ord. No. O-2011-12, § 2, 4-18-11, eff. 7-1-11) 
Chapter 14 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - AMUSEMENT MACHINES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2010-34, § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2010, repealed former Art. I, § 14-2, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to in general and derived from Code 1977, § 5-2. 

Sec. 14-1. - Class B machines. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. chapter 17 of title 48, specifically O.C.G.A. section 48-17-15(b)(2), a business owner or business operator, as defined by O.C.G.A. section 48-17-1(2.1), may provide more than nine Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. sections 48-17-1(2) and (2.3), in a business location, as defined in O.C.G.A. section 48-17-15(2); provided, however, that these Class B bona fide coin operated amusement machines meet the following criteria: (i) it rewards the player or players with tickets, tokens, or other non-cash representations of value redeemable for merchandise prizes; (ii) the outcome of the game involves some skill in its operation; (iii) the award of tickets, tokens or other non-cash representations of value is based solely on the players achieving the object of the game or player's score; (iv) only merchandise prizes are awarded; (v) the average wholesale value of the prizes awarded in lieu of tickets or tokens for a single play of the machine does not exceed five dollars; and (vi) the redemption value of each ticket, token or other non-cash representation of value that may be accumulated by a player or players to redeem prizes of greater value does not exceed the cost of a single play of the machine. The provisions of this section shall apply only to a business owner or operator holding a local business license/occupation tax registration classified as one or more of the following: bowling alley or bowling center, retail restaurant, or amusement device parlor or arcade. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-34, § 1, 9-20-10) 
Secs. 14-2—14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BILLIARD HALLS, POOL ROOMS, ETC.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Billiard or pool supplies, wholesale, § 26-52. 

Sec. 14-26. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-51, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 2006, repealed § 14-26, which pertained to the duty of a proprietor and derived from Code 1977, § 5-17. 
Sec. 14-27. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  The hours of operation of pool rooms, billiard halls and snooker parlors shall be from 6:00 a.m. until 1:00 a.m. the following morning on each of the weekdays, Monday through Saturday. It shall be unlawful to operate such establishments on weekdays between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  The hours of operation of pool rooms, billiard halls and snooker parlors on Sunday shall be from 12:00 noon until 6:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful to operate such establishments on Sunday from 1:00 a.m. until 12:00 noon of such day, and from 6:00 p.m. of such day until 6:00 a.m. of the following Monday morning. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall not apply to a business which includes a billiard room if the billiard room is not operated during the prohibited hours. 
(Code 1977, § 5-18) 
Secs. 14-28—14-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2010-34, § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2010, repealed Art. III, §§ 14-46—14-48, which pertained to standard amusement device code and derived from Code 1977, §§ 5-31—5-33. 

Secs. 14-46—14-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 14-100. - Purpose. 
The intent of the city council in enacting this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values, on the public health, safety, and welfare of the city, on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This ordinance is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally protected forms of expression. Instead, this article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus any legally protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business, establishment, or activity which would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, printed material, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or in any way relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section of the store, comprising five percent of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material, or an establishment with five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means any establishment which is either expressly specified in this article, or which is other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrols expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or which offers its patrons a service or entertainment of any type which is characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means any business or establishment where employees or dancers display or expose specified anatomical areas to others, or any establishment which features live performances by entertainers or employees where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishment means any adult theater, adult bookstore, adult dancing establishment, adult video store, erotic dance establishment or escort service which conducts business in the city. No adult entertainment establishment shall conduct business in the city without first having obtained a license as set forth in this article. 
Adult theater means any establishment which consists of an enclosed building, or a portion or part of an enclosed building, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies, or other reproductions, whether for sale or for rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or any establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, which is devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter which depicts, describes, or relates in any way to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Employee means a person who works or performs in an adult entertainment establishment, irrespective of whether such person is paid a salary or wage. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater, cafe or other establishment which offers live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau means any business, person, or agency who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit furnishes or offers to furnish the names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments, or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Good moral character means a person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of any felony or any nonfelony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. For the purposes of this definition, conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendre or bond forfeiture when charged with either a felony, or a nonfelony involving moral turpitude. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years of age. 
Specified anatomical areas means acts, conduct or appearances which include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities means acts, conduct or appearances which include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship including sadomasochistic abuse, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, lesbianism, zooerastia; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Secs. 14-102—14-104. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-105. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Douglasville. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this section is committed, continued or permitted by such person. 
(b)  Any adult entertainment establishment, adult business, escort bureau, adult theater, erotic dance establishment or adult video store operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this ordinance shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. In addition to any other penalties or remedies provided in this article, the city may commence an action or actions to enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be considered due cause for the suspension or revocation of any licenses issued by the city to the offending party. Such revocation or suspension shall occur by way of a hearing before the city council as provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-106. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity to engage in, operate, conduct, or carry on in or upon any premises an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, escort bureau, adult or erotic dance establishment, adult theater or adult video store without first having complied with the provisions of this ordinance, or without a currently valid license issued by the city for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued hereunder shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States or under any other ordinance, rule, or regulation of Douglas County. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-107. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, licensee, or other adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult or erotic dance establishment, adult theater, escort bureau, or adult video store to admit or permit the admission of minors into the premises of their adult business or adult entertainment establishment, or to allow a minor to remain within a licensed or unlicensed premises of such a business or establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-108. - Erotic and adult dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic or adult dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An erotic or adult dance establishment shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment shall employ or contract with as a dancer any person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(d)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  An erotic or adult dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and on Saturday from 9:00 a.m. through 1:00 a.m. Erotic and adult dance establishments shall not be open for business on Christmas Day. 
(f)  No erotic or adult dance establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage upon the premises of the licensee. 
(g)  All dancers shall perform only on a platform or stage intended for such purpose which is raised two feet or more from the level of the remainder of the floor. 
(h)  No dancer shall perform closer than ten feet from any patron. 
(i)  No dancer shall solicit any pay, tip or gratuity from any patron; no patron shall directly pay, give or extend any pay, tip or gratuity to any dancer. 
(j)  All areas of an erotic dance establishment shall be fully lighted at all times that patrons are present, entertainment is being provided or erotic dancers are performing. Full lighting as used in this article shall mean illumination equal to at least ten foot-candles per square foot at or above 48 inches from the floor. 
(k)  The violation of any provision of this section by any erotic dancer, licensee or employee at any licensed premises shall constitute grounds for the revocation, suspension or probation of any adult entertainment license issued in regard to the licensed premises. The holder of any license sought to be revoked or suspended shall have the right to a hearing before the city council. The hearing shall be at a regular or special meeting of the city council. The city clerk shall give the holder of the license at least seven days prior written notice of such hearing, and such notice shall state the grounds upon which the license is sought to be revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-109. - Location business requirements. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult or erotic dance establishment, escort bureau, adult theater or adult video store shall be located within the following distance and measurement as defined and stated herein: 
(1)  Within 600 feet of any property zoned residential; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of a church, school, library, civic center, public park, hospital, community club or governmental building; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any establishment or business regulated or defined hereunder; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of an establishment selling alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption; 
(5)  On less than two acres of land having at least 100 feet to frontage upon a public road; 
(6)  All distances referred to in this section shall be measured from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-110. - Employees. 
(a)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments, adult businesses, escort bureaus, adult or erotic dance establishments, adult theaters and adult video stores shall be not less than 18 years of age, and shall be of good moral character as defined in this article. 
(b)  Before any person may work at an adult entertainment establishment, such person must file a notice with the finance director of such intended employment on forms supplied by the finance director and shall receive approval of such employment from the finance director. A nonrefundable fee of $25.00 to partially defray the cost of the investigation and background check shall accompany the notice of intended employment. The prospective employee shall supply such information as required by the finance director, including a set of fingerprints upon forms approved by the city police department. After investigation of the proposed employee and upon approval, the finance director shall cause to be issued to the employee an employee identification card and the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. The employee identification card shall expire upon said person's birthday and be renewable annually thereafter. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, make written notice of appeal of such decision to the city council pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 14-120 of this article. 
(c)  Violations of the provisions of this article, the ordinances of the city, or the laws of the State of Georgia may subject an employee to suspension or revocation of his license for employment. Any employee whose license and identification card is suspended or revoked shall have the right to a hearing before the city council. 
(d)  For the purposes of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of all licensees of an adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult or erotic dance establishments, adult theaters, escort bureaus, or adult video store to file with the Douglasville Police Department the names of all employees with their home addresses and home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees must be filed with the Douglasville Police Department within seven from the date of any such changes. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 5, 12-16-13) 
Secs. 14-111—14-114. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-115. - Application for adult entertainment establishment license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the finance director upon forms supplied by the finance director. At the time of application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the finance director to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. 
(b)  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, or conduct of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 6, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 14-116. - Application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The true full name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable evidence that the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(5)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken with the preceding six months; 
(6)  The business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. If the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the business, occupation and employment records of all partners, directors and officers of such corporation and all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding shall be furnished; 
(7)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, director, officer of a corporation, partner, or shareholder holding five percent of the outstanding stock has previously held a permit or license for adult entertainment, and, if so, whether such previous license had ever been suspended or revoked and the reasons therefor; 
(8)  All criminal convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, to include dates and places of conviction. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation and the certificate of incorporation, together with the names and addresses of all officers and directors, and the names and addresses of all stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the names, addresses, and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this article pertaining to corporations shall apply. An applicant which is a corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all applications forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(10)  The name and address of the owner or lessor of the property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, directors and stockholders of more than five percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation if the applicant is a corporation; 
(12)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers, directors or stockholders of more than five percent of the outstanding stock of the corporation have ever been convicted of any felony, or of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, in the preceding five years and, if so, a complete description of such crime, including dates of violation, dates of conviction, jurisdiction and disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed. 
(13)  Individual applicants shall furnish fingerprints upon forms approved by the Douglasville Police Department; 
(14)  If the applicant is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded; 
(15)  The address of the premises to be licensed; 
(16)  A plat by a surveyor or engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the surrounding zoning and the proximity of the premises to any nearby church, school, public park, governmental building or other business regulated under this article or any nearby business licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
(17)  Each application for an adult entertainment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If the applicant is a partnership, by a general partner or managing partner; 
c.  If the applicant is a corporation, by its president or chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-117. - Application; investigation; grant of license. 
The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city clerk shall cause the matter to be placed upon the agenda of the next regularly scheduled council meeting for action by the city council. The city council may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  All required fees have been paid; there are no unpaid ad valorem taxes owed re the property upon which the proposed location is to be located; and the applicant owes no unpaid ad valorem taxes to the City of Douglasville; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted of a felony or of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not had a prior permit or license for adult entertainment revoked or suspended by any governmental body; 
(6)  The building and location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment is in compliance with all applicable laws or ordinances, including health, zoning, prohibited distances and fire and safety codes; 
(7)  The applicant is at least twenty one (21) years of age; 
(8)  That on the date the business for which a license is sought commences business, and at all times thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(9)  That the proposed location is not within the prohibited distance as set forth in this article from any church, school, library, governmental building, residential property, or business regulated under this article. 
(10)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or of any other law, ordinance or regulation of the city or the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-118. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all fees and taxes for a business at the proposed location; 
(2)  Any person not of good moral character as defined in this article; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding issued shares of the corporation, is not of moral character as defined in this article; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose partners are not of good moral character as defined in this article. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as set forth in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 U.S. 50, 81). 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-119. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-120. - License; denial by finance director; appeal. 
(a)  If the finance director, after investigation of the applicant, determines that the applicant does not meet the requirements as set forth in this article, the finance director need not place such application on an agenda for city council action, but shall send written notice to the applicant that the license is denied and state the reasons for such denial. Any applicant denied a permit by the finance director may appeal such decision to the city council as set forth in this article. 
(b)  The applicant may, within ten days of notification of an adverse decision, submit a notice of appeal to the finance director. Said notice of appeal shall be in writing, addressed to the city council, shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of the original application and any amended applications, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof); the basis of the appeal, and the action requested of the city council. 
(c)  The finance director, after timely receipt of a notice of appeal, shall place the appeal on the agenda of a regular or special city council meeting occurring not less than seven nor more than 30 days after receipt of the notice of appeal. The finance director shall notify the applicant in writing of the date and time set for the hearing on appeal. 
(d)  Whenever the finance director has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the city council shall receive such relevant testimony or other evidence from the applicant, from city employees, interested parties, or other persons having relevant evidence. The city council shall not be bound by formal rules of evidence as used in courts of law. The applicant shall have the right to present evidence and to question or examine witnesses. 
(e)  The city council may sustain, modify or overrule the decision complained of. The decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 3, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 14-121. - Restrictions on transferability and addition of additional partners or shareholders. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be sold, given, transferred, or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, gift, transfer, or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license, and who wish to carry on the business by their service in a managing capacity, may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or shareholder without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the new licensee shall immediately notify the city clerk in writing. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of such a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred, or assigned. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the name or location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-122. - Forfeiture of license for nonuse. 
Any holder of an adult entertainment license hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized by the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized by the license, shall, upon completion of said three months period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of said failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity of any further action on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-123. - License fee. 
The annual license fee for an adult entertainment license shall be $5,000.00. Said license fee shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall not be prorated. Licenses are not transferrable. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-124. - Annual renewal required. 
All licenses hereunder shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall expire on December 31st of each year. All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms provided by the city. The fee to renew an adult entertainment license shall be $5,000.00. Applications for renewal shall be filed with the finance director on forms provided by the finance director between October 15th and November 15th of each year, together with the renewal fee. Any application for renewal of an adult entertainment license not received by the finance director by November 15th shall result in a late filing fee of $500.00 being assessed against the licensee. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 3, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 14-125. - Zones where establishment permitted. 
No adult entertainment establishment, adult business, adult video store, bathhouse, or escort bureau shall be located on any premises unless the location has been zoned C-2 under the zoning laws of City of Douglasville. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Sec. 14-126. - Severability and conflict. 
Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Should any section or provision of this article be in conflict with any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or law, then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. O-93-15, § 1, 7-6-93) 
Chapter 18 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , adopted June 20, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1, 18-2, 18-31—18-34, 18-51—18-56, 18-76—18-79, 18-101, 18-102, 18-131—18-137, 18-156, 18-157, 18-176—18-179, 18-201—18-204, 18-231, 18-232, 18-251—18-256, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for a detailed history of derivation. 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate, license animals and fowl, § 1.03(o). 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; environment, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58; animals in parks, § 62-42; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Animals, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the "City of Douglasville Animals Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases have the following meanings for the purpose of this chapter: 
(1)  Abandonment (of an animal): The act of any person who: 
a.  Abandons an animal by leaving an animal unattended for a period of time in excess of 24 hours without food, water, adequate ventilation or shelter on public or private property, including but not limited to the property of the owner/custodian. 
b.  Puts out, leaves, abandons, or in any other way discards any animal on public or private property, including but not limited to the property of the owner/custodian, and including but not limited to leaving an animal contained in a box, bag, fence, house or other structure or tethered; or 
c.  Places an animal in the custody of a state licensed entity, such as but not limited to a veterinary clinic, grooming facility, boarding or other care, and fails to reclaim the animal by the agreed upon time. The entity shall abide by the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 44-14-490 in disposing of the animal. 
(2)  Adequate: Sufficient; commensurate; equally efficient; equal to what is required; suitable to the case or occasion; satisfactory. 
(3)  Adequate exercise: Bodily exertion suitable to the age, size, species and breed of animal to maintain normal good health, muscle tone, non-aggressive temperament, and normal behavior. 
(4)  Adequate or humane care: Attention to the needs of an animal, including but not limited to, the provision of adequate water, food, shelter, bedding, sanitary conditions, ventilation, heating/cooling (temperature control), space, exercise, and veterinary medical attention necessary to maintain the health of the animal with regard to the specific age, size, species, and breed of animal. 
(5)  Adequate shelter: Protective cover for a domestic animal appropriate for the species and providing adequate space to maintain the animal in good health, which also prevents pain, suffering or a significant risk to the animal's health. 
"Adequate shelter" includes but is not limited to the following: sufficient coverage and insulation to protect an animal from extreme hot and cold temperatures; sufficient protection from the elements to keep the animal dry; sufficient shade and ventilation to prevent an animal from overheating and/or dehydrating; and adequate bedding or resting area suitable for the breed, species, age, size, and medical condition of the animal. 
"Adequate shelter" is structurally sound housing which provides an animal with: 
a.  Adequate space; 
b.  Four solid walls or an "igloo" type of structure; 
c.  A roof; 
d.  A dry floor that is either: solid or grids, provided the animal can easily stand, walk, lay and sit on the grids without its feet or body parts being caught, damaged, or injured. The grids and area under the grids must be designed so that they can be cleaned and sanitized. 
e.  Adequate ventilation; 
f.  An entrance; and 
g.  Adequate space for the number of animals on the property. 
Materials not suitable for shelters include, but are not limited to: inadequately insulated containers; crates with exposed sharp edges; metal or plastic drums; abandoned or parked vehicles; porches or decks; lean-tos; any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection from the elements; and any other structure that is not safe or suitable for housing the species. 
(6)  Adequate ventilation: Fresh air sufficient to provide for the health of an animal. 
(7)  Adequate water: Clean, fresh water sufficient to prevent dehydration, properly sustain health, and prevent significant risk to the animal's health. For the purposes of this chapter, snow, ice or rancid/contaminated water are not considered adequate water. 
(8)  Animal: Any description of vertebrate, excluding Homo sapiens. 
(9)  Animal bite: Any physical contact of the teeth, nails, or claws of an animal with human flesh, including but not limited to a scrape, puncture, pierce, scratch or tear, so long as bleeding results. 
(10)  Animal control department: The Douglas County Animal Control Department. 
(11)  Animal establishment: Any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
(12)  Animal shelter: Any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society, or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
(13)  At large: Any animal is at large when it is not under control as provided herein. 
(14)  Auctions: Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as herein defined. 
(15)  Breeder: A person or entity that owns an animal and allows it to reproduce, whether planned or unplanned. 
(16)  Confinement: Restriction of an animal to a home, basement garage, building, pen, or other escape-proof enclosure. Confinement by a rope, chain, tether, fenced yard or other area accessible by other animals or persons, other than the caretaker, is not considered confinement. 
(17)  Cruelty: Every act, omission or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
(18)  Fence: A structure of wire, wood, stone or other materials, including invisible fencing, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against the passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. 
A fence does not include an "invisible fence" if the fence is: 
a.  Turned off or the animal is not wearing a properly operating signaling device; 
b.  Ineffective for any animal that has learned it can cross the fence line; 
c.  Intended to be a means of keeping people or animals out of an enclosed area; or 
d.  Buried in or adjacent to the county right-of-way. 
e.  An invisible fence is not an acceptable means of control for an animal that is classified as vicious, dangerous, potentially dangerous, or is in estrus/heat. 
(19)  Fowl: Any warm-blooded, feathered, flying or nonflying animal. 
(20)  Give away or donate: with regard to an animal, to transfer ownership of the animal without receiving money or other valuable consideration other than a license fee or payment for prospective spaying or neutering for the animal transferred; the terms exclude payment of any adoption fee to the authorized licensing agent for the city. 
(21)  Humane manner: Care of an animal to include, but not to be limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species and breed. 
(22)  Kennel: Any premises wherein any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee or selling animals. 
(23)  Licensing authority: The agency or department of the county or any designated representative thereof charged with administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under the provisions of this chapter. 
(24)  Livestock: Any animal that has hooves. 
(25)  Neutered: Incapable of sexual reproduction. 
(26)  Nuisance: An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
a.  Damages, soils, defiles or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
b.  Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions; 
c.  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; 
d.  Molests, attacks or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; or 
e.  Chases vehicles or attacks other animals. 
(27)  Owner: Any person owning, keeping or harboring one or more animals. An animal shall be deemed to be harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
(28)  Performing animal exhibition: Any spectacle, display, act or event other than circuses, in which performing animals are used. 
(29)  Pet: Any animal kept for pleasure, excluding livestock. 
(30)  Pet shop: Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
(31)  Potentially dangerous dog means: Any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to make unprovoked attacks, cause injuries or otherwise threaten the safety of any human being. Potentially dangerous dog shall also mean any dog which, when unprovoked, inflicts a bite upon a human being or chases or approaches a human being on any public property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of an attack. 
(32)  Primary enclosure: Any structure or device used to restrict an animal to a limited amount of space, such as a fence building, room, pen, run, cage, stall, paddock, or pasture that provides adequate space and shelter. 
(33)  Proper enclosure: An enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog, potentially dangerous dog or vicious animal securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of another animal or any person other that the owner or caretaker. The enclosure must: 
a.  Be designed to prevent the animal from escaping, and 
1.  If the enclosure is a fence, the fence must be high enough to keep the animal from climbing over and must be secured at the bottom to keep the animal from digging under. 
2.  If the enclosure is a pen or structure other than a fence, the pen or structure must have secure sides, top and bottom constructed or secured in such a manner to prevent the animal's escape, and be of a height and strength to maintain the animal within it. 
b.  Provide adequate shelter. 
c.  Provide adequate space for the animal. 
(34)  Provoked attacked: An attack resulting when a domestic animal is placed in a situation such that an expected reaction would be to bite or attack. 
(35)  Responsible person: Any accountable human being. 
(36)  Restraint: See "under control." 
(37)  Spayed: Incapable of sexual reproduction. 
(38)  Tether: Any chain, rope, leash, tie out or wire designed to restrain an animal which is attached to an animal's collar or halter and is also attached to a stationary object. 
(39)  Under control: Any animal shall be considered under control if it is confined by fence, pen, cage or secure enclosure to the premises of its owner, or is secured by a leash, chain or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from the premises of its owner, or is restrained by leash, chain or lead or confined in an automobile when away from the premises of the owner. 
(40)  Unprovoked attack or without provocation: An attack that is not provoked as defined by this chapter. 
(41)  Veterinary clinic or hospital: A clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
(42)  Vicious animal: Any animal that attacks or attempts to attack without provocation a human being or domestic animal. This phrase shall not be construed to include dogs that are part of a governmental operation, nor a professionally trained certified guard dog in the performance of its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person. 
(43)  Wild and exotic animals: Include any monkey or other nonhuman primate, such as raccoon, skunk, wolf, wolf-hybrid, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, ferret, bear, wild rabbit, tarantula, wild rodent, and reptiles, including, but not limited to, crocodiles, alligators, snakes, caiman, and gavials, and any other animal so designated by the animal control department. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-3—18-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 18-20. - Generally. 
(a)  No person or business shall own, keep, harbor or permit to be kept or harbored a wild or exotic animal within the county, other than licensed animal establishments which are approved in writing by the animal control department, which licenses may granted upon presentation of evidence satisfactory to the animal control department that appropriate safeguards for protection of the public are maintained. 
(b)  The provisions of this section for licensure shall not apply to any person or business that is required to be licensed and permitted by state and/or federal agencies for keeping and maintaining wild or exotic animals, where it appears that such person or facility is in fact continuously so licensed and/or permitted. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-21. - Sales. 
Any animal establishment approved by the animal control department for offering for sale any wild and exotic animal shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display a notice in form and substance approved by the animal control department that no person may lawfully own, keep, harbor or permit to be kept or harbored, any wild and exotic animal within the county, including any monkey or other nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, wolf, wolf-hybrid, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, ferret, bear, wild rabbit and wild rodent, and reptiles including but not limited to crocodiles, alligators, caiman, and gavials, and any other animals so designated by the animal control department. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-22. - Impoundment. 
(a)  The animal control department may impound any wild or exotic animal that is owned, kept or harbored in violation of this chapter, and may destroy or rehabilitate any such animal upon conviction of its owner or other responsible person for a violation of this article, notwithstanding the impoundment provisions of this chapter, provided no such animal may be destroyed without first obtaining approval of the city's governing authority. 
(b)  Any wild or exotic animal impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article shall remain impounded or confined by the animal control department until a final order of disposition is entered by a court of competent jurisdiction with respect to the violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-23. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in the sum of $100.00 for each day such violation continues, together with all costs of court and a ten-dollar fee per day for board for each day the animal is impounded in the animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-24—18-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VACCINATION 

Sec. 18-30. - Generally. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the county unless such dog or cat is vaccinated as herein provided. 
(b)  The animal control department shall maintain a record of all certificates issued. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-31. - Rabies vaccination. 
(a)  All dogs and cats over three months of age within the county shall be vaccinated against rabies and revaccinated as recommended by the current State of Georgia Rabies Control Compendium by a licensed veterinarian according to the type of vaccine and the duration of its effectiveness. The veterinarian will issue to the owner a durable metal tag and a certificate of vaccination approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Tags must be attached to the collar or harness of the dog or cat and be worn at all times. Tags are not transferable from one dog or cat to another dog or cat. 
(b)  The animal control department may adopt such other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-32. - Health regulations incorporated. 
All rules and regulations of the Douglas County Board of Health and the Georgia Department of Human Resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-33. - Kennel license fees. 
Applicants for kennel licenses shall pay fees annually in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  Kennel, per kennel: $25.00; 
(2)  During "responsible pet owners month," the applicant for a kennel license shall pay one-half of the fee provided in the applicable category provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-34—18-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESTRAINT 

Sec. 18-40. - Maintenance of premises and disturbing noises. 
(a)  An owner of an animal shall maintain the area in which such animal is kept in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens or any areas in which animals are confined or maintained shall be cleaned regularly so that they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing within a reasonable distance of said premises, and the animals themselves shall be restrained in such a fashion that noise emanating therefrom shall not be disturbing to such persons. 
(b)  Any animal which barks, whines, howls or causes other objectionable noise in succession for a period, although not necessarily constant or continuous, of 20 minutes or more on more than one occasion, or which is at large or chases or runs after persons or vehicles, or which destroys or damages any property of another person, or which causes serious annoyance to a neighboring resident and interferes with reasonable use and enjoyment of his property, or which is otherwise offensive so as to create a nuisance, shall be deemed to be a nuisance and a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(c)  If any two citizens of the city, not residing in the same household, shall sign and file with the municipal court an affidavit stating that an animal, which resides or is commonly kept or housed within audible distance of their residences or places of business has become a nuisance as defined in subsection (b) of this section, the owner or keeper of that animal shall be summoned into the municipal court to answer the charge made by the affidavits and show cause why such animal owner should not be found in violation of this section. 
(1)  After such an affidavit is filed in the municipal court, the court shall notify animal control. An animal control officer or other agent of the city authorized by the city governing authority will personally serve a summons to appear in municipal court upon the animal owner. 
(2)  The summons shall state the offense alleged, the name of the accused, the time and place of the trial, the date of the offense, the date of service; shall bear an identifying number by which it is filed with the court and be signed by the county agent who completed and served it. 
(d)  The owner of any animal found by the court to be in violation of this section may be punished in accordance with section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-41. - Animal or fowl enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, control, or possess any pasture or enclosure for animal or fowl where such enclosure boundary is within 200 feet of any residence or place of business within the city. All pastures or enclosures shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-42. - Confinement of animals generally, vicious animals, etc. 
(a)  An owner of a domesticated animal, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall confine such domesticated animal within an adequate fence or enclosure or within a house, garage or other building to prevent the animal from running at large. No animal shall be tied or tethered as a permanent measure of restraint. No animal shall be left unattended on a chain, lead, runner, cable, rope, leash or similar tethering device. 
(b)  An owner of a dog or cat, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall prevent such dog or cat from becoming a danger to persons or property at any location, or trespassing upon another persons' property without that person's permission. 
(c)  An owner of a dog or cat, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall prevent such dog or cat from running at large upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or other public places in the city. 
(d)  An animal, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, not under control as provided in this chapter which attacks or attempts to attack without provocation a human being or domestic animal is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or ordered confined by the animal control department for a period of 30 days, provided that, if an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any such animal for any violation of this chapter, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that such animal be humanely destroyed. 
(e)  Any owner of a vicious animal, whether vaccinated or not vaccinated, shall confine it within a building or secure enclosure sufficient to prevent the animal from escaping and to prevent a person or another animal from entering the enclosure and not release it therefrom unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint by a person who is at least 18 years of age or older. Any vicious animal not under control as provided in this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and may be impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or confined by the animal control department for a period of 30 days, provided that, if an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended within the discretion of the animal control department until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any such vicious animal for any violation of this chapter, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that such animal be humanely destroyed. 
(f)  Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure or in a veterinary clinic or hospital or in a kennel in such a manner that such female dog or cat cannot come into contact with another dog or cat, except for intentional breeding purposes. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow such owner's dog or cat to enter any food store or place where food is exhibited for sale, except those animals trained for the blind and hearing impaired. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chickens, ducks, horses, cows, goats, pigs or any other type of animal, livestock or other fowl within the city to permit them to run at large or be a menace or nuisance to such person's neighbors or the public in general. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-43. - Rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies. 
(a)  Every veterinarian shall report promptly to the Georgia Development of Human Resources and the animal control department all cases of rabies in animals treated by such veterinarian, giving the name and address of the owner. Every veterinarian shall also report the names and addresses of the owner of any animals bitten by such rabid animal, so far as known. 
(b)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report such information, to the extent known, to the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the animal control department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals or other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal or person has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to incarcerate or impound the animal in the facility of some competent veterinarian within this city, where the animal shall be held for observation for such period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether the animal is infected with rabies. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-44—18-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CRUELTY 

Sec. 18-50. - Prohibited treatment; removal of mistreated animals; payment of expenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either by commission or omission, to: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal; 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal with adequate food and veterinary care; 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal with access to adequate shelter consisting of not less than three walls and a roof adequate to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily; 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal access to adequate water at all times; 
(5)  Abandon any animal; 
(6)  Intentionally poison any animal; 
(7)  Allow or promote any fight between animals, or to allow or permit any such fight in or upon any premises in such person's possession or under such person's control; 
(8)  Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions; 
(9)  Keep or confine an animal in other than a humane manner; 
(10)  No animal may be transported in the back of a pickup truck without the pickup truck bed being enclosed or the animal confined so that it may not jump, fall or be injured in any manner. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-51. - Prohibition of sale or giveaway of animals in front of local businesses or stores. 
(a)  Generally. Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any business or store to allow any person to sell or give away any animal in front of any business or store in the city. Except as provided in subsection (b), it shall be unlawful for any person to give away or sell any animal in front of any business, store or on the side of any public roadway in the city. 
(b)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Animals, other than wild or exotic animals and other than vicious or dangerous animals, may be sold or given away by any animal establishment immediately in front of its own business or store, provided the animal establishment has a temporary permit for outdoor display of merchandise in connection with a special sales event. 
(2)  Animals, other than wild or exotic animals and other than vicious or dangerous animals, may be given away by any person immediately in front of the business or store of an animal establishment, provided that: 
a.  The donor has the written permission of the business licensee of the animal establishment and the owner of the outdoor area where such activity will take place; and 
b.  Such donation activity is conducted only during hours when the animal establishment is open to the public for business; and 
c.  The animal establishment has free written information regarding animal licensing and vaccination available to the public inside the business or store. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-52—18-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 18-60. - Permit required; term; removal; one per establishment; display. 
(a)  No person shall operate an animal establishment without first obtaining a permit from the animal control department in compliance with this chapter, nor may any person operate an animal establishment in a manner in violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  The license period shall begin with the first day of the calendar year and shall run for one year. Renewal application for permits shall be made 30 days prior to and up to 60 days after January first of each year. Application for a permit for a new establishment under the provisions of this chapter shall be made within 60 days of the start of business or operation. 
(c)  Every facility regulated by this article shall be considered a separate enterprise, requiring an individual permit (e.g., two kennels at different locations but owned by the same person shall be considered as two animal establishments). 
(d)  Permits obtained in accordance with this article shall be displayed in a prominent location on the premises of the animal establishment. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or gratuitously distribute any animal, fowl or reptile in a public place without a license or permit as set forth in this article. This prohibition shall include but shall not be limited to such distribution in commercial areas and along public roadways. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the gratuitous distribution of pets from private residential areas. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-61. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Each animal establishment shall annually file an application for permit with the animal control department within the time periods provided by this chapter, provided that all preexisting establishments shall have 90 days from the effective date of this chapter to file such application. 
(b)  The permit application shall be made on a form provided by and available from the animal control department. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a completed application, the animal control department shall make an inspection of the facility to ensure that all animals are provided for in a humane manner and that the establishment is in compliance with all provisions of this chapter. The animal control department shall be permitted to make such inspection at any reasonable time during normal business hours. 
(d)  The animal control department shall either issue or decline to issue a permit to the applicant. If a permit is not granted, it shall notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial. 
(e)  Any animal establishment denied a permit may not reapply for a period of at least 30 days. Each reapplication shall describe any previous denial or revocation. 
(f)  If an applicant is shown to have withheld or falsified any material information on any application, the animal control department may refuse to issue or is entitled to revoke any permit. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-62. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The animal control department may revoke any permit if the person holding the permit refuses or fails to comply with this chapter, or any other law or regulation governing the protection and keeping of animals, including refusal to allow inspection of the animal establishment as provided in this article. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is revoked for cause, or pending any proceedings to contest such action, the animal control department shall have power of entry to inspect all premises where the animals are being kept and shall notify the owner in writing as to the period of time that reasonably shall be allowed for removal of animals from such premises and shall state the specific reasons for revocation. In the event any such owner shall fail to remove such animals as directed, the animal control department may impound such animals pursuant to the impoundment provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-63. - Compliance with Code. 
(a)  An animal establishment shall not sell, trade or give away any dog or cat over three months of age unless the dog or cat has been vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(b)  The animal control department shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the premises where such animals are kept, other than those animal establishments exempted by section 18-66 hereof, at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Animal establishments exempted as provided in section 18-66 may be inspected by the animal control department upon receipt by the animal control department of a request to make inspection from any state and/or federal agencies which license and/or permit such establishments, which inspection may be made at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all regulations pertaining thereto. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-64. - Standards for kennels. 
All kennels shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for kennels are as follows: 
(1)  Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting. 
(2)  Building temperature shall be maintained at a comfortable level. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained. 
(3)  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top of cages. 
(4)  Cages are to be of material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing. 
(5)  Cage floors shall be of concrete, unless radiantly heated, and shall have a resting board or some type of bedding. 
(6)  Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface. 
(7)  All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition. 
(8)  The food shall be free from contamination, and shall be wholesome, palatable and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal. 
(9)  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-65. - Standards for pet shops. 
All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall in addition to the other requirements of this chapter comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for pet shops are as follows: 
(1)  Water. There shall be available hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees for washing cages and disinfecting, and cold water easily accessible to all parts of the shop. Fresh water for consumption shall be available to all species of animals at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
(2)  Room temperature. The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for every species of animal kept in the shop. 
(3)  Cages and enclosures. All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn and stretch out to such animal's full length. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-66. - Exemptions. 
Any animal establishment as defined herein that is required to be licensed and permitted by state and/or federal law, and which is in fact continuously so licensed and/or permitted, shall be exempt from sections 18-60, 18-61 and 18-62 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-67—18-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES 

Sec. 18-70. - Health of the animal. 
No animal shall be permitted to pull any carriage unless the animal is in good health and meets at least the following requirements: 
(1)  All draft animals must weigh at least 1,000 pounds. 
(2)  The animal must have no major open sores or wounds and not be lame or have any other ailment, unless a veterinarian states in writing that the animal shall not be affected unduly by the proposed work. 
(3)  The hooves of the animal must be properly shod and trimmed. 
(4)  The animal must be groomed daily and not have fungus, dandruff or a poor or dirty coat. 
(5)  The animals must have adequate flesh and muscle tone. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-71. - Animal working conditions. 
(a)  No animal shall be worked under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  No animal shall be permitted to draw a carriage equipped with ball bearing wheels which hauls more than 12 people (including the driver) or a carriage equipped with bushing wheels which hauls more than nine people (including the driver). 
(2)  Total hours worked may not exceed eight in any twenty-four-hour period, with fifteen-minute rest periods between each trip, if the animal is used to haul people or goods. 
(3)  Between the dates of June 1 and August 31, total hours worked by any animal shall not exceed six in a twenty-four-hour period with a fifteen-minute rest for every hour worked. 
(4)  The animal pulling a carriage shall not move at a speed faster than a slow trot. 
(5)  No animal shall work with equipment causing an impairment of vision, other than normal blinders. 
(6)  No animal shall be subject to any condition which will impair the good health and physical condition of the animal. 
(b)  The animal control department may order the temporary suspension of the operation of any animal-drawn vehicle upon a determination that special circumstances exist which jeopardize the safety of the animal, such as bad weather or other environmental problems. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-72. - Equipment and facilities. 
Equipment and facilities with respect to animal-drawn vehicles must meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  The harness and bit shall be of standard construction and appropriate for the animal. It shall be properly fitted, padded and maintained, and kept free of makeshift wire, sisal rope and chain. The harness must be oiled and cleaned so as to be soft at all times. 
(2)  Carriages must be properly lubricated and wheels must spin freely. 
(3)  No driver may whip any animal with more than a light touch by a light whip. 
(4)  Adequate water shall be provided in the working area and stables at all times. 
(5)  Drivers of animal-drawn vehicles shall maintain stands in a sanitary condition at all times. 
(6)  Stalls and stables must comply with the following: 
a.  Ceilings in stalls and stables must be at least ten feet high from bedding and flooring. Bedding therein must be at least six inches deep and dry enough so as not to show wetness under the pressure of the animal's hoofs. Sharp surfaces shall not be permitted in any area or building where they may come in contact with the animals. 
b.  Roofs must be kept free of leaks. 
c.  Each animal must have a stall large enough for the animal to turn around. 
d.  Food must be kept free of contamination. 
e.  Animal areas must be treated to exterminate and repel insects. 
f.  Ventilation must be provided in hot weather. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-73. - Inspections. 
The animal control department shall be permitted to inspect all animals, carriages, stalls and stables at any reasonable time to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-74—18-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPOUNDMENT; ADOPTION 

Sec. 18-80. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any animal at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be impounded in the animal shelter in a humane manner, for a period of not less than three days. If within such time an animal so impounded has not been reclaimed by its owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, such animal shall become the absolute property of the animal control department, which may convey ownership of such animal to any responsible person on such conditions as the animal control department may prescribe, or the animal control department may humanely destroy such animal. 
(b)  An animal control officer may follow an animal that has been seen by that officer running at large onto private property to capture and impound that animal. No injunction, action or claim for damages may be brought against the animal control department or its officers, agents or employees with respect to actions herein contemplated. 
(c)  The animal control department shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of any animal impounded in the animal shelter that the animal has been impounded, the manner by which the animal may be reclaimed, and that the animal may be destroyed and shall become the property of the animal control department as provided herein. 
(d)  Following the impoundment of an animal found at large which animal has on it its owner's address and prior to its destruction, the animal control authority shall give the owner five days' notice of the proposed destruction by certified letter, return receipt requested. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the animal control department may refuse to release any animal impounded in the animal shelter for rabies or contagious disease quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution, for such time period as the animal control department may determine. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the animal control department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the animal control department reasonably believes that destruction of the animal is necessary to prevent disease or injury to the animals or to humans due to overcrowding in the animal shelter, the presence or threatened presence of contagious disease, the likelihood of danger or injury to humans or animals, or any other condition. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the animal control department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the animal control department reasonably believes the animal has sustained an injury or disease which will likely result in maiming, prolonged and/or severe suffering or death. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-81. - Reclaiming impounded animals. 
(a)  The owner of an animal impounded in the animal shelter may reclaim the animal, upon presenting evidence satisfactory to the animal control department of compliance with all provisions of this chapter, and upon payment of fees and charges as hereinafter provided, credited to the account of the animal control department, and which fees and charges shall not be in lieu of any fine or penalty otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Fees for reclaiming impounded animals shall be as follows: 
(1)  Vaccinated dogs or cats: 
First offense ..... $ 25.00 
Second offense ..... 35.00 
Third offense ..... 70.00 
Subsequent offense ..... 100.00 
(2)  Unvaccinated dogs or cats: 
First offense ..... $ 35.00 
Second offense ..... 70.00 
Third offense ..... 200.00 
Subsequent offense ..... 250.00 
(3)  Rabbits, poultry and birds: 
Each offense ..... $25.00 
(4)  Other animals: 
Each offense ..... $45.00 
(5)  Animals impounded for rabies quarantine or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution: 
Per day ..... $10.00 
(6)  In addition to the foregoing fees, the per-day board for each day the animal is impounded in the animal shelter: 
Per day ..... $10.00 
(c)  The owner of an animal impounded in the animal shelter shall be liable for the foregoing fees and charges, notwithstanding the destruction or adoption of the animal. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-82. - Adoption. 
The animal control department may convey ownership (permit adoption of) any animal which has become the property of the animal control department to a responsible person subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the animal control department, including, but without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control department that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other disease administered; 
(2)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control department that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-83—18-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-90. - Enforcement responsibility. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the animal control department and by the county sheriff's department. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-91. - Interference. 
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control department or any other officer in the performance of its duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of the animal control department, except as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-92. - Right of entry. 
(a)  The animal control officers, sheriff's deputies and other enforcement officers of the county are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this chapter, including but not limited to an animal that has bitten a person within ten days. 
(b)  The animal control department may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle between the dates of May 1 and September 30. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the animal control department or its officers for this action. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-93. - Summons. 
Representatives of the animal control department and officers of the city police department are hereby authorized to issue a summons to any person for violation of any provision of this chapter. The summons shall be in a form approved by the city municipal court clerk, shall designate the offense charged and shall require the person so charged to appear before the city municipal court on a date certain to answer the charges therein contained. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-94. - Penalties for violations. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $800.00, and public service work not to exceed 100 hours (work to be performed at the animal shelter). If such violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Sec. 18-95. - Equipment. 
The animal control department is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but without limitation to, humane wire box traps; and the animal control department may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-96—18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - RECORDS 

Sec. 18-100. - Required to be kept. 
It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-101—18-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ANIMAL ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 18-110. - Animal control advisory board. 
The Douglas County Board of Commissioners maintains an animal control advisory board, for which the city's governing authority appoints two members. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-111—18-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - INJUNCTION 

Sec. 18-120. - No injunction against department. 
No injunction shall be granted against the animal control department, or any of its officers or agents, except upon court order after due notice and proper hearing. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Secs. 18-121—18-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL 

Sec. 18-130. - Adoption of the responsible dog ownership law. 
The city does hereby adopt and expressly incorporate herein by reference, the terms and provisions of the Georgia Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-1 through 4-8-33. The city does further set and establish the penalties therein stated and does approve and adopt the charging of a registration fee and confiscation fee for dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. The city does further repeal only those portions of the city animal control ordinance that are expressly inconsistent with the terms and provisions of the responsible dog ownership law. 
(Ord. No. O-2016-27, § 1(Exh. A) , 6-20-16) 
Chapter 22 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-96-48, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 1996, amended the Code by repealing Arts. I—X, and enacting provisions designated as Art. I, §§ 22-1—22-5. Sections 2 and 3 of said ordinance renumbered Arts. XII and XIII as Arts. II and III, and section 4 repealed Art; XIV, §§ 22-456—22-462, which pertained to excavating and trenching. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Charter reference— Authority to prescribe building regulations, § 1.03(m). 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26; fallout protection required in public buildings, § 30-41; community development, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; building official appointed to administer flood chapter, § 46-62; fair housing, § 50-36 et seq.; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; house numbering, § 74-136 et seq.; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - STANDARD CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, adopted May 19, 1997, amended Art. I, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. I pertained to similar subject matter. Subsequently, Ord. No. O-97-79, §§ 1—17, amended Art. I by renumbering various sections and adding provisions. See also the editor's note at Ch. 22 and the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 22-1. - Standard codes enforced. 
For the purpose of establishing standards for the design, erection, construction, maintenance and alteration of buildings, housing and other structures, the City of Douglasville enforces the mandatory State Minimum Standard Codes, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i), as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, including the following: 
(1)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code (International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(2)  Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Georgia State Amendments); 
(3)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code (International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(4)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(5)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code (International Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(6)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code (International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments); 
(7)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code (National Electrical Code with Georgia State Amendments); and 
(8)  Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code (International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Amendments). 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-07-42, § 1, 7-16-07) 
Sec. 22-2. - Additional standard codes adopted. 
There is hereby adopted the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-07-42, § 1, 7-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-64, § 1, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 22-3. - Fire code adopted. 
There is hereby adopted by the city the National Fire Protection Association Code, 2004 edition. 
(Ord. No. O-97-79, § 16, 12-1-97; Ord. No. O-04-43, § 3, 10-4-04) 
Sec. 22-4. - Permit and inspection of fire sprinkler and standpipe system. 
All fire prevention sprinkler system and standpipe systems shall require a permit from the building official prior to installation and shall be inspected by the appropriate official upon installation. The prices of such permit and inspection fees shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be maintained on file by the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 15, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-5. - Wire mesh in building slabs. 
All building slabs shall have incorporated therein ten by ten welded mesh wire throughout. 
(Ord. No. O-97-79, § 17, 12-1-97; Ord. No. O-07-44, § 1, 8-2-07) 
Sec. 22-6. - Electrical permit required. 
Any person, except a public utility company operating under a franchise, installing line wires, meters, signal and/or communicating systems, before doing any electrical wiring or making additions to or alterations in existing electrical wiring shall file written notice at the building official's office, stating fully the nature of the work to be done and the owner of and location of the property where the work is to be done, and obtain a permit to do the work outlined. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 14, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-7. - Issuance of electrical permits restricted. 
No electrical work permit shall be issued to any person who shall not be a duly licensed electric wiring contractor. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 13, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-8. - Concealment of electrical work. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal or cause to be concealed, in such manner that the building official cannot satisfy himself that the provisions of this article have been complied with, any electrical wiring until after the wiring has been inspected and approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 12, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-9. - Inspections required. 
Upon the completion of any electrical wiring installation, and before the same may be connected to a source of electrical service, the same shall be inspected and approved by the building official as being in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 11, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-10. - Certificate of approval. 
Upon approval of an electrical wiring installation, the building official shall issue a certificate of approval therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 10, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-11. - Temporary electrical and gas connections. 
No electrical or gas connection shall be instituted or maintained for any building or structure without a certificate of occupancy absent the permission of the building official. For a building or structure which is substantially complete, permission may be granted by the building official for temporary electrical or gas service and for use of an electrical meter or a gas meter, for a period of time not exceeding 90 days. For new construction projects on lots where the building or structure is not substantially complete, a permit may be granted by the building official for a temporary electrical pole to be set and used, provided that no electrical line shall be run or maintained above ground across any public street or across property owned or occupied by any person other than the user of the temporary pole. For every new building or structure served with gas, temporary gas service shall be secured prior to final inspection of the connection by the building official. The building official may require an affidavit and completion other appropriate applications and forms prior to grant of any permit for temporary electrical or gas service. The building official may terminate temporary electrical or gas service upon the expiration of any temporary utility permit, upon the discovery of any unsafe condition related to use of the utility, upon issuance of a stop work order or permit suspension, or in other appropriate circumstances. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-41, § 1, 6-16-97; Ord. No. O-97-46, § 1, 7-21-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 9, 12-1-97; Ord. No. O-00-23, § 1, 3-6-00) 
Sec. 22-12. - Plumbing standards. 
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the Standard Plumbing Code with state amendments, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 22-10. All plumbing fixtures installed as referenced to above should not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
(1)  Toilets, per flush. ..... 1.6 gallons 
(2)  Urinals, per flush ..... 1.0 gallons 
(3)  Showerheads, per minute at 60 psi gauge pressure ..... 2.5 gallons 
(4)  Kitchen faucets, per minute ..... 2.5 gallons 
(5)  Bathroom and lavatory faucets, per minute ..... 2.0 gallons 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 8, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-13. - Exceptions to plumbing standards. 
The following fixture uses or applications shall be exempt from the standards established in section 22-10: 
(1)  Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)  Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. 
(3)  Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in correctional institutions which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)  Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing would be required to accommodate the lower lows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 7, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-14. - Fees. 
The fees to be paid for permits and inspections required by the provisions of this chapter shall be as fixed and determined by the mayor and council from time to time and on file in the office of the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 6, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-15. - Enforcement; qualifications of building official, board of adjustments and appeals. 
(a)  Building official. Whenever within any State Minimum Standard Code reference is made to the duties of certain officers or officials named therein, the building official of the City of Douglasville shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the building code is concerned. Any official of the city buildings department or the city police department may serve as agent for the building official for purposes of enforcement of this chapter. Such building official need not hold the qualifications as set forth for the enforcement official in any State Minimum Standard Code, but shall hold such qualifications as the city council deems relevant 
(b)  Board of adjustments and appeals. Whenever within any State Minimum Standard Code reference is made to a board of adjustments and appeals, such board of adjustments and appeals shall consist of four members of the city council. Such members shall be selected by the mayor, to serve for annual terms and at the pleasure of the mayor. Any councilmember chosen to serve as a member of a board of adjustments and appeals need not hold the qualifications set forth for such post in the building code. Two members of such board shall constitute a quorum, but not fewer than two affirmative votes shall be required to carry any motion. The board shall meet promptly after the filing of any appeal at a time to be designated by the building official or the chairman of such board. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 5, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-16. - Conflicts. 
If any conflict exists between the provisions any State Minimum Standard Code by the provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the more stringent provisions shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 4, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-17. - Payment of regulatory fee and registration by contractor; bond and letter of credit. 
It shall be the duty of every contractor or builder, who shall make any contract for the erection or construction or repair of any building for which a permit is required, and every contractor or builder making any such contract subletting the same, or any part thereof, to pay a regulatory fee as provided in Chapter 26 of this Code of Ordinances, and to register his name in a book provided for that purpose with the city building department, giving full name, residence and place of business, and in case of removal from one place to another to cause to be made a corresponding change in said register accordingly; and it shall be further the duty of every such person to give good and sufficient bond to be approved by the building official, conditioned to conform to the regulations of this section and other ordinances and laws of the City of Douglasville, Douglas County, and the State of Georgia. The amount of said bond for residential buildings shall be $10,000.00 per contractor, regardless of the number of residential buildings under construction; for commercial buildings, separate bonds shall be posted for each building and the amount of each bond shall be equal to ten percent of the estimated cost of construction, but not less than $10,000.00 per building and not more than $50,000.00 per building. In lieu of a bond, a contractor or builder may obtain an irrevocable letter of credit from a financial institution licensed by the State of Georgia in the appropriate amount in favor of the City of Douglasville to be approved by the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 3, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-18. - Modifications. 
The building official shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the State Minimum Standard Codes adopted by the provisions of this chapter upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided, that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the building official thereon shall be entered upon the records of the building official and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 2, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-19. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person, partnership, firm, agent or corporation who shall violate any terms or provision of this chapter, in addition to any cause of action state or federal authorities may have, shall be tried in the municipal recorder's court of the city, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-97-37, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-79, § 1, 12-1-97) 
Sec. 22-20. - Additional regulations. 
Additional regulations concerning buildings and building regulations may be found in other chapters of the Douglasville City Code, including but not limited to article VIII of appendix B, the development code, and in appendix A, zoning. 
(Ord. No. O-09-043, § 34, 8-17-09) 
Sec. 22-21. - Rain sensor shut-off switches for irrigation systems. 
Every lot developed after November 15, 2010, and having a ground irrigation system, shall also have a rain sensor shut-off switch. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-47, § 1, 11-15-10) 
Secs. 22-22—22-395. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note— See editor's note at Ch. 22. 

Sec. 22-396. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the building official, and employees of that office, who shall have authority to make inspections of buildings and lands necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 8-61) 
Sec. 22-397. - Building permit required. 
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building, or to commence construction or addition of any building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building, until the building official has issued a building permit for such work. In the case of accessory buildings and additions meeting all use and yard regulations of this article, a building permit is not required if the accessory building or addition will be 100 square feet or less in area. 
(Code 1977, § 8-62) 
Sec. 22-398. - Application for building permit. 
(a)  Permit applications for single-family detached and duplex dwellings in legally platted and recorded subdivisions shall be made to the building official. Each application shall be accompanied by a paid receipt from the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority for water and sewer taps and approval from the county health department in case of septic tanks. The builder shall leave on file in the building department one copy of each building plan that he is using in a subdivision. Plans shall be drawn to scale with floor plans, sections, elevations, and structural details. Two copies of site plans shall be required on any lots so designated on the final plat by the city engineer. Applications may be subject to the plan review process at the discretion of the building official. 
(b)  Permit applications for townhouse dwellings in legally platted and recorded subdivisions shall be accompanied by two sets of building plans drawn to scale with floor plans, sections, elevations, and structural details. Two copies of site plans shall be required on any lots so designated on the final plat by the city engineer. Applications shall be subject to plan review. Applicant shall show paid receipts from the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority for water and sewer taps before obtaining building permits. 
(c)  Permit applications for single-family detached and duplex dwellings and mobile homes which are not located in legally platted and recorded subdivisions shall be accompanied by two copies of site plans which have been stamped approved by the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority and approval from the county health department in cases of septic tanks. At the discretion of the building official, the applicant may be required to submit building plans drawn to scale with floor plans, sections, elevations, and structural details. Applications shall be subject to the plan review process. 
(d)  Permit applications for residential buildings of three or more units and nonresidential buildings of less than 5,000 square feet shall be accompanied by two sets of site plans stamped approved by the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority and sets of building plans, including electrical and plumbing plans, drawn to scale with floor plans, sections, elevations, and structural details, one set of which shall be returned to be kept at the building site. Applications shall be subject to the plan review process. 
(e)  Permit applications for any nonresidential building of 5,000 square feet or more shall be accompanied by five copies of site plans stamped approved by the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority and complete architectural drawings, plans, and specifications prepared by a registered architect or a registered engineer. One set of plans shall be returned to the applicant to be kept at the building site. Applications shall be subject to the plan review process. 
(f)  Site plans required by the above provisions shall be prepared by a registered surveyor, architect, or engineer and shall contain, as a minimum, the following elements: 
(1)  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
(2)  The size of the building to be erected; 
(3)  The location of the building on the lots with finished floor and basement elevations; 
(4)  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any; 
(5)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate; 
(6)  The setback lines of the buildings on adjoining lots; 
(7)  The layout of off-street parking and loading spaces; 
(8)  The layout of all driveways and curb cuts on the subject property and on adjoining lots and on lots across the street; 
(9)  The location of all utilities and appurtenances on the subject property, on adjoining property, and in the right-of-way; 
(10)  The lines of direction, the topography, and the run-off on the subject property; 
(11)  The landscape plan; 
(12)  The recycled water system for any commercial conveyor car wash; and 
(13)  Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this article are being observed. 
(Code 1977, § 8-63; Ord. No. O-2012-35, § 1, 7-16-12) 
Sec. 22-399. - Property requiring access to state highway. 
No building permit application shall be considered for property requiring access to a state road unless the application is accompanied by an approved driveway permit from the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1977, § 8-64) 
Sec. 22-400. - Construction progress. 
Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by the permit is not substantially completed at the end of one year. 
(Code 1977, § 8-65) 
Sec. 22-401. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1)  A building hereafter erected, altered or moved. 
(2)  A change of use of any building or land. 
(b)  Upon payment of any required fees, the building official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this article, the zoning ordinance, all sanitary and health regulations, and all other ordinances, and the building, as finally constructed, complies with plans upon which the building permit was issued. 
(Code 1977, § 8-66) 
Sec. 22-402. - Denial of certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this article, the zoning ordinance, all sanitary and health regulations, and all other ordinances, or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with plans upon which the building permit was issued. The building official shall, in writing, state the reasons for denying such certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1977, § 8-67) 
Sec. 22-403. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating any of the terms and provisions of this article shall be tried in the recorder's court of the City of Douglasville, and upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-3. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1977, § 8-68) 
Sec. 22-404. - Remedies. 
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this article, any appropriate city authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation. 
(Code 1977, § 8-69) 
Secs. 22-405—22-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING PLAN REVIEW[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See editor's note at Ch. 22. 

Sec. 22-431. - Intent. 
The intent of this article is to provide procedures and standards for review and approval of building plans and site and landscaping improvements for buildings other than a single-family detached and duplex dwellings to ensure that such buildings comply with the plans, ordinances, and policies of the City of Douglasville. 
(Code 1977, § 8-71) 
Sec. 22-432. - Applicability. 
Approval of building plans by the plan review committee or the mayor and city council shall be required before a building permit is issued or any improvement, grading, or alteration of land or buildings commences for all structures and uses except for single-family detached and duplex dwellings. 
(Code 1977, § 8-72) 
Sec. 22-433. - Plan review committee. 
The plan review committee shall consist of the city manager, the building official, the city engineer, the city fire marshal, and any other persons the mayor shall appoint. 
(Code 1977, § 8-73) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 22-434. - Approval procedures. 
Preapplication meeting. Prior to submittal of an application for approval of building plans, the applicant shall meet with the building official or his designee. The purpose of this informal meeting is to ensure that the builder understands the city's application process and its land use plans and regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 8-74) 
Sec. 22-435. - Plan review. 
(a)  Plan review sessions shall be scheduled by the plan review committee. The builder shall be notified of the time and place of the meeting and may attend. The committee shall set deadlines for plan submittals. 
(b)  The committee may render its decision at the plan review session, or it may delay its decision for no more than 30 working days. 
(c)  The committee shall take final action by rendering one of the following decisions on the application: 
(1)  Approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building and/or grading permits in accordance with the approved plans. 
(2)  Conditional approval. The applicant shall be authorized to file for appropriate building and/or grading permits with approved conditions or modifications to the plans. Conditions imposed by the committee shall be to achieve public purposes and shall permit development as accorded similar properties within similar zones. 
(3)  Denial. The applicant shall not be granted a building and/or grading permit. The committee shall specify in writing to the applicant and to the mayor and city council the reasons for denial. The reasons for denial shall be negative impacts on the environment, property values, surrounding properties, or public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1977, § 8-75) 
Sec. 22-436. - Enforcement. 
All on-site improvements shall be completed in accordance with the approved plans. The building official shall make periodic field inspections as required. When a violation is discovered, the building official shall take appropriate action to ensure compliance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all improvements are completed in accordance with the approved plans. 
(Code 1977, § 8-76) 
Sec. 22-437. - Approval duration and extension. 
Approval for building plans submitted under provisions of this article shall expire after 90 days if a building permit is not purchased. The committee may give one extension for another period of 90 days. 
(Code 1977, § 8-77) 
Sec. 22-438. - Revisions. 
Plans shall be revised to conform to approval. Other revisions shall require resubmittal to the plan review committee. 
(Code 1977, § 8-78) 
Sec. 22-439. - Requirements. 
(a)  Application requirements. Specific administrative requirements for submittals for plan review and approval may be established by the mayor and city council. However, the application shall be accompanied at least by the elements listed in section 22-398. 
(b)  Waiver. The plan review committee may waive administrative requirements of this section as needed to facilitate the review process, where such requirements are inappropriate or unnecessary. 
(c)  General building requirements. 
(1)  The general building requirements set forth in this section are minimum standards for structures regulated by the provisions of this article. These requirements shall be used by the committee in reviewing building plans and may be supplemented by specific policies and standards if established by the mayor and city council. 
(2)  Design shall be in harmony with the general character of the neighborhood and surrounding area, considering factors such as mass, placement, height, and changing land use patterns. 
(d)  General landscaping requirements. The landscaping requirements set forth in this section are minimum design standards for all development regulated under the provisions of this article. These requirements shall be used by the committee in reviewing building plans and may be supplemented by specific policies if established by the mayor and city council. 
(1)  Landscape design and planning shall be integrated with the overall design for any building. 
(2)  The committee shall evaluate landscaping plans for their relationship to the existing natural landscape, developed and other proposed landscape plans including those on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and the building existing and/or proposed. 
(e)  Frontage and perimeter landscaping requirements. Existing lots of record which do not meet the minimum lot size requirements shall conform as closely as possible and specified by the building official with the following landscaping requirements that shall apply to all other nonresidential uses and lots: 
(1)  All required side and rear yards shall be used for planted buffers and/or landscaping. 
(2)  At least a ten-foot wide strip adjacent to the street right-of-way shall be planted and attractively maintained in grass, flowers, low shrubs, or other appropriate plant material which does not obstruct vision for ingress and egress. 
(3)  All storage areas, loading docks or areas, trash receptacles, equipment storage, service vehicles which are visible from any public right-of-way, shall be attractively screened from all streets or public rights-of-way by any dense planting of evergreens or by an attractive solid wall or fence or combination thereof. 
(4)  All walkways shall be paved. 
(5)  All other land surfaces must be covered with buildings, pavement, or well maintained grass, flowers, shrubs or other suitable plantings. 
(f)  Maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance and protection of all landscaping. 
(Code 1977, § 8-79; Ord. No. O-92-22, § 1, 8-17-92; O-93-29, § 1, 7-19-93; Ord. No. O-98-2, § 1, 1-6-98; Ord. No. O-99-24, § 2, 7-6-99) 
Secs. 22-440—22-469. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATION OF BUILDING AND FIRE CODES TO EXISTING HISTORIC BUILDINGS 

Sec. 22-470. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article to encourage the sensitive rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, or preservation of existing buildings throughout the commercial historic district of the city to any individual historic properties designated pursuant to chapter 48 of the City Code, and to encourage the preservation of buildings and structures deemed to be historic in total or in part; provided, however, such rehabilitation and preservation efforts should provide for the upgrading of the safety features of the building or structure to provide a practical level of safety to the public and surrounding property. It is the further purpose of this article to provide guidance regarding acceptable alternative solutions and to stimulate use of alternative compliance concepts wherever practical to permit the continued use of existing buildings and structures. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-471. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term: 
Building system means any utility, mechanical, electrical, structural, egress, or fire protection/safety system. 
Capacity means the maximum number of persons who may be reasonably expected to be present in any building or on any floor thereof at a given time according to the use which is made of such building. The authority having jurisdiction shall determine and by rule declare the formula for determining capacity for each of the uses described in this section. 
City means the City of Douglasville, Georgia, or its building official. 
Enforcement authority means the City of Douglasville Building Official or the State of Georgia Fire Marshal. 
Existing building or structure means any completed building or structure which has been placed in service for a minimum of 25 years and was originally constructed prior to January 1, 1975. 
Local enforcement authority means the City of Douglasville or its building official. 
State enforcement authority means the State of Georgia Fire Marshal. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-472. - Scope and jurisdiction. 
The provisions of this article shall apply only to buildings and structures located within the commercial historic district of the city, and to any individual historic properties designated pursuant to chapter 48 of the City Code, but the provisions of this article shall not be applicable to new construction built after January 1, 1975, except as specifically provided herein. 
Where an existing building or structure falls within the jurisdiction of both state and local enforcement authorities, the final review of any part of the project which is under the jurisdiction of both such enforcement authorities shall occur with the state authority; provided, however, no compliance alternative for any building may be approved by the state enforcement authority absent a written agreement with the building official for that building. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-473. - Alteration or repair without total compliance with new construction requirements. 
The provisions of this article authorize the enforcement authorities to permit the repair, alteration, addition, or change of use or occupancy of existing buildings without total compliance with any rule, regulation, code, or standard for new construction requirements under the following general conditions: 
(1)  All noted conditions hazardous to life, based on the provisions of applicable state and local standards or codes for existing buildings, and outlined in section 22-474, shall be corrected to a reasonable and realistic degree as set forth in this article; 
(2)  The existing building becomes the minimum performance standard; and 
(3)  The degree of compliance of the building after changes must not be below that existing before the changes. Nothing in this article will require nor prohibit compliance with requirements more stringent than those provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-474. - Identification and correction of certain conditions or defects. 
With reference to existing buildings, enforcement authorities shall assure that any of the conditions or defects described in this section are identified and corrected as deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority having jurisdiction and through the utilization of appropriate compliance alternatives: 
(1)  Structural. Any building or structure or portion thereof which is in imminent danger of collapse because of but not limited to the following factors: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 
b.  Faulty structural design or construction; 
c.  The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; or 
d.  The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of the foundation. 
(2)  Number of exits. Less than two approved independent, remote, and properly protected exit ways serving every story of a building, except where a single exit way is permitted by the applicable state or local fire or building code or life safety code; 
(3)  Capacity of exits. Any required door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other required means of egress which is not of sufficient capacity to provide for the population of the portions of the building served and which is not so arranged as to provide a safe and adequate means of egress to a place of safety; and 
(4)  Mechanical systems. Utilities and mechanical systems not in conformance with the codes in effect at the time of construction of a building which create a serious threat of fire or threaten the safety of the occupants of the building. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-475. - Additions to existing buildings. 
Additions to an existing building shall comply with the applicable requirements of state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes, and standards for new construction. Such additions shall not impose loads either vertical or horizontal which would cause the existing building to be subjected to stresses exceeding those permitted under new construction. If the existing building does not comply with the standards provided in this article and the authorized enforcement authority finds that the addition adversely affects the performance of the total building, the authorized enforcement authority may require: 
(1)  The new addition to be separated from the existing structure by at least a two-hour fire wall with openings therein properly protected; or 
(2)  The installation of an approved automatic fire suppression system; or 
(3)  Other remedies which may be deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-476. - Minor alterations and new mechanical systems. 
Minor alterations or repairs to an existing building which do not adversely affect the performance or safety of the building may be made with the same or like materials. Existing buildings which, in part or as a whole, exceed the requirements of any applicable construction or fire safety code, may, in the course of compliance with this article, have reduced or removed, in part or in total, features not required by such code for new construction; provided, however, that such features were not a condition of prior approval. Existing buildings and structures which, in part or as a whole, do not meet the requirements of the applicable code for new construction may be altered or repaired without further compliance to any such code by utilizing the provisions of this article, provided their present degree of compliance to any applicable construction or fire safety code is not reduced. Any new mechanical systems installed in an existing building shall conform to applicable codes for new construction to the fullest extent practical as approved by the authorized enforcement authorities. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-477. - Continued use. 
The legal use and occupancy of any building or structure may be continued without change, except as may be provided otherwise by this article or as may be legally provided for by any applicable state or local law, ordinance, rule, regulation, code, or standard. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-478. - Change in use. 
(a)  A total change in the use or occupancy of an existing building which would cause a greater hazard to the public shall not be made unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards for the new use or occupancy; provided, however, the compliance alternative provisions of this article may be utilized by authorized enforcement authorities where total or strict compliance with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards is not practical. 
(b)  When the proposed use is of equal or lesser hazard as determined by an authorized enforcement authority, further compliance with any code for new construction is not required unless otherwise provided in this article. Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which do not adversely affect the performance of the building may be made with like materials. Any proposed change to the existing building or change in type of contents of the existing building shall not increase the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures. If the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures is increased, then requirements of applicable construction or fire safety codes for exterior walls shall apply. 
(c)  Exceptionally, for buildings located within the historic district and lying south of Broad Street, north of Church Street, east of Club Drive, and west of Campbellton Street, installation of sprinklers shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. O-07-64, § 2, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 22-479. - Change in use of a portion of a building. 
(a)  If a portion of a building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is separated from the remainder of the building with vertical or horizontal fire separations complying with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards or with compliance alternatives, then the portion changed shall be made to comply to the applicable requirements for the new use or occupancy to the extent noted in section 22-478. 
(b)  If a portion of the building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is not separated from the remainder of the building as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the provisions of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards applying to each use or occupancy of the building shall apply to the entire building to the extent noted in section 22-478; provided, however, if there are conflicting provisions in requirements for the various uses or occupancies, the authorized enforcement authority shall apply the strictest requirements. 
(c)  Exceptionally, for buildings located within the historic district and lying south of Broad Street, north of Spring Street, east of Club Drive, and west of Duncan Street, installation of sprinklers shall not be required. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01; Ord. No. O-07-64, § 3, 11-19-07; Ord. No. O-2010-17, § 1, 4-19-10) 
Sec. 22-480. - Floor loading. 
Any proposed change in the use or occupancy of an existing building or portion thereof which could increase the floor loading should be investigated by a Georgia registered professional engineer to determine the adequacy of the existing floor system to support the increased loads. If the existing floor system is found to be inadequate, it should be modified to support the increased loads or the proposed allowable floor loading shall be reduced by and posted by the appropriate enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-481. - Documentation. 
Whenever any compliance alternative pursuant to this article is requested, the applicant shall submit complete architectural and engineering plans and specifications consistent with the requirements of this article. Whenever action is taken on any existing building to repair, make alterations, or change the use or occupancy of an existing structure and, when said action proposes the use of compliance alternatives, the authorized enforcement authority shall ensure that at least one copy of the accepted compliance alternatives approved, including applicable plans, test data, or other data submitted for evaluation, be maintained on file in the office of the building official. If any structure also falls under the jurisdiction of a state level enforcement authority, at least one copy of same material shall be maintained on file with that authority. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-482. - Compliance alternatives. 
Paragraphs (1) through (5) contain generally acceptable compliance alternatives illustrating principles which shall be applied to the rehabilitation of existing buildings by enforcement authorities in the city. It is recognized for purposes of this article that all building systems interact with each other; therefore, any consideration of compliance alternatives should take into account all existing and proposed conditions to determine their acceptability. The compliance alternatives are not all-inclusive and do not preclude consideration and approval of other alternatives by any enforcement authority. 
(1)  Compliance alternatives for an inadequate number of exits include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Provide connecting fire-exit balconies acceptable to the enforcement authority between buildings; 
b.  Provide alternate exit or egress facilities leading to safety outside the building or to a place of safe refuge in the building or an adjoining building as acceptable to the enforcement authority; 
c.  Provide an exterior fire escape or escapes as acceptable to the enforcement authority where the providing of enclosed interior or enclosed exterior stairs is not practical; or 
d.  Install early fire warning and fire suppression systems. 
(2)  Compliance alternatives for excessive travel distances to an approved exit include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Install an approved smoke detection system throughout the building; 
b.  Install an approved complete automatic fire suppression system; 
c.  Subdivide the exit travel route with smoke-stop doors acceptable to the enforcement authority; 
d.  Increase the fire resistance rating of corridor walls and doors; or 
e.  Provide additional approved means of escape. 
(3)  Compliance alternatives for unenclosed or improperly enclosed exit stairways or vertical shafts include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Improve enclosure of exit stairway; 
b.  Add a partial fire suppression system; 
c.  Add a sprinkler draft curtain; or 
d.  Add a smoke detection system. 
(4)  Compliance alternative for inadequate or a total lack of fire partitions or fire separation walls shall be as set forth in paragraph (3). 
(5)  Compliance alternatives for a lack of required protection of openings in exterior walls where a fire exposure is a risk include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Improve fire resistance of existing openings and protect them with fire-rated windows or doors as appropriate; 
b.  Seal the openings with fire-rated construction as approved by the enforcement authority; or 
c.  Install an approved fire suppression system. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-483. - Appeals and interpretations. 
Should any applicant disagree with a decision of the building official based on this article, an appeal may be made to the board of adjustments and appeals in writing and filed with the building official within 30 days of the decision. Should the building official desire an interpretation of any provision of this article, he may request an interpretation from the board of adjustments and appeals in writing at any time. Should any applicant be dissatisfied with any ruling or decision on the state fire marshal pursuant to the provisions of this article, the applicant is granted to appeal to the commissioner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-221. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Sec. 22-484. - Liability provisions. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the city or any officer or employee thereof in carrying out the provisions of this article. Further, no action shall be maintained against the city, or any duly authorized elected or appointive officer or duly authorized employee thereof, for damages sustained as a result of any fire or hazard covered by this article by reason of inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee or person in charge thereof from any legal duty, obligation, or liability incident to the ownership, maintenance, or use of such property. 
(Ord. No. O-01-44, § 1, 7-2-01) 
Chapter 26 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to levy license fees and taxes, § 1.03(b). 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; animals, ch. 18; animal establishments, § 18-131 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; environment, ch. 38; human relations, ch. 50; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; signs, ch. 66; display of merchandise on sidewalks, § 74-2; taxation, ch. 78; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; zoning, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference— Municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific, business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq.; professions and businesses, O.C.G.A. tit. 43. 

ARTICLE I. - OCCUPATIONAL TAX AND REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 0-95-39, § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 1995, amended Arts. I and II to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, said provisions pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 26-1. - Occupation tax required; occupation tax required for business dealings in the incorporated area of the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the City of Douglasville, Georgia whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia but exerting substantial efforts within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the City of Douglasville, Georgia. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the City of Douglasville, Georgia, such business tax registration shall be shown to the Clerk's Office of the City of Douglasville or any duly authorized representative of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term city is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean the incorporated area of the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
(1.1)  Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(2)  a.  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation to the following: 
i.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
ii.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
iii.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
iv.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
v.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
b.  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
i.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
ii.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
iii.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
iv.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; 
v.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
vi.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
(3)  Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where any business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
(4)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
(5)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(6)  Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
(7)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
(8)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
(9)  Practitioner of profession and occupation shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-3. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $50.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  An administrative fee of $10.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the transfer of the registration certificate to a new business location for the same owner to operate the same business under the same name at the new location for the remainder of the existing license period under the same terms and conditions contained herein. 
(c)  In addition to the administrative fee, a non-prorated regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee and is non-refundable. The regulatory and administrative fees required by this section shall be paid in addition to any occupation tax required under section 26-4. 
(d)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is set forth as follows: 
(1)  Vehicles for hire, per registered operator ..... $100.00 
(2)  Private ambulance, per provider ..... 50.00 
(3)  Dealers in precious metals, per applicant ..... 35.00 
(4)  Pawnbrokers, per applicant ..... 50.00 
(5)  Massage parlors, per applicant ..... 50.00 
(6)  Fortunetellers, per applicant ..... 50.00 
(7)  Flea markets, per location ..... 50.00 
(8)  Amusement centers, per location ..... 100.00 
(9)  Peddlers and door-to-door salespersons ..... 35.00 
(10)  Transient merchants, per location ..... 35.00 
(11)  Adult entertainment, per location ..... 5,000.00 
(For additional regulations see section 14-1000 et seq.) 
(12)  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors, roofers, siding, security and fire alarm installers and workers. Permit fees shall be as provided in a schedule adopted by the city council and on file in the office of the building official, and are due for each permit issued. 
Unless otherwise noted, all fees under this section are due annually and are payable prior to the conduct of any business for the applicable time period. 
(e)  Regulatory fees required by this article shall be paid before commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation as a condition precedent for transacting business, or practicing a profession or occupation. Regulatory fees may be paid after commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation when: 
(1)  The work done or services provided are necessary for the health, comfort, or safety of one or more individuals or protection of property. This paragraph shall apply to, but not be limited to, the repair, service, or installation of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment or systems; 
(2)  The work done or services provided have no adverse effect on any other person; 
(3)  Regulatory fees are tendered to the within two business days after commencing business or the practice of a profession or occupation and any and all required inspections are made in order to ensure compliance with applicable codes; and 
(4)  The work is commenced or the services are provided within 24 hours of receiving the request for such work or service and it is not possible for the person conducting the work or providing the service to obtain a permit prior to commencing due to the hours of operation of the city's offices. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 2, 12-4-13; Ord. No. O-2015-44, § 1 , 9-21-15; Ord. No. O-2016-52 , § 1, 11-7-16) 
Sec. 26-4. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the incorporated area of the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in Georgia pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  The occupation tax schedule is based upon profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. The tax rate for a business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the finance director. 

 
(c)  Business classification. 
(1)  For the purpose of this article, every occupation, profession or business shall be classified according to the major group classification of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual. 
(2)  Occupations, professions, or businesses will be grouped into six classes as follows: 
Class 1 
15 Building construction - General contractors 
37 Manufacturing - Transportation equipment 
41 Local and suburban transit interurban highway passenger transportation 
42 Motor freight transportation and warehousing 
45 Transportation by air 
47 Services incidental to transportation 
50 Wholesale trade - Durable goods 
51 Wholesale nondurable goods 
52 Retail trade - Building materials, hardware, garden supply and mobile home dealers 
54 Retail trade - Food stores 
55 Retail trade - Automotive dealers and gasoline service stations 
57 Retail trade - Home furniture, furnishing and equipment stores 
59 Retail trade - Miscellaneous, not elsewhere classified 
86 Membership organizations 
99 Nonclassifiable establishments 
Class 2 
11 Anthracite mining 
12 Bituminous coal and lignite mining 
16 Heavy construction other than building - Contractors 
17 Construction - Special trade contractors 
22 Manufacturing - Textile mill products 
24 Manufacturing - Lumber and wood products, except furniture 
25 Manufacturing - Furniture and fixtures 
33 Manufacturing - Primary metal industries 
53 Retail trade - General merchandise stores 
56 Retail trade - Apparel and accessory stores 
58 Retail trade - Eating and drinking places 
63 Insurance carriers (underwriters) 
70 Services - Hotels, rooming houses, camps, and other lodging places 
75 Automotive repair, services, and parking 
80 Health services 
83 Social services 
Class 3 
07 Agricultural services 
08 Forestry 
09 Fishing, hunting and trapping 
20 Manufacturing - Food and kindred products 
23 Manufacturing - Apparel and other finished textile products 
30 Manufacturing - Rubber and miscellaneous plastic products 
31 Manufacturing - Leather and leather products 
34 Manufacturing - Fabricated metal products, except machinery and transportation equipment 
40 Railroad transportation 
72 Services - Personal 
73 Services - Business 
76 Miscellaneous repair services 
78 Services - Motion pictures 
82 Educational services and schools 
Class 4 
01 Agricultural production - Crops 
02 Agricultural production - Livestock 
14 Mining and quarrying of nonmetallic minerals, except fuels 
26 Manufacturing - Paper and allied products 
27 Manufacturing - Printing, publishing and allied industries 
29 Manufacturing - Petroleum and related products 
32 Manufacturing - Stone, clay, glass and concrete products 
36 Manufacturing - Electronic and other electrical machinery, equipment and supplies, except computer equipment 
39 Manufacturing - Miscellaneous manufacturing industries 
81 Legal services 
87 Professional services 
89 Services not elsewhere classified 
Class 5 
10 Metal mining 
13 Oil and gas extraction 
28 Manufacturing - Chemicals and allied products 
35 Manufacturing - Machinery, except electrical 
38 Manufacturing - Measuring, analyzing, and controlling instruments; photographic, medical, and optical goods; watches and clocks 
48 Communication 
49 Electric, gas, and sanitary services (utilities) 
62 Security and commodity brokers, dealers, exchanges, and services 
64 Insurance agents, brokers, and services 
65 Real estate 
79 Services - Amusement and recreation, except motion pictures 
Class 6 
46 Pipe lines, except natural gas 
61 Credit - Extending agencies other than banks 
67 Holding companies and other investment offices 
(d)  (1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business' gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(5)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(6)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the State of Georgia. 
(7)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7 which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 7, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 26-5. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-6. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the finance director office and that line of business being noted by the occupational tax office upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. No. O-95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 8, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 26-7. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in city. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-8. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), Paragraphs 1 through 18. 
(a)  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 26-4 of this article; or 
(2)  A flat fee of $300.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by October 15 of the preceding year. If the practitioner fails to make the election by October 15 the city will assess the flat fee of $300.00 against the practitioner. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-9. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-10. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-11. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be levied for a calendar year. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and, if not paid by January 30 of each year, the taxpayer shall be subject to citation to the municipal court for violation of this article. If the tax is not paid by March 31, the taxpayer shall be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency, and interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the amount of the unpaid tax accruing after January 30. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city after January of any year, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained within 30 days after beginning business and a ten percent delinquency penalty imposed after 90 days, plus interest at the at the rate of one and one-half percent per month on the amount of the unpaid tax accruing after the thirtieth day of business. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city finance director and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided by this article and the ordinances of the city. Each day that the profession, trade or calling subject violates the aforesaid provision shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies and any other remedies provided for by law, the officer charged with the collection of the tax or other official authorized pursuant to the law may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-2016-52 , § 2, 11-7-16) 
Sec. 26-12. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intra- or interstate locations. 
For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations, Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business's or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-13. - Exemptions. 
All state and local authorities and all nonprofit organizations shall be exempt from occupation tax, regulatory fees and administrative fees. There shall be an annual exemption against occupation tax in the amount of $7,500.00 and an annual exemption against from regulatory fees in the amount of $100.00 available for any business which is wholly owned by any individual who is: 
(1)  One hundred percent medically disabled; or 
(2)  A veteran of the United States armed service who is 50 percent or greater disabled. 
The exemption shall apply only to one business normally taxed hereunder, and shall not apply to any additional businesses or locations as herein defined. Written proof of qualification for said exemptions shall be exhibited to the city clerk and all required applications shall be completed. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-14. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 4.3 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-15. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(b)  All persons registering for the occupation tax shall comply with all ordinances of the city, including but not limited to, all zoning ordinances, fire ordinances, building ordinances and regulations, and environmental ordinances and regulations or said occupation tax registration may denied. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-16. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-17. - Penalty of article violation. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article may, upon conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, be fined in an amount not exceeding $500.00 and/or imprisoned not exceeding 60 days for each offense in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-18. - Administration by finance director; subpoena powers. 
The occupational tax ordinance shall be enforced by the office of the finance director and its duly designated employees and inspectors shall be classified as deputy marshal-business inspectors with the ability to seek full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the occupation tax ordinance. The finance director may deny any application for registration due to (a) the applicant's failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or (b) any reason which would be a basis for revocation pursuant to section 26-42, had the applicant been licensed. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 4, 12-3-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 1, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-2011-39, § 1, 10-3-11) 
Sec. 26-19. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the State of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. section 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. section 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. section 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. section 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the State of Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. section 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. section 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-20. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-21. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during calendar year; filing of initial returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the calendar year. However, for the convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 26-4 shall file an initial tax return prior to the subject tax year, based on the gross receipts for the business during the 12 months preceding filing. This initial return and any other relevant information deemed pertinent by the finance director shall be used as the basis for estimating the amount to be paid for the occupation tax for the calendar year of registration. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted during the subject calendar year of registration shall be adjusted and paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the subject year, in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  After July 31 and before October 16 in any year preceding a calendar of business registration in the city, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of any business subject to occupation tax shall file with the finance director's office, on a form provided by the finance director, a signed initial return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the 12 months immediately preceding the filing of the initial return. Concurrent with said filing, the taxpayer shall produce for the finance director such information as is required to substantiate any exemption or exclusion from taxes claimed by the taxpayer. The initial tax return and any other information deemed pertinent by the finance director will be used to determine an estimate of gross receipts for the subject calendar year of registration and the initial tax assessment to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 4, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 26-22. - Filing of initial return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  After January 1 and before March 2nd of any year, immediately following a calendar year wherein a taxpayer has been registered or transacted business subject to occupation tax in the city, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of a business; subject to occupation tax shall file with the finance director's office, on a form provided by the finance director, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. Concurrent with said filing, the taxpayer shall produce for the finance director such information as is required to substantiate any exemption or exclusion from taxes claimed by the taxpayer. The final tax return and any other information deemed pertinent by the finance director will be used to determine the gross receipts for the subject calendar year of registration and the final tax assessment. 
(b)  If the amount of the final tax assessment for a taxpayer exceeds the initial assessment paid, then the taxpayer shall remit payment of the difference in said assessments on or before March 15 immediately following the subject tax year. 
(c)  If the amount of the final tax assessment for a taxpayer is less than the initial assessment paid, then the city shall refund the difference in said assessments to the taxpayer on or before May 15. At the option of the city, where any refund is due a taxpayer with a current business registration, the city may apply such refund as a credit to the taxpayer's occupation tax account for the current year. Any taxpayer due a refund or credit for tax overpayment shall notify the finance director in writing of the amount of the same, and provide any necessary supporting documentation, on or before March 15th immediately following the subject tax year. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 4, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 26-23. - Initial return for newly established businesses; filing of final return before end of calendar year. 
(a)  Where a business currently subject to occupation tax has been conducted for only a part of the preceding calendar year, then the amount of gross receipts for such part of the preceding year shall be reported for purposes of the initial return for the business. The initial return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis, with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said extrapolated figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts for the business for purposes of the initial return for the current tax year. 
(b)  Where a business currently subject to occupation tax was not conducted for any part of the preceding calendar year, then the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business subject to occupation tax shall estimate the gross revenue to be received by the business from the date of commencement of business through the end of the current calendar year, and report the same as estimated gross income for purposes of the initial tax return. The owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of any such newly established business subject to occupation tax shall file an initial tax return and an application for business registration, and pay the initial tax assessment on or before beginning to conduct business in the city. 
(c)  Where any registered business has ceased to maintain an office or location inside the corporate limits of the city due to transfer of ownership or relocation of the business, then the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business subject to occupation tax may surrender to the finance director the original business registration or business license document previously issued for the business by the finance director for the current tax year, and file a final tax return for the business before the end of the current tax year. Concurrent with filing of the final return or within 60 days thereafter, the taxpayer shall notify the finance director in writing of the amount of any claim for refund and provide any necessary supporting documentation. Any refund determined to be due the taxpayer shall be paid by the city within 90 days of submission of a documented claim for refund. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 4, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 26-24. - More than one place or line of business; consolidated licenses. 
(a)  Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, said business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(b)  Individual vendors of used goods, operating in a single commercial location where multiple vendors customarily operate, may, at their option, dispense with individual registration and be licensed jointly under the name of the main operator of the establishment, if the establishment is: 
(1)  An indoor business located in not more than two suites of a single building where all customer payments are received at a central location for all vendors; or 
(2)  An outdoor flea market, where the main operator elects and pays a double occupation tax for all vendors of goods; vendors of services at such location shall be licensed individually, and may not be included in the consolidated license. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-02-34, § 1, 9-16-02; Ord. No. O-03-02, § 1, 2-3-03; Ord. No. O-07-03, § 1, 1-16-07) 
Sec. 26-25. - Returns confidential. 
Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent, or clerk of the city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of said return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees" for the purposes of this paragraph and section 26-26. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia, the United States, and other local governments 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-26. - Inspections of books and records. 
In any case the finance director, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or person for which the returns are made. The finance director shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the City of Douglasville, Georgia, and upon demand of the finance director such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the finance director at that official's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of ten percent will be assessed for the period delinquent. Said assessment and penalty shall be due and payable within ten calendar days of receiving written notice of any such deficiencies. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 4, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 26-27. - Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
Upon the failure of any business to pay said occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of said returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of said business to do business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 26-22. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of any lawful penalties permitted shall be pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-28. - Effect of failure to comply with article provisions; continuing in business after tax registration revocation. 
Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees, who do business in said city after the registration for said business has been revoked as above, hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make said returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided herein. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of many lawful penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-29. - Lien taken for delinquent occupation tax or fees. 
In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of assessments for the occupation tax, administrative fees and regulatory fees herein levied, upon any assessment becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, the assessment shall bear interest at the rate of 1.5 percent per month from the date when such assessment or installment becomes delinquent, until execution issued. Additionally, upon any assessment becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid for more than 90 days, there shall be added a ten percent penalty. Upon any assessment becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid for more than 90 days, the city clerk shall issue execution for the correct amount of said assessment against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said assessment. The execution shall bear interest on the assessment, excluding any penalty and pre-execution interest, at the rate of 1.5 percent per month, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of persons, partnership, or corporation liable for said assessment, all as provided by the ordinances of said city and the laws of Georgia, and the defendant in said execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the appropriate officer or official against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-30. - Appeals and qualifications for board of adjustments and appeals. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation who is of the opinion that the occupation tax has been incorrectly assessed or that the major line classification is incorrect or that the registration has been incorrectly denied shall have the right to appeal to the board of adjustments and appeals within ten calendar days of having been notified of the disputed decision by the city clerk's office. A written appeal stating the position of the appealing party to the board of adjustment and appeals must be made within ten calendar days of any adverse decision. A hearing by the board of adjustments and appeals on the dispute shall be held within ten calendar days of written appeal to the board of adjustment and appeals. If the appealing part is still aggrieved after the decision of the said board he/she may file a written appeal to the city council within ten calendar days of receiving said adverse decision. 
(b)  Reference to the board of adjustments and appeals within this section shall refer to such board consisting of at least three members of the city council. Such members shall be selected by the mayor and approved by the city council by resolution, to serve for such term as the city council shall select and at the pleasure of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-31. - Posting of emergency information. 
All businesses, including separate business establishments within one building, shall post in a conspicuous place the current name and telephone number or numbers of a person for contact in the event of an emergency. It shall be the duty of the applicant to comply with this requirement. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-32. - Advertisement. 
Any person advertising by signs, cards, circulars, newspaper advertising, radio advertising or otherwise, that he/she is in business of any kind the city shall be held liable for the registration, if any, required of such business. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-33. - Miscellaneous registration provisions. 
(a)  If there is any business not specifically and particularly mentioned or provided for by the terms of this article or any other ordinance now in effect, the finance director and/or the city manager are authorized and empowered to require that a registration be obtained for the conduct of such business, and to fix the amount thereof prior to the engaging in such business, and no person shall engage in any business without having paid such occupation tax, but the finance director and/or city manager shall be required to notify the city council of any such action within 30 days. 
(b)  The maximum occupation tax set by the finance director and/or city manager shall be the maximum as set forth in this article for a business mentioned in this article and the minimum shall be the minimum as set forth in this article for a business mentioned in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 5, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 26-34. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-35. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-36. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and other duly appointed persons to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same not exempt from criminal penalties to appear before the court. Notwithstanding any ordinance to the contrary, attorneys at law are hereby exempted from any and all criminal sanctions for failure to comply with this chapter, and are subject only to civil penalties for failure to comply. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk, police chief, members of the police department, building department, code compliance officer and their assistants to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-97-58, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. O-2018-9 , § 2, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 26-37. - Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. 
After January 1, 1996, the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in the article. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-38. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority or a plan. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-39. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-40. - Severability. 
If any section, provision, or clause of any part of this article shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of this article as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such individuality shall not be construed to affect the portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent that this article would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-41. - Repeal of conflicting provisions. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-42. - Revocation of registration. 
The city council, on the basis of citations issued by the city clerk or any duly authorized representative, or on the basis of citations issued by any law enforcement officer, shall have the right to suspend and/or revoke any registration issued under this chapter whenever the licensee shall do any of the following: 
(1)  Fail to confine the business operations to those normally associated with the particular registered activity; or 
(2)  Violate any city code, rule, regulation or ordinance pertaining directly or indirectly to the registered activity; or 
(3)  Violate any state or federal code, rule, regulation, ordinance or statute pertaining directly or indirectly to the registered activity. 
Any person alleged to have violated the provisions of this chapter shall be given written notice of such violation by a representative of the city and shall be entitled to have a hearing before the city council on any proposed suspension or revocation. At the hearing, the licensee shall be entitled to legal representation and shall have the right to present witnesses and to cross-examine any witnesses presented by the city. No hearing provided for herein shall be conducted sooner than ten days from the date of the issuance of the citation. The decision of the city council shall be rendered within ten days from the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-43. - Taxes on alcoholic beverages additional. 
Nothing herein shall affect any ordinance providing for the regulation of the sale of any form of alcoholic beverages and takes imposed thereon, such taxes being due and payable in addition to the occupational tax imposed hereby. Holders of licenses issued by the City of Douglasville for the sale of alcoholic beverages, both retail and wholesale, shall be in addition to this article be taxed in accordance with the applicable provisions of state law and the Alcoholic Beverage Code of the City of Douglasville. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-44. - Street sales restricted. 
Generally, the streets, sidewalks and alleys of the city shall not be used for the sale of any merchandise. The city council shall have authority, upon written application to the council, to make exception to this section for periods of one day at a time for the purpose of sidewalk sales, street festivals and the like. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-45. - Unlawful display. 
No person shall carry or display any city license or permit which has been revoked or has expired or which has not been lawfully acquired and issued. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-46. - Inspection by building official. 
The building official of the City of Douglasville or his duly authorized agent shall inspect every business address within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville list[ed] on the business license application as a place of conducting business, of every person, firm or corporation to verify that the business location is properly zoned, the building structure is suitable for the type of business to be located in the structure, that no building code violations exist and that a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the structure, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Secs. 26-47—26-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TEMPORARY BUSINESS REGISTRATION 

Sec. 26-51. - General provisions. 
A person, firm, or corporation desiring to open a business at a location not properly zoned for the business may make application to the city council for temporary registration under the terms and conditions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-52. - Application. 
An applicant desiring temporary registration of a business for a location not properly zoned shall make an application to the finance director for said registration. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location and legal description of the location at which such temporary business registration is sought, and the current zoning classification of the location. As a part of the application, the applicant shall submit satisfactory evidence that a rezoning application or application for a land use permit regarding such location has been properly filed with the proper public officials and that all required fees regarding zoning application have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 9, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 26-53. - Action by city council. 
Upon receipt of an application for temporary registration under this division, the city clerk shall forward such application to city council for action. The council shall consider the nature of the business sought to be conducted, the location and characterization of the location at which such business is sought to be conducted, the merits of the application in general, and other factors and information as the council deems relevant. The grant of temporary registration shall be considered on a case-by-case basis and shall be solely within the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-54. - Fee and duration. 
(a)  Any temporary registration granted by the council shall be for a period not to exceed 90 days. Temporary registrations shall not be subject to renewal by the city council. At the expiration of a temporary business registration, the holder thereof shall immediately make application for a regular registration as elsewhere provided by this chapter. 
(b)  The fee for temporary business registration shall be $50.00 and this cost of processing said application shall not apply as partial payment or credit towards the regular, full term occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 26-55. - No vested rights. 
No applicant under this section who applies for temporary registration shall, as a result of being granted a temporary registration and/or as a result of invested time, labor, materials, and funds in the establishment of a business at a requested location or in improvements or modifications regarding such location, acquire any vested rights to a rezoning of such location or the grant of a land use permit at such location. Any such investment of time, labor, materials, and funds are made at the risk of the applicant, and shall not obligate the council to take any further favorable action regarding the rezoning of such locations. 
(Ord. No. 95-39, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Secs. 26-56—26-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, AND DOOR-TO-DOOR SALESPERSONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, adopted Dec. 4, 2013, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 26-111—26-119, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 16-36—16-43; Ord. No. O-95-11, §§ 1—8, 5-1-95; Ord. No. O-95-11, §§ 1—8, 5-1-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 5, 12-3-01; Ord. No. O-03-35, § 1, 2, 10-20-03; and Ord. No. O-04-14, § 2, 4-19-04. 

Sec. 26-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable organization means any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary (of, relating to, or supported by charity or alms) corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint-stock company, trust, unincorporated organization or individual who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the general public, any part of which contributions is used for charitable purposes. 
Charitable purpose means any charitable, benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, or eleemosynary purpose for religion, health, education, social welfare, arts and humanities, environment, civic or public interest. 
Door-to-door salesperson means any person who solicits orders on behalf of a firm, corporation, company, association, partnership or individual of any goods, wares or merchandise, or other things of value by traveling from house to house. 
Handicapped means any physical, mental, or neurological impairment which severely restricts a person's mobility, manual dexterity, or ability to climb stairs; substantial loss of sight or hearing; loss of one or more limbs or use thereof; or significantly diminished reasoning capacity. 
Peddler means any person who sells or solicits for sale any new or used goods, wares, merchandise, produce, service or other things of value, who does not possess a certificate of occupancy, selling or offering for sale any of such things to either merchants or customers. 
Transient merchant means any person, firm or corporation, as principal or agent, or both, which is not a regular retail or wholesale merchant with a permanent place of business in this state, but rather one who displays samples, goods, wares, or merchandise in any lot, building, room, structure or vehicle, for the purpose of securing orders for the sale of such item or items of like kind or quality for future or immediate delivery, or one who sells food, drink, produce or like products from a temporary site or structure. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-112. - Exclusions. 
The terms "transient merchant" and "peddler" and "door-to-door salesperson" shall not include any person, firm or corporation which: 
(1)  Sells directly to consumers only such produce or other direct farm products, as the seller has produced himself. 
(2)  Solicits sales for charitable organizations, charitable purposes, or on behalf of religious organizations, political organizations or political candidates. 
(3)  Conducts business at any industry or association trade show, or at any craft show or festival of not more than three days in duration. 
(4)  Sells items at a rummage, garage, flea market, antique or similar sale where such person, firm or corporation is a resident of this state or has a permanent place of business within this city and such sale is not part of the regular business activity of such person, firm or corporation. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-113. - Registration required; duration of registration. 
Each peddler, transient merchant and door-to-door sales person who does business within this city shall be required to obtain a registration from the finance director, in the manner specified in this article. Every such registration shall be valid for a continuous period of 15 days. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-114. - Requirements for corporations; registered agents. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler or transient merchant or door-to-door salesperson which is a corporation to engage in business within the city unless such corporation shall comply with all applicable provisions of O.C.G.A. section 14-2-101 et. seq., relating to corporations and obtain a registration. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler or transient merchant or door-to-door salesperson which is not a corporation to engage in business within the city unless such person shall have and maintain a registered agent or agents as required by section 26-116 and shall obtain a registration. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-115. - Applications. 
(a)  All peddlers and transient merchants and door-to-door salespersons shall file an application for a registration with the office of the finance director. Such application shall include but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and permanent address of the individual peddler or transient merchant or door-to-door salesperson, and if applicable the name and address of the corporate peddler's or transient merchant's or door-to-door salesperson's registered agent or office. 
(2)  The type of business to be conducted. 
(3)  The date and place of incorporation, when such peddler or transient merchant is a corporation. 
(4)  The address, location or general area where business is to be conducted. 
(5)  An administrative fee of $65.00 per registered individual, in addition to the base administrative fee required by section 26-3. 
(b)  At the time the registration application is filed, the applicant shall pay all regulatory fees due under section 26-3. Registrations under this division are not transferable. 
(c)  As a part of the registration application for transient merchants, each applicant designating any one or more stationary addresses or locations where business is to be conducted shall, prior to filing of such application with the office of the finance director, submit said application to the building official for approval. The building official shall approve applications designating addresses and locations for business where traffic will not be unduly impeded, and where any stationary non-motorized structures used to store inventory, samples, or other business materials is sufficiently stable to withstand inclement weather. 
(d)  As a part of the registration application, each transient merchant applicant designating any one or more stationary addresses or locations owned by another where business is to be conducted, shall submit with such application a written statement showing the consent of the property owner (and lessee, if any) for the applicant to transact business thereon. 
(e)  As a part of the registration application, each individual applicant and each representative for a corporate applicant shall submit to a criminal background check by the police department, and obtain a photo identification card bearing a current photograph of the applicant. 
(f)  An individual applicant who is 65 years old or older, or one who is handicapped, shall be exempt from all regulatory fees, but shall still be required to make application for a registration with the office of the finance director and obtain and pay the administrative fee for a photo identification card from the police department. Any handicapped applicant will be required to provide proof of handicap either by providing state handicap identification or a letter of handicap from a licensed physician. Any applicant, who is 65 years old or older, shall provide proof of age either by birth certificate or state identification. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-116. - Denial of applications; revocation of registration. 
(a)  Applications for registration for individual peddlers and transient merchants and door-to-door salespersons shall be denied by the police department for: 
(1)  Any person who has been convicted within the past seven years of any felony offense; or 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted within the past seven years of any misdemeanor offense involving theft, fraud or physical violence; or 
(3)  Any person who has, within the past seven years, had revoked his business license or any license issued by a local government. 
(b)  Denial of registration may be appealed by the applicant to the mayor and council, by filing of a written appeal with the city clerk not later than seven days after dispatch of written notice to the applicant. On appeal, the mayor and council may correct any errors of law or fact, upon appeal, but may not grant a registration to any individual whose background is in violation of the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Registrations may be revoked otherwise sanctioned in the same manner and upon the same basis as for the revocation of business licenses and occupation tax registrations. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-117. - Display of photo identification. 
Photo identification cards shall be displayed at all times while the applicant or representative conducts business in the city, and each shall exhibit such registration at the request of any person. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-118. - Loud noise and amplification devices prohibited. 
No registration holder under this article shall shout, ring bells, blow horns, make loud noises or use any radio or amplifying system upon any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places within the city for the purpose of attracting attention to the goods, wares or merchandise which such registrant intends to sell. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-119. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-120. - Additional regulations for transient merchants. 
(a)  Transient merchants shall conduct business only in locations zoned general commercial and in accordance with Appendix A—Zoning of the City Code. 
(b)  All vehicles must be removed from the transient merchant's location at the end of each workday. Only one vehicle, other than any vehicle of a customer present at the sales location, is allowed for each location during business hours. 
(c)  No transient merchant shall transact business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-121. - Additional regulations for peddlers. 
(a)  Peddlers shall park the vehicle associated with the business on asphalt or concrete and out of the right-of-way. 
(b)  No tents, tables, boxes, chairs, or any accessory to the business shall be allowed in connection with sales. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Sec. 26-122. - Additional regulations for door-to-door salespersons. 
(a)  The police department shall provide to each registered door-to-door salesperson an information card, and the door-to-door salesperson shall present this card to each household he visits. It is the responsibility of the door-to-door sales person to make sufficient copies of the information card to furnish to each household he visits. Such card shall contain information as required by the police department. 
(b)  At any home where a "no soliciting" sign is posted, no soliciting shall be made. 
(c)  No door-to-door salesperson shall enter a home except at the express invitation of the occupant. 
(d)  Any residential occupant may refuse entry or to ask the door-to-door salesperson to leave the premises, after allowing entry, and, if the door-to-door salesperson should fail to leave the premises after such instructions, he shall be in violation of the laws of this state and ordinances of the city. 
(e)  Any purchaser of the product of the door-to-door salesperson has the right to cancel a home solicitation service agreement any time until midnight on the business day after the day on which the purchaser signs the agreement, provided the purchaser gives notice of the cancellation to the seller at the place of business as set forth in the agreement or by certified mail, return receipt requested, which shall be posted not later than midnight on the day following execution of the agreement. 
(f)  At each house where a door-to-door salesperson calls for sales, the door-to-door salesperson shall announce to the owner or occupant of the home his name and that he has been issued a permit by or has registered with the City of Douglasville as a door-to-door salesperson, and shall announce the purpose of his call and present the card provided for by this division and shall allow time for the occupant or owner to read the card. 
(g)  A door-to-door salesperson shall at all times maintain a courteous decorum and shall not use opprobrious words to any homeowner or occupant. No door-to-door salesperson shall remain upon the premises of an occupant or owner after such occupant or owner has requested the door-to-door salesperson to leave or has indicated that he is not interested in purchasing the door-to-door salesperson's product. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any door-to-door salesperson to represent by word, action or deed that the issuance of a permit or registration by the city in any way represents approval of either the action of the door-to-door salesperson or his product or organization. 
(i)  If a door-to-door salesperson shall secure an order from an owner or occupant, such door-to-door salesperson shall inform the owner or occupant as to his rights under the home solicitation act of the state. This may be done by the door-to-door salesperson leaving a written card or document specifying the rights of a homeowner or occupant under the Retail Installment and Home Solicitation Sales Act (O.C.G.A. § 10-1-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. O-2013-52, § 1, Exh. A, 12-4-13) 
Secs. 26-123—26-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NONPROFIT FOOD SALES AND FOOD SERVICE 

Sec. 26-130. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Nonprofit food sales and food service means the temporary sale or service of food items by an organization at an event sponsored by an organization and an authority. 
(2)  Organization means an organization exempt from taxes under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. Section 48-7-25 and under Section 501(d) or paragraphs (1) through (8) or paragraph (10) of Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code, as that code is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 48-1-2. 
(3)  Authority means an authority established by general or local legislation for the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-97-28, § 5, 3-17-97) 
Sec. 26-131. - Permits, duration, subsequent permits. 
Upon proper application and payment of a permit fee, the finance director shall issue to any organization a permit for nonprofit food sales and food service. A permit shall be valid for a period of 48 hours or less, and another permit shall not be issued to the organization holding such permit until five days have elapsed from the date of expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-97-28, § 5, 3-17-97; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 10, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 26-132. - Health standards. 
(a)  Food shall be in sound condition, free from spoilage, filth, or other contamination and shall be safe for human consumption. Food shall be obtained from sources that comply with all laws relating to food and food labeling. The use of food in hermetically sealed containers that was not prepared in a licensed food processing establishment is prohibited. 
(b)  At all times, including while being stored, prepared, displayed, served, or transported, food shall be protected from potential contamination, including dust, insects, rodents, unclean equipment and utensils, unnecessary handling, flooding, drainage, and overhead leakage or overhead drippage from condensation. The temperature of potentially hazardous food shall be either 45 degrees Fahrenheit or below or 140 degrees Fahrenheit or above at all times. 
(c)  The preparation of the following potentially hazardous foods is prohibited: 
(1)  Pastries filled with cream or synthetic cream; 
(2)  Custards; 
(3)  Products similar to the products listed in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection: or 
(4)  Salads containing meat, poultry, eggs, or fish. 
(d)  Frozen desserts shall only be produced using commercially pasteurized mixes or ingredients. Suitable utensils must be provided to eliminate hand contact with the cooked product. All utensils and equipment shall be cleaned periodically as necessary to prevent a buildup of food. 
(e)  Ice that is consumed or that contacts food shall be from an approved source and protected from contamination until used. Ice used for cooling stored food shall not be used for human consumption. Food shall be served in an individual meal type of container and handed to the customer. Food items shall not be transported for sale at any other location or sold, held, or reused at another event. 
(f)  A convenient handwashing facility shall be available for employee handwashing. This facility shall consist of, at least, warm running water and individual paper towels. 
(g)  This Code section shall in no way be construed to allow the sale of food items which have been packaged, bottled, or canned in facilities not approved by the law. 
(Ord. No. O-97-28, § 5, 3-17-97) 
Sec. 26-133. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Violations of this article are declared to be unlawful, and violations shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of the Code of the City of Douglasville. 
(Ord. No. O-97-28, § 5, 3-17-97) 
Secs. 26-134—26-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BAIL BONDSMEN[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-97-28, § 1, adopted March 17, 1997, renumbered Art. IV as Art. V. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said ordinance O-97-28. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 26-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Professional bondsmen means all persons who hold themselves out as signers or sureties of bail bonds for compensation, and who are licensed as provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 7-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-152. - Persons prohibited from signing bonds. 
No attorney-at-law and no official authorized to admit to bail, nor any city, or county official, shall become surety on any bond. 
(Code 1977, § 7-2) 
Sec. 26-153. - Power of attorney. 
All professional bondsmen must attach to each bail bond a duly executed power of attorney in an amount of at least the penal sum of the bond. This section shall not apply to any card or certificate of membership of any automobile club. 
(Code 1977, § 7-3) 
Sec. 26-154. - Fees of sureties. 
Professional bondsmen shall not, when receiving compensation, charge or receive more than ten percent of the first $500.00 of the principal amount of the bond and five percent of the principal of such bond over $500.00 from the defendant or from anyone acting for the defendant. 
(Code 1977, § 7-4) 
Sec. 26-155. - Prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment. 
(a)  All professional bondsmen engaged in the bail bond business, who accept money or any other consideration for any bail bond which they execute, must for each and every payment received, give to the person paying the money or giving the consideration, a prenumbered receipt as evidence of payment, which receipt shall state the date, name of the principal, amount of money or consideration received and purpose for which received, number of the power of attorney form attached to the bond, penal sum of the bond, and name of person making payment or giving consideration. 
(b)  All professional bondsmen must retain a duplicate copy of each receipt issued as part of their records. 
(Code 1977, § 7-5) 
Sec. 26-156. - Suggesting employment of attorney. 
Professional bondsmen shall not suggest or advise the employment or name for employment any attorney or attorneys to represent the defendant, during the negotiations for the bondsmen to sign the bond or subsequent thereto. 
(Code 1977, § 7-6) 
Sec. 26-157. - Soliciting business. 
Professional bondsmen shall not solicit business as such bondsmen, nor shall they lounge about or around the city jail, for the purpose of engaging in or soliciting business as such bondsmen. No officer or personnel of the city jail shall suggest to or advise in any manner whatever any prisoner of the city, the employment of the services of any professional bondsman to sign bonds for appearance in court at any time. 
(Code 1977, § 7-7) 
Sec. 26-158. - Participation in defense prohibited. 
Professional bondsmen shall not advise defendants, principals in bonds signed by them, or give any directions in the defense or disposition of the cases in which bonds are signed. 
(Code 1977, § 7-8) 
Sec. 26-159. - Payments to and by. 
No professional bondsman becoming surety on a bond and receiving the compensation in the case for signing such bond as surety, shall thereafter receive any other sum in the case to the final disposition of the same. 
(Code 1977, § 7-9) 
Sec. 26-160. - Forfeiture of bond, surrender of custody of defendant. 
(a)  Upon a forfeiture of the bond, the surety shall have the right to surrender into custody the defendant or the principal in such bond without the return of any money paid for the signing of such bond. 
(b)  The nonappearance of defendant on first call of docket shall be declared as bail forfeited. The forfeiture shall be paid within 30 days of the date of forfeiture, however, at any time within 30 days from the date of forfeiture, the city recorder may upon proper showing: 
(1)  Of a satisfactory explanation of the breach of the bond; 
(2)  That the defendant was at the time of required appearance adjudicated insane and confined in an institution or hospital; or 
(3)  That the defendant was at the time of required appearance confined in a jail or prison within the state for a felony; 
direct that the forfeiture of the bond be discharged, or if the forfeiture has been paid, shall direct that remission of the forfeiture be made to the surety; provided that the court may require, as a condition to discharge or remission, the payment of costs and expenses incurred. 
(Code 1977, § 7-10) 
Sec. 26-161. - Condition of the bond. 
If a person is admitted to bail for his appearance in recorder's court, the condition of the bail bond shall be that he will appear for such hearing, at the time and date specified on copy of charges to answer the charge, or at such other time or times set by the court, to answer the charge, and will submit himself to the orders and processes of the city recorder trying the case, and will not depart without leave of same. 
(Code 1977, § 7-11) 
Sec. 26-162. - Judgment absolute. 
(a)  The city recorder shall issue an order of judgment absolute 30 days after date of forfeiture. The professional bondsman, as surety on the bond, shall then and there pay to the court the penal sum of the bond. 
(b)  This judgment absolute becomes a final disposition and relieves surety and defendant of any further obligation to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 7-12) 
Sec. 26-163. - Canceling the bond. 
When the condition of the bond is satisfied or the forfeiture of the bond has been discharged or remitted, the city recorder shall make an order canceling the bond. Conviction or acquittal of the defendant shall satisfy the terms of the bond written by any bail bondsman. 
(Code 1977, § 7-13) 
Sec. 26-164. - To have equal access. 
All professional bondsmen who hold a currently effective license issued by the finance director shall be entitled to equal access to the jail of this city for the purpose of making bond. 
(Code 1977, § 7-14; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 6, 12-3-01) 
Sec. 26-165. - Employee termination. 
Any professional bondsman who terminates the appointment of any employee authorized to sign bonds, shall immediately file written notice thereof with the chief of police and the city clerk, together with a statement that he has given or mailed notice to the employee. Such notice filed shall state the reasons, if any, for such termination. Information so furnished shall be privileged and shall not be used as evidence in any action against the professional bondsman. All bonds signed by a terminated employee prior to such notification shall be binding upon the professional bondsman. 
(Code 1977, § 7-15) 
Sec. 26-166. - Prohibited activities. 
It shall be unlawful for any professional bondsman to: 
(1)  Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to a jailer, policeman, peace officer, city recorder, or any other person who has power to arrest or to hold in custody; or to any city official or city employee in order to secure a settlement, compromise, remission or reduction of the amount of any bail bond thereof. 
(2)  Pay a fee or rebate or give anything of value to an attorney in bail bond matters, except in defense of any action of a bond. 
(3)  Pay a fee or rebate or give or promise anything of value to the principal or anyone in his behalf. 
(4)  Sign nor countersign in blank any bond, nor shall be given a power of attorney to, or otherwise authorize, anyone to countersign his name to bonds unless the person so authorized is directly employed by the bondsman giving such power of attorney. 
(Code 1977, § 7-16) 
Sec. 26-167. - Officer taking insufficient bail. 
Any person authorized to take bail, who takes bail which he knows to be insufficient, or accepts as surety any professional bondsman who is not qualified to act as surety, shall be guilty of an act of misconduct and shall be subject to disciplinary action by the department head or mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 7-17) 
Sec. 26-168. - Display of signs. 
(a)  Each professional bondsman duly licensed by the city shall be allowed to display a sign of his own making in a place designated by the chief of police, at or near the book in/book out section of the city jail. 
(b)  One sign per licensee shall be permitted and shall be limited to lettering and numbering of no more than three inches high and 1½ inches in width for each letter or numeral. 
(c)  Signs shall be limited to two lines to allow name of business at top and phone number at bottom. 
(d)  Signs shall be restricted to black and white in coloring, shall be of such overall dimensions as determined by the chief of police or mayor and council, and shall be hung in a place so designated on a first come first served priority. 
(Code 1977, § 7-18) 
Secs. 26-169—26-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 26-186. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business as a professional bondsman within this city without first obtaining a license therefor. 
(Code 1977, § 7-31) 
Sec. 26-187. - Issuance regulations. 
Every license required by the provisions of this article shall be issued under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 7-32) 
Sec. 26-188. - Qualifications. 
To qualify for license as a professional bondsman in the city, it must affirmatively appear that the: 
(1)  Applicant is a natural person who has reached the age of 18 years. 
(2)  Applicant is a citizen of the United States, has been a bona fide resident of this state for one year last past. 
(3)  Place of business of the applicant will be located in this state and that such applicant will be actively engaged in the bail bond business and maintain a place of business accessible to the public. 
(4)  Applicant is a person of high character and approved integrity and shall be vouched for by two other reputable citizens who are residents of this county. 
(5)  Applicant shall furnish with his application, a complete set of his fingerprints and a recent credential-size full face photograph of himself. The applicant's fingerprints shall be certified by the chief of police. 
(6)  Applicant can justify the sufficiency of his bonding ability by affidavit that he possesses the qualifications and sufficiency to become a surety, and in such affidavit shall describe his property, to which he proposes to justify as to his sufficiency, stating the encumbrances thereon, according to the standards as promulgated by the county sheriff. 
(Code 1977, § 7-33) 
Sec. 26-189. - Application fee. 
A fee of $10.00 shall be submitted with each application for a license required by the provisions of this article. Such fee shall be to defray the costs of conducting a character investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1977, § 7-34) 
Sec. 26-190. - Termination. 
Any professional bondsman who discontinues writing bail bonds during the period for which he is licensed shall notify the chief of police and the city clerk and immediately return his license. 
(Code 1977, § 7-35) 
Sec. 26-191. - Denial, suspension, revocation. 
In addition to any other provision of this Code, the mayor and council may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any license issued in accordance with this division for any of the following causes: 
(1)  For any cause for which issuance of the license could have been refused had it then existed and been known to the mayor and council. 
(2)  Material misstatement, misrepresentation or fraud in obtaining the license. 
(3)  Misappropriation, conversion or unlawful withholding of money belonging to others and received in the conduct of business under the license. 
(4)  Conviction of a felony. 
(5)  Fraudulent or dishonest practices in the conduct of business under the license. 
(6)  Willful failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Willful failure to return collateral security to the principal when the principal is entitled thereto. 
(8)  When, in the judgment of the mayor and council, the licensee has in the conduct of affairs under the license, demonstrated incompetency or untrustworthiness, or conduct or practices rendering him unfit to carry on the bail bond business, or making his continuance in such business detrimental to the public interest, or that he is no longer in good faith carrying on the bail bond business, or that he is guilty of rebating or offering to rebate, or offering to divide his compensation, and for any or all such reasons is found by the mayor and council to be a source of detriment, injury or loss to the public. 
(Code 1977, § 7-36) 
Secs. 26-192—26-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE, BANKRUPT, GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS, ETC., SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-97-28, § 2, adopted March 17, 1997, renumbered Art. V as Art. VI. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said ordinance O-97-28. 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 

Sec. 26-216. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's, adjustment, alteration, assignee's bankrupt, benefit of administrator's, benefit of creditor's, benefit of trustee's, building coming down, closing, creditor's committee, creditor's end, executor's final days, forced out, forced out of business, insolvent's last days, lease expires, liquidation, loss of lease, mortgage sale, receiver's, trustee's quitting business, and other like sales. 
Goods means and includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 16-66) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-217. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Violations of this article are declared to be unlawful and violations shall be subject to punishment as provided by section 1-3 of the Code of the City of Douglasville. 
(Code 1977, § 16-81) 
Sec. 26-218. - General provisions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person advertising by newspaper, radio, posters or otherwise to represent that he is operating, offering or maintaining fire sales, wreck sales, bankrupt sales, or going-out-of-business sales and similar businesses whereby the public is led to believe that they are being offered merchandise at reduced rates on account of fires, wrecks, bankruptcies, closing-out or discontinuance of business when, in fact, such sales are not bona fide. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale, except judicial sales, whether the same is by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise which are claimed to be or have been in or damaged by fire, or which are claimed to be or have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been, or which are claimed to be the property of any bankrupt person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment or is or has made a general assignment, or is or has been in voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale in such sale any goods, wares, or merchandise not so affected or damaged or to add to or to permit to be added to, or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or any building in the city, for the purpose of adding to such goods, wares, or merchandise so circumstanced or affected and which are on hand in any such store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at such sale. 
(Code 1977, § 16-65) 
Sec. 26-219. - License—Required. 
All persons shall secure a license from the city before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sale; 
(2)  Removal of business sale; or 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(Code 1977, § 16-67) 
Sec. 26-220. - Same—Application. 
A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the city, setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale; 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold, the price therefor, and, if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition; 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held; 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease, and the effective date of termination of such occupancy; 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising such sale together with the proposed content by any advertisement; and 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. Such inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
a.  All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
b.  Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated under this article. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within ten days before the filing of an application under this section shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(Code 1977, § 16-68) 
Sec. 26-221. - Same—Fee. 
Any applicant for a license under this article shall submit to the city a license fee of $100.00 with his application. 
(Code 1977, § 16-69) 
Sec. 26-222. - Same—Established business prerequisite. 
Any person who has not been the owner of the business advertised or described in the application for a license under this article for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license, except upon the approval of the mayor and council of the city; provided, that upon the death of a person doing business in this city, his heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 16-70) 
Sec. 26-223. - Same—Restricted to one place of business. 
Where a person applying for a license under this article operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store or branch specified in the application. No other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with it or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(Code 1977, § 16-71) 
Sec. 26-224. - Same—Term. 
A license issued under this article shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof; provided, that a longer period may be designated by the mayor and council of the city upon good cause shown. 
(Code 1977, § 16-72) 
Sec. 26-225. - Same—Limitation as to type of sale. 
A license issued under this article shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(Code 1977, § 16-73) 
Sec. 26-226. - Same—Nontransferable. 
Any license provided for by this article shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1977, § 16-74) 
Sec. 26-227. - Surrender of other licenses for going-out-of-business sale. 
Upon being issued a license under this article for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the city all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 16-75) 
Sec. 26-228. - Interval between sales. 
Any person who has held a sale, as regulated under this article, at the location stated in the application, within one year past from the date of such application, shall not be granted a license, except upon the approval of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 16-76) 
Sec. 26-229. - Limitation on goods to be sold. 
A license issued under this article shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(Code 1977, § 16-77) 
Sec. 26-230. - Duties of licensees. 
A licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license; 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising; 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto; 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request; and 
(5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
(Code 1977, § 16-78) 
Sec. 26-231. - Effect of article. 
The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of article II of this chapter. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by article II, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Code 1977, § 16-79) 
Sec. 26-232. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(4)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication who publishes in good faith, any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character, or without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. 
(Code 1977, § 16-80) 
Secs. 26-233—26-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - YARD SALES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-97-28, § 3, adopted March 17, 1997, renumbered Art. VI as Art. VII. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of said ordinance O-97-28. 

Sec. 26-256. - Title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as an Ordinance Regulating Yard Sales in the City of Douglasville. 
(Code 1977, § 16-52) 
Sec. 26-257. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Douglasville. 
Household items means goods and wares normally associated with the household, including but not limited to furniture, furnishings, linens, silverware, flatware, chinaware, glassware, utensils, supplies, equipment and appliances, televisions, radios, musical instruments, and clothing. The terms shall not include automobiles, but shall include automotive accessories, such as radios. 
Not in the course of ordinary business means an enterprise which is not a normal source of income for the person so engaged but is one that is occasional or irregular, including but not limited to yard sales, garage sales, attic sales, rummage sales, flea markets, swap meets, etc. 
Person means any individual, corporation or partnership, and includes the plural. 
Yard sale shall have the meaning ascribed to it as indicated in the zoning ordinance of the City of Douglasville. 
(Code 1977, § 16-53; Ord. No. O-99-48, § 1, 12-9-99) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-258. - Penalty. 
Failure to file notice or other violation of this article shall constitute a violation punishable under the terms of the Charter of the City of Douglasville. 
(Code 1977, § 16-59) 
Sec. 26-259. - Permit required. 
Any person who conducts a yard sale or allows the same to be conducted upon his property shall first apply for and have issued to him a permit from the planning and zoning director. 
(Ord. No. O-99-48, § 2, 12-9-99; Ord. No. O-02-17, § 1, 5-7-02) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-99-48, § 2, adopted Dec. 9, 1999 repealed sections 26-259—26-263 in their entirety and replaced them with new sections 26-259—26-262. Former sections 26-259—26-263 pertained to similar material and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 16-54—16-58. 
Sec. 26-260. - Permit application. 
(a)  Any application for a yard sale permit shall be signed by the applicant, shall be filed at least 24 hours in advance of commencement of the sale and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and phone number for any person conducting, sponsoring or promoting the yard sale. 
(2)  The location at which the sale is to be conducted. 
(3)  The date or dates on which the yard sale is to be conducted, and the time period or periods of the day during which it is proposed to carry on the sale. 
(b)  There shall be no fee for any yard sale permit. 
(Ord. No. O-99-48, § 2, 12-9-99; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 7, 12-3-01; Ord. No. O-02-17, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. O-2017-25 , § 1, 6-19-17) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following section 26-259. 
Sec. 26-261. - Exhibition of permit. 
A copy of the permit required by this article shall be posted conspicuously in or at the place named therein for the yard sale. Any permit shall be available for inspection at any time during the sale, and shall be valid only for the times, dates and place specified therein. 
(Ord. No. O-99-48, § 2, 12-9-99) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following section 26-259. 
Sec. 26-262. - Inspection. 
Any police officer or city code compliance officer shall have the right to enter any premises showing evidence sufficient to alert the general public of any ongoing enterprise such as regulated in this article, for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-99-48, § 2, 12-9-99; Ord. No. O-2018-9 , § 2, 3-5-18) 
Editor's note— See editor's note following section 26-259. 
Sec. 26-263. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following section 26-259. 
Secs. 26-264—26-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-58, § 2 , adopted Dec. 21, 2015, repealed Art. VIII, §§ 26-281, 26-282, which pertained to minority/women's business enterprise outreach program and derived from Res. No. R-94-3, adopted Jan. 18, 1994; and Ord. No. O-06-27, § 1, adopted July 5, 2006. 

Secs. 26-281—26-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-05-19, § 1, adopted May 2, 2005, repealed former Art. IX of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. IX, §§ 26-301—26-305, pertained to products used in the preparation of methamphetamine and derived from Ord. No. O-05-10, § 1, adopted March 21, 2005. 

Secs. 26-301—26-305. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PAWNBROKERS AND PAWNSHOPS 

Sec. 26-306. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the conduct and activities of pawnshops, as defined herein, in order to reduce and curtail the criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses, to aid the police department in detection and prevention, and to ensure fair dealing between the pawnbroker(s) and his or her customers. This article is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 44-12-130 et seq. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-307. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this article shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Accepted identification: An official document, most commonly in the form of a plastic coated/sealed card, issued for purposes of identification or driver's license. These documents must be issued by one of the 50 states or a branch of the U.S. military, i.e. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard, or current State of Georgia and counties of Georgia probation and parole cards. The identification must at a minimum bear a true photograph of the person presenting it, date of birth, description of the person, and an address for the person. 
Deceptive business practice: 
(1)  Any use or possession of a false weight or measurement, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity in connection with any scale or service; 
(2)  Any sale of, offer to sell or delivery of less than the represented quality or quantity; 
(3)  Any attempt to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity, when as buyer or broker, he furnishes the weight or measure; 
(4)  Any service which is of an unreasonably lesser quality than the service offered or represented; 
(5)  Any other practice designated as unlawful by O.C.G.A. section 10-1-390 et seq.; 
(6)  Any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Good moral character: A person who has not been convicted of any felony or any crime involving theft, fraud or a crime against property in the past ten years. 
Interest in a pawnshop. Exists if the person involved or any member of his or her family is the outright owner of the pawnshop; a co-owner of the pawnshop; a partner in a partnership which owns all or part of the pawnshop; a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of the pawnshop. 
Minor: Any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
New in box: Any unused item in the original unopened, factory sealed boxes. 
Occupation tax certificate: Permission to operate a pawnshop pursuant to grant by the city council. 
Pawn or pledge: A bailment, or personal property or title (including but not limited to a motor vehicle title) as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the express or implied power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker: Any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, personal property or titles, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property or title on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property or title from persons or sources other than the manufacturers or regulated dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described herein. 
Pawnshop: Any business wherein a well-defined part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, motor vehicles, or any kind of personal property or title whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Permit: Permission to be employed or work in a pawnshop regulated by the police department, or to be a pawnbroker. 
Person: The term shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
Police department: The chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-308. - Employee permit required. 
All persons employed or working in a pawnshop as defined herein shall first file an application with the city for an employee permit to be employed or work in a pawnshop. Such a permit shall be obtained from the police department. The permit fee for each and every employee shall be $50.00, renewable annually. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-309. - Pawnshop employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of a pawnshop, as defined herein, shall not be less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined by this article. Any employee who has been convicted of any felony or crime involving theft, fraud or against property shall not be permitted to work on the premises of a pawnshop for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "on the premises" shall include all work done or services performed in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the regulated premises. 
(b)  Disclosure. Every employee must disclose any ownership or interest in any other pawnshop, whether it is located locally or out-of-state and must disclose the nature of such ownership or interest. As used in this article, an interest in a pawnshop shall be deemed to exist if the person involved or any member of his or her family is the sole owner of the pawnshop; a co-owner of the pawnshop; a partner in a partnership which owns all or any part of the pawnshop; or a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of the pawnshop. 
(c)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on the regulated premises, he shall file a notice with the police department of his intended employment on forms setting out the information required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section; and each applicant must be fingerprinted by the police department. The city shall have 45 days to investigate the information submitted by the employee. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the police department shall grant any approval of employment; and issue an annual personal identification card authorizing the person to be employed by a pawnshop. Upon approval the employee may begin working on the regulated premises. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to assure that the provisions of this section are complied with. The employee is required to notify the police department of any change in information or circumstances which has occurred since the original approval was granted. If approval is denied, the applicant may, within ten days apply in writing to the police department for reconsideration. The decision of the police department upon reconsideration may be appealed to the city council which shall issue such order as is required. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the permitting officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation of the occupation tax certificate or permit. Conviction of violating the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of the city, rules or regulations of the city or conviction of any felony or any crime involving theft, drugs, fraud or a crime against property shall subject the employee to suspension or revocation of the employee permit, and in the case of an owner or pawnbroker shall subject the party to suspension of any permit authorized by this article and the occupation tax registration for the pawnshop. 
(e)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or occupation tax certificate holder of any pawnshop. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-310. - Operation of an unregulated premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on within the city any pawnshop, as defined herein, without a pawnshop permit or a currently valid occupation tax certificate to do so. A proper application for renewal within the time required must be submitted and such occupation tax certificate shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-311. - Renewal of permits. 
Permits for pawnbroker businesses may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The applicant must file a verified annual report showing the applicant's gross receipts and the amounts paid to the employees for the preceding calendar year and such shall be submitted with the renewal applications. The renewal fee for permits shall be $25.00. Renewal applications shall be submitted by January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-312. - Permit nontransferable. 
No pawnbroker permit or employee permit may be sold, transferred or assigned to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permit holder is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without affecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit upon notification to the city shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-313. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any pawnshop operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal violation hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such pawnshop and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a pawnshop contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of any related permit and occupation tax registration granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-314. - Receipt of goods from minors unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, pledge or sale, goods of any character or description from a minor. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-315. - Receipt of new in box items unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, pledge or sale, goods of any character or description any item which is a new in box item and unless a receipt or other proof of purchase is provided. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-316. - Application for permit; review by city council. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership, corporation, trust or joint venture desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on a pawnshop as required by this article shall make application to the finance director through its designated representative. 
(b)  Each application for a pawnshop permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The owner(s)'s full true and legal name(s) and any other aliases or name changes used in the last five years. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the owner(s). 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the owner(s) is at least 18 years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the owner(s) for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(5)  The pawnshop permit history of the owner(s) and whether, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory, the owner(s) has had such permit revoked or suspended. If such permit has been revoked or suspended, the owner(s) must state the reason, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the owner(s) is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the owner(s) is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the owner(s) is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate filed with the county clerk or secretary of state. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The owner corporation(s) or partnership(s) shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual owner under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If any of the owners have been convicted of any crime involving moral character in the past ten years, the owner must provide a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of the disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If the owner is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name, properly recorded, must be provided. If owner is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name, affidavit, if any, and the last annual report, if any, must be provided. 
(9)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the owners and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character. The finance department shall prepare forms, consistent with the provisions of this article, for the owner who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(10)  Address of premises to be regulated. 
(11)  Payment for a survey to verify that the location is no closer than 2,500 feet to another pawnshop. 
(12)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(13)  Nature and character of the business to be conducted. 
(14)  Each application for a pawnshop occupation tax certificate shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by all owners. 
(15)  The owners must disclose any ownership interest in any other pawnshop, whether it is located locally or out-of-state and must disclose the nature of such ownership interest. 
(16)  The owner(s) must certify that there are no fees, taxes, fines, utilities or other charges due to the city. 
(17)  Any other information that may be required by the finance director or police department such as source of financing for the business operation. 
(c)  The owners' representative shall personally appear at the city, and produce proof that the occupation tax has been paid and shall present the application containing the above-referenced information. 
(d)  The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and background of the applicant. 
(e)  Upon completion of the review of the application by the finance department and the police department, the matter shall be placed on an agenda for mayor and council who may grant or deny the application consistent with this article. A denial of the application by mayor and council may be appealed to superior court. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-317. - Denial of an application. 
The finance director may reject, and the city council may deny an application which shows any of the following exist: 
(1)  The required fees or taxes have not been paid. 
(2)  The pawnshop will be located within 2,500 feet of another pawnshop. 
(3)  Application does not conform to all the provisions required by the article. 
(4)  The owner has failed to fully cooperate with the investigation required by this article. 
(5)  Any owner has had any license or occupation tax certificate issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked within the last ten years for the reason related to good moral character as defined herein. 
(6)  The owner, as a previous holder of a license or occupation tax certificate to operate a pawnshop has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business, within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(7)  Any owner has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction within the last ten years of an offense involving any felony or any crime involving theft, fraud or against property or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. 
(8)  Any owner has engaged in any deceptive business practice as defined herein. 
(9)  Any owner is less than 18 years of age. 
(10)  Any owner is not to be good moral character as defined herein. 
(11)  Any owner has failed to obtain any paper or document necessary in pursuance of this business or this application as may be required by any officer, agency or department of the city, county, state or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the city, state or United States. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-318. - Considerations in hearing of application. 
In considering whether or not any permit applied for shall be granted, the following shall be considered by mayor and council in the public interest and welfare: 
(1)  If any owner is a previous holder of a permit, the manner in which he or she conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business. 
(2)  The location for which the permit is sought as to traffic congestion, general character of the neighborhood and the effect such an establishment would have on the adjacent and surrounding property values. 
(3)  The number of permits already granted for similar businesses in the city and the place for which the occupation tax certificate is sought. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-319. - Change of location, name, or other information. 
(a)  No pawnbroker shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the finance department for the city. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's code, have been met. 
(b)  No owner shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a pawnbroker business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the permit. 
(c)  The owner shall notify the police department of any change in the information, material or data set out in the original application. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-320. - Revocation and appeal of permit. 
(a)  The city council shall be authorized to suspend, revoke or place on probation with or without conditions, any permit previously granted herein, upon hearing, with at least five days' written notice mailed to the owner at the permitted place or upon one or more the following: as 
(1)  An owner gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  An owner commits a deceptive business practice as defined herein; 
(3)  An owner has knowingly allowed the continuous violation of an ordinance of the city or other law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; 
(4)  An owner has violated any provision of the pawnbroker ordinance; 
(5)  An owner has been convicted of any felony or any crime involving theft, fraud or against property, by the State of Georgia or the city regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; 
(6)  An owner fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other ordinance of the city; 
(7)  An owner has failed to obtain, or has suffered the expiration, suspension or revocation of any paper or document necessary in pursuance of its business as may be required by any officer, agency, authority, or department of the city, state, or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolutions of the city, state or the United States; 
(8)  An owner made any misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead any party with whom the owner deals in pursuance of the regulated business. The term misrepresentation of fact as used herein shall embrace not only express misrepresentations but also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the owner's conduct, including acts and omissions; 
(9)  An owner has failed to make an entry of any material matter in his permanent record book; or falsified, obliterated, destroyed or removed from his place of business such permanent record book; 
(10)  An owner has failed to submit the daily report to the police department within the prescribed time; or has submitted an illegible, incomplete or improper daily report to the police department; 
(11)  An owner has refused to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect his permanent record book, his daily report or any goods in his possession during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(12)  An owner has failed to maintain a record of each pawn transaction, and fingerprints and photographs for at least four years; 
(13)  An owner has accepted a pledge or purchase of property from a person under the age of 18 years or who the owner knows is not the true owner of such property; 
(14)  An owner has made an agreement requiring the personal liability of the pledgor or seller or waiving any of the provisions of this part or providing for a maturity date less than one month after the date of the pawn transaction; or 
(15)  An owner has failed to return or replace the pledged goods to the pledgor or seller upon payment of the full amount due the owner unless the pledged goods have been taken into custody by a court or law enforcement officer or agency. 
(c)  The decision of mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-321. - Permit number. 
Each owner hereunder shall have printed on the front window of the regulated premises the inscription, "City of Douglasville Pawnshop Permit Number _______" in uniform letters not less than three inches in height. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-322. - Records and information to be maintained; display of pawnshop transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
(a)  All pawnbrokers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the pawnbroker. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The pawnbroker shall assign a pawnshop transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the pawnshop transaction number. 
(b)  The tag bearing the pawnshop transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however the pawnbroker shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this paragraph. 
(c)  The pawnbroker shall require all persons pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling property to show proper identification prior to conducting a pawnshop transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government-issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. 
(d)  The pawnbroker shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(e)  The pawnbroker shall photograph, with a digital camera, the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subject's face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(f)  The pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling any property, the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The electronic digital fingerprint scanner will be the primary method of entry required. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the pawn transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the person pawning, trading, pledging, exchanging, or selling the property. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one pawn transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature should be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained each time such person pledges, trades, pawns, exchanges, or sells any property. 
(g)  Items of property that appear to be new, unused, and in their original packaging cannot be accepted by the pawnbroker unless the customer can supply a copy of the original sales receipt, or other proof of purchase from the place of purchase, to the pawnbroker who shall retain the receipt or proof of purchase on file. 
(h)  The pawnbroker shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(i)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09; Ord. No. O-09-024, § 1(exh. A), 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-323. - Daily report to police; required format. 
Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, of all pawnshop transactions that occurred during 24 hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. 
(1)  Daily reports shall list all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold, the pawn transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the property including, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, and social security number of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging, or selling the property, along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(2)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(3)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible. Pawnshops that incur electronic system failures or other events that would cause partial or complete loss of electronic reporting should notify the police department forthwith with the reason of the failure. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions on paper forms. A digital camera will be used to collect the required pictures and transferred to a CD for submittal. The paper forms must include information as enumerated in section 26-322. Pawnbrokers shall maintain a minimum three-day supply of these paper forms. On a daily basis, all transactions not reported in electronic automated reporting system, will be delivered to the police department by the pawnshop within two hours of the end of the business day for every day until the event has been corrected. 
(4)  The chief of police or his designee shall designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. There will be a regulatory fee assessed to each pawnshop for each reported transaction: said fee shall be an amount set by the chief of police equal to that charged by the administrator. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnbroker and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09; Ord. No. O-09-024, § 1(exh. A), 6-15-09) 
Sec. 26-324. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. O-09-024, adopted June 15, 2009, repealed § 26-324, which pertained to the requirement of fingerprints and identification and derived from Ord. No. O-09-014, adopted March 16, 2009. 
Sec. 26-325. - Conflict of interest of city employees. 
(a)  No employee of the city who has any interest in a pawnshop, as defined herein, shall be assigned to work in an area or division of the city which regulates the business of pawnshops. 
(b)  No employee of the city with regulating authority may own, work in or be employed (paid or unpaid) by a pawnshop inside the city limits of the city. Regulating authority, for purposes of this article, is defined as any person involved in or assigned to the inspection of the premises, approval of the occupation tax certificate applications or pawnbroker permits; and granting or denying of such applications or permits, or enforcement of this article and its provisions such as law enforcement or police officers. 
(c)  No employee of the city with regulating authority as defined herein, may regulate a pawnshop where such is owned or operated by any person related to the employee of the city within a third degree of kinship. The term third degree of kinship shall include, for purposes of this article, children, grandchildren, mother, father, brothers and sisters, aunts and uncles, first cousins and in-laws. 
(d)  The definition of employees does not include elected officials of the city. 
(e)  All persons already engaging in the operation of or employment by a pawnshop prior to the effective date of this article shall be exempt from the provisions of this section, and shall be allowed to continue such operation or employment, provided they meet all the other conditions imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-326. - Additional merchandise. 
A pawnbroker selling goods other than those pledged may add new merchandise to his stock of the same type as that on which loans are made, up to a value of $1,000.00 per month, without having to pay an additional occupation tax as would otherwise be imposed according to the terms of the business taxes of the city. The pawnbroker must maintain all records, invoices, and bills of sale on such merchandise which shall be subject to inspection and review by any duly authorized law enforcement. No article(s) shall be maintained on the premises for sale on a consignment basis for any citizen, employee or pawnbroker. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-327. - Disposition of articles or goods. 
Any pawnbroker who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the words goods being here used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold those goods so taken in pawn or purchased for at least 30 days or longer if directed by the police department before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. All property and/or titles taken in pawn or purchased must be kept on the premises where such items were pawned or purchased. These articles/titles will be maintained in an area not accessed by customers. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a misdemeanor, as defined herein. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-328. - Restrictions regarding sale or pledge of building glass or plumbing material. 
(a)  Generally. It is unlawful for pawnbrokers to purchase, advance money on, or take in pawn, glass taken from buildings, such as mantel mirrors, art glass and the like, or copper wire, copper linings of bathtubs, lead pipes or any kind of plumbing materials sold as junk, where same is offered for sale or pawned by other than persons of known good character. 
(b)  Duties of pawnbroker. In all cases where goods are purchased or money advanced, pawnbrokers shall keep a record of the purchases or advances, showing the names of the person from whom received, their residence, the goods so taken and the amount of money paid or advanced, and this shall be at all times open for inspection to members of the police department. It is unlawful for pawnbrokers or employees thereof to purchase any goods, or to advance any money thereon, where their appearance indicates they have been tampered with, or there is an effort to conceal identity, or same are mutilated, or otherwise show an effort to destroy evidence of the former location of the property. 
(c)  Inspection. While the goods are being kept for 30 days before being disposed of, they shall be so arranged that they can be inspected by members of the police department on demand and the article location(s) shall be annotated in records readily available for inspection by the police department. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute an offense. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-329. - Redemption; lost or damaged goods. 
Any person properly identifying himself/herself and presenting a pawn ticket to the pawnbroker shall be presumed to be the pledgor or seller and shall be entitled to redeem the pledged goods described in such ticket. In the event such pledged goods are lost or damaged while in the possession of the pawnbroker, it shall be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to replace the lost or damaged goods with like kinds of merchandise and proof of replacement shall be a defense to prosecution. For the purposes of this subsection, lost includes destroyed or having disappeared because of any cause, whether known or unknown, that results in the pledged goods being unavailable for return to pledgor. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-330. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to section 1-3. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, any person dialing to comply with any provision of this article, or other laws, ordinances or regulations as may be passed by city council in regulating the conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the occupation tax certificate hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Sec. 26-331. - Business existing on date of adoption of this article. 
All persons already engaging in the business of operating a pawnshop prior to the effective date of this article shall file an application in accordance with the terms of this article by January 1 for the first year in which such permit is requested, and each year thereafter, on January 1 of the year for which such occupation tax certificate is requested in accordance with the renewal provisions set forth in this article. If the city council shall determine that the application filed pursuant to this subsection should be denied the applicant may continue to operate his or her business until the conclusion of the year in which they have a permit to operate. 
(Ord. No. O-09-014, § 1(exh. A), 3-16-09) 
Secs. 26-332—26-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 2010, repealed Art. XI, which pertained to precious metals and gems and derived from Ord. No. O-06-16, § 2, 6-5-06. 

Secs. 26-400—-26-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 18, 2010, repealed former Art. XII, §§ 26-500—26-522, and enacted a new Art. XII as set out herein. Former Art. XII pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-2010-1, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-10; Ord. No. O-2010-8, § 1, 3-15-10. 

Sec. 26-500. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accepted identification means an official document, most commonly in the form of a plastic coated/sealed card, issued for purposes of identification or driver's license. These documents must be issued by one of the 50 states or a branch of the U.S. military, i.e. Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard, or current State of Georgia and counties of Georgia probation and parole cards. The identification must at a minimum bear a true photograph of the person presenting it, date of birth, description of the person, and an address for the person. 
Acquire means buying, exchanging, transferring, collecting, or otherwise receiving physical possession of regulated secondhand items from another person or entity not a secondhand dealer, for resale, exchange, or transfer by the purchaser. 
Consigned goods means goods or items accepted by the dealer for resale where ownership of the goods or items is retained by the supplier, or where payment to the supplier by the dealer is contingent on resale by the dealer. 
Dealer in precious metals and gems means: 
(1)  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
(2)  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Deceptive business practice means: 
(1)  Any use or possession of a false weight or measurement, or any other device for falsely determining or recording any quality or quantity in connection with any scale or service; 
(2)  Any sale of, offer to sell or delivery of less than the represented quality or quantity; 
(3)  Any attempt to take more than the represented quantity of any commodity, when as buyer or broker, he furnishes the weight or measure; 
(4)  Any service which is of an unreasonably lesser quality than the service offered or represented; 
(5)  Any other practice designated as unlawful by O.C.G.A. section 10-1-300 et seq.; 
(6)  Any other fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
Electronic media means all non-blank video games, compact discs and CD's, video discs and DVD's, computer software, VHS, SIM cards, flash drives, vinyl records, 8-track tapes, cassette tapes, audio and/or video tapes, and like media. Electronic media does not include playing systems such as game boxes, stereos, computer hardware, phones, and the like. 
Employee means any person who works for a secondhand dealer, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of any felony or any crime involving theft, fraud or a crime against property in the past ten years. 
Interest in a secondhand dealership means any full or part ownership if the person involved, or any member of his or her family, is the outright owner of the secondhand dealership; a co-owner of the secondhand dealership; a partner in a partnership which owns all or part of the secondhand dealership; a stockholder in any corporation organized for pecuniary gain which owns all or any part of the secondhand dealership. 
Licensed supplier means a wholesaler, retailer, or distributor which sells only new items and possesses a current business license in the State of Georgia. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Nonregulated secondhand items means real property, visual fine art other than jewelry, motor vehicles, motorcycles, motorized water craft, waste paper, tires, lumber or raw wood products, and industrial machinery. 
Occupation tax certificate means permission to operate a business pursuant to ordinances of the city. 
Permit means permission to be a secondhand dealer, or to be employed or work in a secondhand dealership and to receive regulated secondhand goods from a seller on behalf of a secondhand dealer. 
Person means an association, firm, partnership and body politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as an individual. 
Police department means the chief of police or his designee. 
Recycler means any person or entity engaged in collecting, trading or holding for commercial purposes used goods and materials for conversion into raw material prior to use in manufacturing, including but not limited to a secondary metals recycler; no recycler shall sell or offer for sale used goods for reuse in substantially original form. 
Regulated secondhand items means new or used goods sold or acquired for resale by a secondhand dealer which are: 
(1)  Precious metal or gems as defined by O.C.G.A. section 43-37-1 et seq., or electronic media; or 
(2)  All other nonexempt goods of any kind other than nonregulated secondhand items defined in this section, and includes but is not limited to the following: hand tools, power tools, sporting equipment, electronic equipment, watches, jewelry, precious stones, precious metals, scrap gold, numismatic coins, musical instruments, electrical appliances, washers, dryers, clothing, electronic media, furniture, refrigerators, furniture and home furnishings, home appliances, automobile parts, watercraft parts, and other goods that have been previously sold or put into action or service and all new items for sale by a secondhand dealer. 
Return means a transaction where a vendor allows a customer to tender back goods previously purchased from that vendor by that customer within 90 days of the previous purchase, for a full or partial refund, with or without documented proof of purchase. 
Secondhand dealer means any person whose business, in whole or in part, is dealing in purchasing, selling, or trading regulated secondhand items; a second-hand dealer shall not engage in recycling. 
Seller or supplier means the person from whom a secondhand dealer or employee acquired new or secondhand items. 
Substantially similar means similar in function, style and manufacture, except for color and size. 
Trade-in means a transaction where a vendor allows a customer to tender back goods previously purchased in exchange for credit against a new purchase of greater value, where the new purchase is completed at the time of the tender, and where either: (a) The customer provides a sales receipt created contemporaneously with the original purchase, showing the date of purchase, the item purchased and the sales price, or (b) the vendor has a record of the original purchase created contemporaneously with the original purchase, showing the date of purchase, the item purchased and the sales price. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-40, § 1, 10-17-11; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 1, 12-19-11; Ord. No. O-2012-25, § 1, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-501. - Annual permit required; other violations. 
No person shall acquire or transfer any previously acquired nonexempt regulated secondhand items as a secondhand dealer or become an employee without a secondhand dealer permit. It shall be unlawful for any secondhand dealer or employee to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for a permit required by this article; or 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-502. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Exempt vendors. The following vendors are exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Tax-exempt entities; 
(2)  Vendors at one-day auctions, and permitted yard sales; 
(3)  Pawnbrokers; 
(4)  Recyclers. 
(b)  Exempt goods. All electronic media, and precious metals and gems are nonexempt regulated goods, even where the same may otherwise qualify for one or more of the exemptions listed in this subsection; subject only to that inclusion, the following specified goods are exempt from the requirements of this article: 
(1)  Licensed supplier goods. All new items of any kind purchased by the dealer directly from a licensed supplier. 
(2)  Consigned goods. 
(3)  Goods which will be offered for a resale price less than $40.00, unless received from the supplier: 
a.  In substantially similar multiples of more than two from the same supplier in any one calendar day, or 
b.  In the original box or package, or 
c.  With previous retail tags still attached. 
(4)  Firearms. 
(5)  Books and magazines. 
(6)  Motor vehicles, motorcycles, motorized water craft. 
(7)  Fungible goods held for mass recycling, including but not limited to waste paper, tires, lumber or raw wood products, industrial machinery. 
(8)  Children's furniture and equipment. All furniture, strollers, car seats, playpens and like portable equipment (but not sporting goods) designed primarily for use by a child age six years or younger. 
(9)  Visual fine art other than jewelry. 
(10)  Returns. 
(11)  Trade-ins, provided that the vendor shall retain documented proof of the previous purchase for not less than one year after completion of the trade-in transaction. 
(c)  Dealers of exempt goods exclusively. Secondhand dealers who sell only exempt or nonregulated goods shall not be required to obtain a secondhand dealer's permit, nor to comply with any other provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2010-43, § 1, 11-15-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 2, 12-19-11; Ord. No. O-2012-25, § 2, 6-18-12) 
Sec. 26-503. - Fixed physical location. 
No secondhand dealer or employee may operate except at a fixed permanent physical business location with an occupation tax registration; no dealer or employee may operate as a peddler or transient merchant. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-504. - Secondhand dealer and employee permits. 
(a)  Qualifications. All secondhand dealers and employees, as defined herein, shall be not less than 18 years of age, and must be of good moral character as defined by this article. Any person who has been convicted of any felony or crime involving theft, fraud or against property shall not be permitted to work on the premises of a secondhand dealership for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "on the premises" shall include all work done or services performed in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the regulated premises. 
(b)  Disclosure. Every secondhand dealer and employee must disclose any ownership or interest in any other secondhand dealership, whether it is located locally or out-of-state and must disclose the nature of such ownership or interest. 
(c)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on the premises of a secondhand dealership, he shall file an application with the city finance department setting out the information required in subsections (a) and (b) of this section. Each applicant must be fingerprinted by the police department. The city shall have 45 days to investigate the information submitted by the applicant. If the applicant is found to be of good moral character by the police department, and if all other applicant requirements of this article are met, the police department shall approve an employee permit and annual personal identification card authorizing the person to be employed at a secondhand dealership. Upon approval, the applicant may begin working on the regulated premises. It shall be the duty of the secondhand dealer to assure compliance with that the provisions of this section. Every permit holder is required to notify the city finance department of any change in information or circumstances which occurs after the original approval was granted. If approval is denied, the applicant may, within ten days, apply in writing to the city finance department for reconsideration by the police department. The decision of the police department upon reconsideration may be appealed to the city council, which shall issue such order as is required. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment, or a receipt of the permitting officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(d)  Suspension, revocation of the occupation tax certificate or permit. Violation of the provisions of this article or any other ordinance of the city, rules or regulations of the city or commission of any felony or any crime involving theft, drugs, fraud or a crime against property shall subject the employee to suspension or revocation of the employee permit, and in the case of an owner or secondhand dealer shall subject the party to suspension of any permit authorized by this article and the occupation tax registration for the secondhand dealership. 
(e)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or occupation tax certificate holder of any secondhand dealership. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 3, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 26-505. - Operation of an unregulated premises unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on within the city any secondhand dealership, as defined herein, without a secondhand dealer permit and a currently valid occupation tax certificate to do so. A proper application for renewal within the time required must be submitted and such occupation tax certificate shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-506. - Renewal of permits. 
Permits for secondhand dealers and employees may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. Each secondhand dealer must file a verified annual report showing the person's gross receipts from the business and the amounts paid to the employees for the preceding calendar year and such shall be submitted with the renewal applications. The renewal fee for permits shall be $25.00. Renewal applications shall be submitted by January 1 of the year for which such permit is requested. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-507. - Permit nontransferable. 
No secondhand dealer permit or employee permit may be sold, transferred or assigned to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permit holder is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without affecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit upon notification to the city shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-508. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any secondhand dealership operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal violation hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such secondhand dealership and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a secondhand dealership contrary to the provisions of this chapter. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of any related permit and occupation tax registration granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-509. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-510. - Application for permit; approval. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership, corporation, trust or joint venture desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on a secondhand dealership as required by this article shall make application to the finance director through its designated representative. 
(b)  Each application for a secondhand dealership permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full true and legal name(s) and any other aliases or name changes used in the last five years. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the individual applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(4)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(5)  The secondhand dealership permit history of the applicant and whether, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory, the applicant has had such permit revoked or suspended. If such permit has been revoked or suspended, the applicant must state the reason, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate filed with the county clerk or secretary of state. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation(s) or partnership(s) shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated applicants shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual owner under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(7)  If any applicant has been convicted of any crime involving moral character in the past ten years, the applicant must provide a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether the terms of the disposition have been fully completed. 
(8)  If the applicant is doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name, properly recorded, must be provided. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name, affidavit, if any, and the last annual report, if any, must be provided. 
(9)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral character, must be provided. The finance department shall prepare forms, consistent with the provisions of this article, for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(10)  Address of secondhand dealership to be regulated. 
(11)  Whether the premises are owned or rented. 
(12)  Nature and character of the business to be conducted. 
(13)  Each application for a secondhand dealership permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by all owners. 
(14)  Any ownership interest in any other secondhand dealership, whether it is located locally or out-of-state and the nature of such ownership interest. 
(15)  Statement that there are no fees, taxes, fines, utilities or other charges due to the city from the applicant. 
(16)  Any other information that may be required by the finance director or police department such as source of financing for the business operation. 
(c)  The applicant shall personally appear at the city, and produce proof that the occupation tax has been paid and shall present the application containing the above-referenced information. 
(d)  The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and background of the applicant. 
(e)  Upon completion of the review of the application by the finance department and the police department, the police department shall grant or deny the application consistent with this article. A denial of the application by the police department may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 4, 12-19-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 4, adopted Dec. 19, 2011, amended § 26-510 title to read as herein set out. Former § 26-510 title pertained to application for permit; approval by city council. 
Sec. 26-511. - Denial of an application. 
The finance director or the police department may reject any application for incompleteness. The police department may deny an application which shows any of the following exist: 
(1)  The required fees or taxes have not been paid. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Application does not conform to all the provisions required by the article. 
(4)  The owner has failed to fully cooperate with the investigation required by this article. 
(5)  Any owner has had any license or occupation tax certificate issued under the police powers of any county or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked within the last ten years for the reason related to good moral character as defined herein. 
(6)  The owner, as a previous holder of a license or occupation tax certificate to operate a secondhand dealership has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business, within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(7)  Any owner has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction within the last ten years of an offense involving any felony or any crime involving theft, fraud or against property or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses. 
(8)  Any owner has engaged in any deceptive business practice as defined herein. 
(9)  Any owner is less than 18 years of age. 
(10)  Any owner is not to be good moral character as defined herein. 
(11)  Any owner has failed to obtain any paper or document necessary in pursuance of this business or this application as may be required by any officer, agency or department of the city, county, state or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the city, state or United States. 
(12)  If the applicant or any owner of the applicant is a previous holder of a permit, the manner in which he or she conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual police observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to the business. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 5, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 26-512. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 5, adopted Dec. 19, 2011, repealed § 26-512, which pertained to considerations in hearing of application and derived from Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 18, 2010. 
Sec. 26-513. - Change of location, name, or other information. 
(a)  No secondhand dealer shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the police department for the city. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations, as contained in the city's code, have been met. 
(b)  No owner shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a secondhand dealer business under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the permit. 
(c)  The owner shall notify the police department of any change in the information, material or data set out in the original application. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 6, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 26-514. - Revocation and appeal of permit. 
(a)  The police department shall be authorized to suspend, revoke or place on probation with or without conditions, any permit previously granted herein, upon hearing, with at least five days' written notice mailed to the owner at the permitted place or upon one or more the following as: 
(1)  An owner gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
(2)  An owner commits a deceptive business practice as defined herein; 
(3)  An owner has knowingly allowed the continuous violation of an ordinance of the city or other law of the State of Georgia to occur on the premises; 
(4)  An owner has violated any provision of the secondhand dealer ordinance; 
(5)  An owner has committed any felony or any crime involving theft, fraud or against property, or has committed a violation of this article on the premises; 
(6)  An owner fails to pay any fee, occupation tax, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other ordinance of the city; 
(7)  An owner has failed to obtain, or has suffered the expiration, suspension or revocation of any paper or document necessary in pursuance of its business as may be required by any officer, agency, authority, or department of the city, state, or United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolutions of the city, state or the United States; 
(8)  An owner made any misrepresentation of fact, whether through advertisement or through any form of direct communication oral or written, which is intended to mislead the public or to mislead any party with whom the owner deals in pursuance of the regulated business. The term misrepresentation of fact as used herein shall embrace not only express misrepresentations but also misrepresentations arising by virtue of the owner's conduct, including acts and omissions; 
(9)  An owner has failed to make an entry of any material matter in his permanent record book; or falsified, obliterated, destroyed or removed from his place of business such permanent record book; 
(10)  An owner has failed to submit the report to the police department within the prescribed time, or has submitted an illegible, incomplete or improper daily report to the police department; 
(11)  An owner has refused to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect his permanent record book, his daily report or any goods in his possession during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time; 
(12)  An owner has failed to maintain a record of each secondhand transaction, and fingerprints and photographs for at least four years; or 
(13)  An owner has accepted acquired secondhand items from a person under the age of 18 years or who the owner knows is not the true owner of such property. 
(b)  The decision of the police department may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 7, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 26-515. - Permit number. 
Each owner hereunder shall have printed on the front window of the regulated premises the inscription, "City of Douglasville Secondhand Dealership Permit Number _____;" with permit number inscribed, all in uniform letters not less than three inches in height. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 7, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 26-516. - Records and information to be maintained; display of secondhand dealership transaction number; identification; digital photographs; fingerprints; records storage. 
(a)  All secondhand dealers shall maintain records documenting accurate descriptions of all property pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged, or sold to the secondhand dealer. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the manufacturer, model, serial number, style, material, kind, color, design, number of stones if jewelry, and all other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The secondhand dealer shall assign a secondhand dealership transaction number documenting each transaction, and ensure each item received is tagged with the secondhand dealership transaction number. 
(b)  The tag bearing the secondhand dealership transaction number must remain attached to the item until the property is disposed of by sale, trade, or other lawful means. This paragraph does not apply to the purchase of property from licensed wholesale or distributor businesses for the purpose of retail sales; however the secondhand dealer shall be required to maintain all purchasing records for property exempted from this paragraph. 
(c)  The secondhand dealer shall require any person selling secondhand items to him to show proper identification prior to conducting a secondhand dealership transaction. Proper identification is defined as a government-issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, or state identification card. 
(d)  The secondhand dealer shall also document the name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth of the person selling the secondhand items, along with the date and time of transaction. This documentation shall be made at the time of the transaction. 
(e)  A digital photograph shall be made by the dealer or employee at the time of acquisition of any regulated secondhand item depicting the item's serial number, which number shall be clearly visible and readable in the photograph if imprinted on the item. If the item is not imprinted with any type of serial number, then the photograph shall show the entire item; the photograph shall be clearly focused upon the item, and no more than 25 percent of the photograph area shall depict anything other than the item. All such digital photographs shall be submitted to the automated reporting system at the time of reporting, immediately before completion of the transaction. Further, a digital photograph of the seller's face, similar to those on accepted identification, shall be made at the time of each and every acquisition and submitted to the automated reporting system. The photograph shall be clearly focused and shall show a frontal view of the seller's face along with the secondhand dealer's ticket transaction number. Digital images shall be labeled and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable, and readily available for review. 
(f)  The secondhand dealer shall obtain from each seller the fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. The electronic digital fingerprint scanner will be the primary method of entry required. The fingerprint shall be imprinted onto the transaction form in the designated area along with the signature of the seller. The fingerprint must be clear and legible. In the event that more than one transaction form is required, a fingerprint and signature shall be obtained for each form. Fingerprints and the information required herein shall be obtained upon each occasion of acquisition. 
(g)  The secondhand dealer shall store the above records, digital images, and fingerprints for a period of four years and make them available to law enforcement upon request. 
(h)  Every secondhand dealership shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 8, 12-19-11) 
Sec. 26-517. - Report to police; required format. 
Every secondhand dealer shall make a report in such form as may be prescribed by the police department of all secondhand dealership transactions. 
(1)  Reports shall list all secondhand items acquired, the transaction number for each transaction, and a description of the secondhand items including, to the extent possible: (a) the manufacturer, (b) model, (c) serial number, (d) style, (e) material, (f) kind, (g) color, (h) design, (i) number of stones if jewelry, (j) weight for jewelry, and precious metals, and (k) and any other identifying names, marks, and numbers. The daily report shall also list the name, address, race, sex, height, weight, driver's license number, date of birth, along with the date and time of the transaction. 
(2)  Every secondhand dealership shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system via the internet to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system, and immediately prior to completion of the transaction. A transaction is complete when the owner has received payment in cash or other consideration for the regulated secondhand goods. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the police department. 
(3)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, secondhand dealerships and secondhand dealers will be notified as soon as possible. Whenever secondhand dealers incur electronic system failures or other events that cause partial or complete loss of electronic reporting, they shall notify the police department immediately, and then make a written record on prescribed paper forms, as a substitute for timely electronic reporting, until the electronic automated reporting system is restored. Prior to making any written report as a substitute for electronic reporting, secondhand dealers shall contact the police department officer in charge of secondhand reporting, via email or documented phone call, and state the reason and circumstances of the failure. For substitute reporting, secondhand dealers shall (a) use digital cameras to collect the required photographs and shall transfer them to a CD for submittal, and (b) take required fingerprints in ink and record them on the prescribed forms. The paper forms shall be used to record all information required by this section for electronic reporting. Secondhand dealers shall maintain a minimum three-day supply of required paper forms. Secondhand dealers shall enter into the electronic reporting system all transactions originally reported in substitute written form within 24 hours after the electronic system is restored. 
(4)  The police department shall designate the required automated reporting system and required equipment needed. A regulatory fee shall be assessed to each secondhand dealers for each reported transaction in an amount set by the chief of police equal to that charged by the administrator. This fee will be invoiced to each secondhand dealer and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10; Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 9, 12-19-11; Ord. No. O-2012-25, § 3, 6-18-12) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2011-52, § 9, adopted Dec. 19, 2011, amended § 26-517 title to read as herein set out. Former § 26-517 pertained to daily report to police; required format. 
Sec. 26-518. - Disposition of articles or goods. 
Any secondhand dealer who acquires nonexempt regulated secondhand items shall hold them for at least 30 days, or longer if directed by the police department, before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. All property and/or titles must be kept on the premises. These secondhand items will be maintained in an area not accessed by customers. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-519. - Restrictions regarding sale or pledge of building glass or plumbing material. 
(a)  Generally. It is unlawful for secondhand dealers to acquire secondhand items taken from buildings, such as mantel mirrors, art glass and the like, or copper wire, copper linings of bathtubs, lead pipes or any kind of plumbing materials sold as junk, where same is offered for sale by other than persons of known good character. 
(b)  Duties of secondhand dealer. It is unlawful for secondhand dealers or employees thereof to purchase any secondhand items where their appearance indicates they have been tampered with, or there is an effort to conceal identity, or same are mutilated, or otherwise show an effort to destroy evidence of the former location of the items. 
(c)  Inspection. While the items are being kept for 30 days before being disposed of, they shall be so arranged that they can be inspected by members of the police department on demand and the items shall be annotated in records readily available for inspection by the police department. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-520. - Additional registration and restrictions for dealers in precious metals and gems. 
Dealers in precious metals and gems shall comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. section 43-37-1 et seq., and shall register with the police department as required by State law, in addition to compliance with this article. Every dealer in precious metals and gems shall be considered a secondhand dealer for purposes of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise or transact business as a dealer in precious metals or gems without first registering pursuant to do so. It shall be unlawful for any dealer in precious metals or gems to purchase precious metals in a melted or smelted state unless the purchase is from a registered dealer in precious metals or gems. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-521. - Penalties for violation. 
Any applicant violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to section 1-3. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, any applicant dialing to comply with any provision of this article, or other laws, ordinances or regulations as may be passed by city council in regulating the conduct of the business of a secondhand dealer, shall be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit and occupation tax certificate hereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Sec. 26-522. - Business existing on date of adoption of this article. 
All applicants already engaging in the business of operating a secondhand dealership in the city prior to the effective date of this article shall file an application in accordance with the terms of this article by January 1, 2011, and each year thereafter, on January 1 of the year for which such occupation tax certificate is requested in accordance with the renewal provisions set forth in this article. If the city council shall determine that the application filed pursuant to this subsection should be denied the applicant may continue to operate his or her business until the conclusion of the year in which they have a permit to operate. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-40, § 1(Exh. A), 10-18-10) 
Chapter 28 - CEMETERY AND BURIAL GROUND PRESERVATION 
ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND INTENT; DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 28-1. - Purpose and intent. 
The City of Douglasville has been richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased, and many of those who passed on have been memorialized with resting places in cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds that have been abandoned and are threatened by unknowing development. Human remains and burial objects are not property to be owned by the person or entity which owns the land or water where the human remains and burial objects are interred or discovered, but are a part of the finite, irreplaceable and non-renewable cultural heritage of the citizens of Douglasville which should be preserved. The care accorded the remains of deceased persons reflects respect and regard for human dignity as well as cultural, spiritual, and religious values. Therefore, it is the desire of the mayor and council of the City of Douglasville to provide for the preservation of all such cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds. The mayor and council of the City of Douglasville hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a commission for the purpose of providing a procedure for the identification of abandoned cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds. It is further the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for the processing of applications to disturb and relocate human remains and burial objects in conformity with state and local law. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Abandoned cemetery means a cemetery which shows signs of neglect including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
Archaeologist means any person who is: 
(1)  A member of or meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologists and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves; or 
(2)  Employed on July 1, 1991, by the state or by any county or municipal governing authority as an archaeologist. 
Burial ground means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains including, without limitation, privately owned burial plots, individually and collectively, once human remains have been buried therein. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
Burial object means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker, or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term also includes any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
Cemetery or cemeteries means any land or structure dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for interment or human remains. It includes sites for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
City means the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
Consultant means an individual, chosen and hired by the city, and knowledgeable in matters of archaeology or local geographical history, but whose qualifications need not meet those of an archaeologist as defined by this section. 
DCC means the Douglasville Cemetery Commission. 
Descendant means a person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with Title 19 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.), and as may be amended from time to time. 
Genealogist means a person who traces or studies the descent of persons or families and prepares a probative record of such descent. 
Human remains means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96; Ord. No. O-99-4, § 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. O-99-4, § 1, 1-19-99) 
Secs. 28-3—28-9. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INVESTIGATION FOR ABANDONED CEMETERIES AND GRAVE SITES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-99-4, § 1, adopted January 19, 1999, amended the Code by repealing former Art. II, §§ 28-10 and 28-11, in its entirety. Former Art. II pertained to the cemetery commission, and derived from Ord. No. O-96-39, adopted July 22, 1996; Ord. No. O-96-43, adopted September 3, 1996; and Ord. No. O-96-58, adopted December 2, 1996. 

Sec. 28-10. - Investigation required. 
Where any person shall apply to the city for zoning or rezoning of property or for any soil disturbance permit, and where the subject property has not been previously investigated for abandoned cemeteries or grave sites pursuant to this chapter, prior to issuance of said permit or grant of the requested zoning or rezoning, the city engineer or his designee shall refer such property for investigation in accordance with this chapter; provided however, the city engineer shall have authority to waive referral and investigation for good cause for any property which has been previously developed. Any such application filed for zoning, rezoning or for a soil disturbance permit shall be accompanied by written authorization signed by the property owner for the city and its agents and its consultant to enter upon the premises and conduct an investigation. Any such application for which referral and investigation is not waived by the city engineer at the time of filing shall be accompanied by payment of an investigation fee, for which an amount shall be set by the city's mayor and council from time to time. No zoning, rezoning or soil disturbance permit shall be completed or issued for any property for which an investigation is required by this article prior to completion of the same where such investigation and referral have not been waived. 
(Ord. No. O-99-4, § 2, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 28-11. - Investigation by consultant. 
Where any property is referred for investigation in accordance with this article, the city engineer shall promptly procure the services of a consultant as defined by this chapter. In the course of investigation of the subject property, the consultant shall, within thirty days of referral, view the subject property and gather any available relevant social history regarding said site and transmit to the city engineer a written report stating the probability or lack thereof that the site contains an abandoned cemetery or burial ground. 
Any written report rendered pursuant to this section shall state either that it is "probable" or "not probable" that an abandoned cemetery or burial ground currently exists on the subject property, and the facts supporting such conclusion. Said report shall include any additional relevant information known or discovered in the course of said investigation, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  The estimated number of graves and their approximate location; 
B.  The estimated age of the abandoned cemetery or burial ground; 
C.  The sources of any social history; 
D.  The names and addresses of any likely descendants of any individual interred at the site, or any information likely to lead to discovery of the same; and 
E.  Any evidence or indication that individuals of aboriginal or American Indian descent are interred at the site. 
(Ord. No. O-99-4, § 2, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 28-12. - Effect of investigation. 
Where the written report of a consultant shows that it is "probable" that an abandoned cemetery or burial ground currently exists on the subject property, the applicant for zoning, rezoning or a soil disturbance permit shall be so advised by the city engineer, and any permit inconsistent with such finding shall be denied, absent compliance by the applicant with Article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-99-4, § 2, 1-19-99) 
Secs. 28-13—28-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTURBANCE OF GRAVES AND CEMETERIES 

Sec. 28-20. - Fifty-foot buffer for known cemeteries or burial grounds. 
No owner or occupier of property shall knowingly disturb or allow to be disturbed any property located within 50 feet of any grave site within any known cemetery or burial ground unless a burial disturbance permit is first obtained or an alternative protective buffer is established by the city engineer as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-21. - Notification of discovery or disturbance of cemeteries or burial grounds. 
Any person who knows or has reason to know that a human burial ground or cemetery within the city is being disturbed, destroyed, defaced, mutilated, removed, excavated, or exposed without issuance of a burial disturbance permit shall immediately notify the city police department and the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-22. - Suspension of development or activity upon disturbance of human remains of burial objects; establishment of protective buffer. 
(a)  When human remains or burial objects are disturbed without a burial disturbance permit in the course of development of any tract of property, whether through discovery of a previously unknown cemetery or burial ground or otherwise, all activities that may affect the cemetery or burial ground shall immediately cease. When any cemetery or burial ground has been so disturbed in the course of development, after the discovering party has notified the city police department and the city engineer of the discovery, the owner or agent of the property, at his or her own expense, shall immediately apply for a burial disturbance permit and take steps to determine the estimated number of graves on the owner's property and their approximate location on the property through an archaeologist. Once the archaeologist has established the approximate boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground on the disturbed property, a protective buffer shall be determined by the city engineer. 
(b)  Any owner or occupier of property desiring to develop the same within 50 feet of the outer boundary of any grave site within any cemetery or burial ground may apply for establishment of a protective buffer by the city engineer, as an alternative to the 50-foot buffer otherwise imposed by this chapter. Upon application, it shall be within the discretion of the city engineer to establish a protective buffer less than 50 feet around the perimeter of the cemetery or burial site. 
(c)  In determining the appropriate protective buffer, the city engineer shall consider the following non-exhaustive list of factors: 
(1)  The slope of the land in and surrounding the boundaries; 
(2)  The proximity of the burial around or cemetery to any floodplains; 
(3)  The proximity to any body of water or stormwater runoff; 
(4)  The natural vegetation within and surrounding the boundaries; 
(5)  The nature of any land-disturbing or development activity in the area adjacent to the boundaries; and 
(6)  Any other factors determined relevant by the city engineer. 
(d)  No activity may occur on the property where the cemetery or burial ground is discovered that will cause the destruction, defacement, mutilation, removal, or exposure of a burial place pending the application and appeal period. 
(e)  No activity shall resume within the protective buffer unless: 
(1)  Authorization is received from the city engineer or his or her designee; or 
(2)  The burial disturbance permit application and appeal period is completed and the activity is in compliance: 
a.  With the terms of an approved burial disturbance permit as issued by the city council or as modified by the superior court or other reviewing court; and 
b.  With any applicable provisions of the Code of Douglasville, including but not limited to the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and the zoning ordinance. 
(f)  The owner or agent may appeal the determination of the protective buffer by city engineer to the city council, upon written request made and delivered to the city clerk within ten days of notification to the owner or agent of the protective buffer established by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-23. - Application for burial disturbance permit and review by city council. 
Any person or entity seeking a burial disturbance permit from the city council pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 36-72-4 shall comply with the following: 
(1)  An application shall be filed with the city clerk containing the following: 
a.  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a written legal opinion based upon a title search by an attorney licensed to practice in the State of Georgia. 
b.  A written report prepared by an archaeologist stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit. 
c.  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archaeologist's report. 
d.  A written plan prepared by a genealogist for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to buried in such cemetery. The applicant shall implement its plan for identifying, locating and giving notice to descendants no later than the date that the application is submitted to the city clerk for review by the city council. 
1.  The applicant shall notify possible descendants that a burial disturbance permit has been applied for, that the recipient is believed to be a descendant of one who is believed to be buried on the property, of the location of the cemetery or burial ground, of their rights under this chapter and O.C.G.A. section 36-72-1 et seq., and how to contact the city for further information regarding any mitigation proposals, the terms of any permits issued, the time and place of any scheduled public hearings, appeal procedures and events. 
2.  If those buried or believed to be buried in the cemetery or burial ground are of aboriginal or American Indian descent, the genealogist must consult with the Council on American Indian Concerns created pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 44-12-280. In such case, the notification plan shall include any American Indian tribes as-defined in paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. section 44-12-260 that are culturally affiliated, as well as any known descendants of those presumed buried. 
e.  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify: 
1.  The method of disinterment; 
2.  The location and method of disposition of the remains; 
3.  The approximate cost of the process; and 
4.  The approximate number of graves affected. 
f.  An application fee not to exceed $2,500.00 which shall reflect the cost of the city: 
1.  To process and review the application; 
2.  To advertise and conduct a public hearing to consider the application; 
3.  To hire an attorney, if desired by the city, to assist in making recommendation regarding the applicant's plan; 
4.  To hire an independent archaeologist, if desired by the city, to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan; 
5.  To hire an independent surveyor, if desired by the city, to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  After filing of any application for a burial disturbance permit, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city council for the sole purpose of reviewing the adequacy of the applicant's plan for notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to buried in such cemetery or burial ground. The applicant shall not delay efforts to notify such descendants until the time of such hearing or until approval of such plan, but shall instead commence implementation of the notification plan upon its filing with the city clerk, notwithstanding possible later modification, as required by O.C.G.A. section 36-72-6 and this chapter. After reviewing the plan, the city council may require the applicant to utilize additional reasonable methods to identify and locate descendants. Additional requirements imposed may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Newspaper notices in communities where descendants are believed or likely to be located; 
b.  Further title research than is normally required on the property where the burial ground or cemetery is also located on adjacent property, if it may assist in the identification of descendants. 
(4)  After the city council has reviewed applicant's notification plan, and after applicant's completion of all required efforts to implement said plan as amended by the city council, the applicant shall submit to the city clerk written verification that all such efforts were completed more than 15 days ago. Upon such verification the applicant may apply for approval of the same by the city council in the form of a resolution. Such resolution, if approved, shall reflect the council's satisfaction that all reasonable efforts have been made by applicant to notify descendants. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96; Ord. No. O-99-4, § 3, 1-19-99) 
Sec. 28-24. - Public hearing on burial disturbance permit application. 
Within 15 days after enactment of any resolution of the city council approving the efforts of the applicant to notify descendants, the city clerk shall set the date and time for a public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard on the issue of the burial disturbance permit application, and shall notify the applicant of said hearing date in writing. The city clerk shall cause notice of the public hearing to be advertised in the legal organ of Douglas County once a week for the two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which the hearing is to be held. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-25. - Decision on burial disturbance permit application. 
(a)  In determining whether to deny or grant the burial disturbance permit application, the city council shall consider the following issues: 
(1)  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed; 
(2)  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
(3)  The economic and other costs of mitigation; 
(4)  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects; 
(5)  The balancing of the applicant's interest in disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment; and 
(6)  Any other compelling factors which the city council deems relevant. 
(b)  The city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of the conclusion of the public hearing of its decision to: 
(1)  Deny the application for burial disturbance permit. Such notification shall include the reasons for the denial. 
(2)  Issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part. 
(3)  Issue a permit, adopting the application in whole or in part, including additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground. Such additional requirements may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Relocation of the proposed project; 
b.  Reservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land; 
c.  Respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-26. - Appeal of decision on application for burial disturbance permit. 
Any applicant or descendant who is dissatisfied with a decision of the city council to grant or deny a burial disturbance permit may file an appeal in the Superior Court of the Douglas Judicial Circuit within 30 days of such decision. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-27. - Development activities pending appeal. 
(a)  An applicant who has been granted a burial disturbance permit may not begin or resume any activities affecting a cemetery or burial ground has been granted until the 30-day period for appeal of the decision of the city council has expired. 
(b)  If an appeal is filed contesting the grant of a burial disturbance permit, an applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only: 
(1)  Upon consent of the city council and the party seeking judicial review; or 
(2)  Upon order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-28. - Disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects. 
The permit holder's archaeologist shall supervise, monitor and carry out any disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects permitted by this chapter. All associated costs shall be borne by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 28-29—28-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION, PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 28-40. - Administration, inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  This chapter shall be enforced by the city's police department, the building department, the or other persons designated by the city council. 
(b)  The city engineer shall have the authority to issue a stop-work order to obtain compliance with this article. 
(c)  The city shall cause inspections as necessary to determine whether any permit holder has complied with the provisions of this chapter requiring cessation or limitation of activity and to determine whether the permit holder has complied with the terms of the burial disturbance permit as issued by the city council or as modified by the superior court or other reviewing court. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-41. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to knowingly disturb, destroy, deface, mutilate, remove, excavate or expose a burial place without first obtaining a burial disturbance permit from the city council as required by O.C.G.A. section 36-72-1, et seq., or as it may be amended from time to time, and following the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to report the discovery of human remains or burial objects to the Douglasville Police Department or the city engineer. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to report the disturbance of any human remains, burial objects, cemeteries or burial grounds to the Douglasville Police Department. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to observe the provisions of section 28-22, section 28-27, or the protective buffer requirements imposed by the city engineer. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to observe the conditions and provisions of a burial disturbance permit granted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-42. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter by any person is hereby deemed to be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to any other remedy provided herein, the city may seek injunctive relief to cease and remove any violations of this chapter in the appropriate court against the appropriate person or entity. 
(c)  In addition, any violation of this chapter is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance, and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceedings allowed by law in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Secs. 28-43—28-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 28-50. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-51. - Severability. 
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declarations shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Sec. 28-52. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. 
(Ord. No. O-96-39, § 1, 7-22-96) 
Chapter 30 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , adopted April 20, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 30, §§ 30-36—30-43, 30-66—30-68, 30-91—30-93, 30-111—30-113, 30-136—30-139, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 30 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, §§ 9-1—9-8, 9-21—9-23, 9-35—9-37, 9-49—9-51, and 9-63—9-66. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; mayor and council, § 2-46 et seq.; E 9-1-1 advisory committee, § 2-326 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Local organization for emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27; local rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28; emergency interim successors, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-50. 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
The City of Douglasville Charter authorizes establishment of procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation or unusual occurrence exists within or outside the city and for making and carrying out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such emergencies for the protection, safety, health, and well-being of the citizens of the city. The city's operational response to emergencies and unusual occurrences shall be tailored to the unique requirements of any emergency situation, and shall be consistent and compatible with the emergency operation plan (EOP) developed by the Douglasville-Douglas County Emergency Management Agency. The purpose of this chapter 30 shall be to set forth standards and procedures supplemental to the EOP, and to establish administrative and operational measures the City of Douglasville should take in developing plans and preparing to respond effectively to an unusual occurrence. These provisions shall place responsibility with specific personnel, units, or positions within the City of Douglasville. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-2. - Other sources of law. 
These provisions are to be utilized by employees of the City of Douglasville as a guide during local emergencies. These provisions are not meant to be "standards" as contemplated by O.C.G.A. Title 38, chapter 3. These provisions are supplemental to the EOP developed by the Douglasville-Douglas County Emergency Management Agency, and in the event of any conflict, the provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 38 Chapter 3 and the EOP shall supersede the provisions of this chapter 30. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means a federal emergency, a state emergency, or a local emergency. 
Emergency command center means the central location from which any local emergency will be managed by city personnel. 
Emergency management center means the location from which the location where Douglas County Emergency Management personnel will manage any state emergency or federal emergency. 
Emergency operation center means a stationary or mobile emergency operations center (EOC) established at or near the location of any site-specific local emergency, where city personnel will maintain a perimeter and see to the immediate needs of persons in the area of the emergency site. 
Federal emergency means a state of emergency declared by the President of the United States or other authorized federal official. 
Local emergency or unusual occurrence means a state of emergency declared by the city's mayor or other authorized city official, and lasting until officially terminated; a local emergency may be declared and in effect either during or independent from a state emergency or a federal emergency. 
Mobilize means assigned to emergency work as instructed by a superior employee or the mayor during a declared local emergency, which may include work on days and at times of day other than the employee's normal schedule; mobilizing an employee does not cause his travel time to the work site from home, or to home from a work site, to be compensable. 
State emergency means "state of emergency" as defined by O.C.G.A. subsection 38-3-3(7). 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-4. - Conditions warranting a local emergency declaration. 
The mayor may declare a local emergency whenever: (a) a federal emergency is in effect, (b) a state emergency is in effect, (c) whenever in his or her judgment, the imminent threat or actual occurrence of a disaster is of sufficient severity or magnitude to warrant extraordinary local government measures to prevent or alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering threatened or caused thereby. By way of example, the these conditions include energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, acts of domestic or international terrorism, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, radiological action, or other causes. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-5. - Initiation of a local emergency declaration. 
(a)  Declarations initiated by other than the police department. The mayor may initiate declaration of a local emergency, without assistance from other personnel, whenever he has information regarding an existing or threatened local disaster from the Douglas County Director of Emergency Management or from any other credible and reliable source. Whenever the mayor declares a local emergency not requested by the police department, the mayor shall have a member of the administration department contact the city manager and the police chief or the ranking officer of the police department command staff within 20 minutes of the declaration, after which the city manager shall designate the appropriate level of the local emergency. 
(b)  Declarations initiated by the police department. The declaration of a local emergency by the mayor may be requested by the highest ranking police officer who is of a rank not lower than sergeant, and who is personally at the scene of any potential local emergency. Such officer shall immediately inform the police shift commander of the relevant facts constituting the emergency; the shift commander shall contact the police chief or the ranking officer of the police department command staff, who shall confirm or terminate the initiation within 20 minutes of its receipt. After confirmation of any request for a declaration of local emergency, a member of the police department administrative staff shall contact the mayor and city manager and deliver all pertinent information. The city manager shall designate the level of emergency and then contact all persons required by subsection 30-9(a) to report to the emergency command center (ECC), and inform the department heads for any city departments to be mobilized at the declared level of the emergency. Call-out of employees to be mobilized shall be the responsibility of the respective department heads. When an emergency has been declared, it is the responsibility of the city manager to assure that proper operational procedures are followed and coordinated with any assistance and direction from agencies outside city government. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-6. - Designation of emergency level. 
The city manager shall designate one of three levels for any declared local emergency, and the designated level may be revised prior to termination of the emergency: 
(1)  Level 1 emergencies. At this level the police department, maintenance and sanitation department, and the communications department shall be mobilized. The city manager shall additionally contact Douglas County Fire Department and request a representative to participate. A level 1 emergency is the least pervasive emergency level. 
(2)  Level 2 emergencies. At this level the police department, maintenance and sanitation department, development services division of the community and development services department, the information technology division of the community and development services department, the communications division of the community and development services department, the finance department, and the parks and recreation department shall be mobilized. The city manager shall contact the Douglas County Fire Department and request a representative to participate. A level 2 emergency declaration reflects a mid-level pervasive emergency level. 
(3)  Level 3 emergencies. At this level the police department, maintenance and sanitation department, development services division of the community and development services department, the information technology division of the community and development services department, the communications division of the community and development services department, the finance department, the parks and recreation department, and the legal division of the administration department shall be mobilized. The city manager shall contact the Douglasville - Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority, the appropriate electric power utilities, and the Douglas County Fire Department and request a representative to participate. A level 3 emergency is the most pervasive emergency level. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-7. - Intergovernmental contacts and cooperation. 
Anytime a local emergency is declared, the city manager or his designee will contact the director of emergency management for Douglas County. Other agencies, such as hospitals, other law enforcement agencies, or volunteers shall be contacted and mobilized as appropriate and as determined by the city manager or the mayor. Use of the city's emergency warning system during any local emergency shall proceed in compliance with the written Douglas County E-911 Severe Weather Warning System Alert Policy, a copy of which is maintained by the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-8. - Intradepartmental contacts. 
Each city department head and division head designated to report to the ECC in subsection 30-9(a) shall keep a list of subordinate employees in his department or division in his or her possession at all times, which list shall include the listed employees' home telephone numbers and other off-duty contact information. After declaration of a local emergency and determination of the emergency level, the department heads for each mobilized department shall promptly contact every department employee determined to be necessary by the department head, whether the emergency occurs during or after normal business hours. All contacted employees for a mobilized department shall report to their normal base locations to be issued equipment to be utilized during the local emergency and to receive initial instructions. After receiving equipment and instructions, mobilized employees will report to their assigned areas. City personnel who are not mobilized shall continue their normal workday activities unless otherwise directed by their department heads or the city manager. Each department head will set the number of employees to be summoned, based on the situation. Only full-time city employees shall be mobilized during local emergencies, unless otherwise directed by the city manager or the mayor. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-9. - Emergency command center. 
(a)  Location; persons to report. The emergency command center is the Douglasville Police and Municipal Court building located at 2083 Fairburn Rd. All of the following city personnel shall report initially to the emergency command center (ECC) during every local emergency: 
Mayor 
All city council members 
City manager or assistant city manager 
City attorney chief assistant or city attorney 
Police chief or deputy police chief 
Maintenance and sanitation director 
Building official 
IT director 
Communications director 
Finance director 
Parks and recreation director 
Executive assistant to the mayor 
Executive assistant to the city manager 
After initial reporting, personnel at the ECC may be released or assigned to other locations by the mayor or the city manager. The mayor and the city manager shall conduct information releases to the community and the media on a timely basis, either from the ECC or through authorized individual releases of information to the press and others at an established designated remote location. The information may include an update on the emergency situation, casualty information and other information as deemed appropriate by the mayor and city manager. No city employee shall give out information on behalf of the city concerning the local emergency without the express permission of the mayor or the city manager. City employees should direct inquires from members of the media to the ECC or to any designated remote location for release of information. 
(b)  Communications. 
(1)  Executive assistants. The executive assistants for both the mayor and the city manager shall assist the police department receptionist with answering and transferring phone calls to and from the ECC, shall direct callers to the appropriate locations for assistance, and shall update the mayor and the city manager on information as it is received. The executive assistants will keep a log of all phone calls taken, to insure all the needs of the community are met. 
(2)  Duties of the communications director. The communications director shall be the city's liaison with the news media, and shall pass information to the mayor, councilmembers, and city manager for information received from the media. The communications director will continually update the community via City of Douglasville CitiTv, social media, and the city website as instructed by the mayor, council and city manager. 
(3)  Emergency calls from citizens. During a declared local emergency, city employees shall direct incoming calls for assistance that are associated with the emergency to the ECC, except for life-threatening calls which shall be directed to E911 personnel dispatching appropriate first responder assistance, and then send such calls to the ECC. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-10. - Emergency management center. 
In the event of a state emergency with local impact, the assistance of the Georgia Emergency Management Administration (GEMA) may be needed. For such state emergencies, Douglas County will establish an emergency management center, and the police chief will send a representative from the police command staff to coordinate with staff from GEMA and Douglas County Emergency Management. This city employee will act as the liaisons regarding deployment of city assets, as well as keeping the communications open with the mayor and the city manager. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-11. - Emergency operations center. 
In addition to the ECC, a stationary or mobile emergency operations center (EOC) will be established at or near the location of any site-specific local emergency. The EOC shall be equipped so as to receive and dispatch calls, and so as to be able to communicate with the police department, the maintenance and sanitation department, and the Douglas County Fire Department. During local emergency operations, the EOC will be staffed only by essential personnel as assigned by the mayor or the city manager, and may include department heads, a representative from the state patrol, a representative from each utility company, and others. Personnel who are not essential to on-site management of the emergency will be assigned or re-assigned to a location other than the EOC by the mayor or the city manager. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-12. - Radio communications among emergency personnel. 
(a)  City radio system. In the normal course of business, city employees who use radios include employees of the police department, the maintenance and sanitation department, the development services division of the community and development services department, the information technology division of the community and development services department, the communications division of the community and development services department, the finance department, and the parks and recreation department, plus the mayor and the city manager. During a local emergency, the police department will use dispatch, traffic, patrol and investigations talk groups for non-emergency radio traffic. Tactical talk groups will be assigned by the police chief as the situation warrants, with one talk group assigned as an administrative talk group. Mutual talk groups such as events, 911 or park security, will be utilized for communications for system-wide announcements. The 911 talk group will be utilized only for communications regarding life-threatening matters. All police employees at the rank of captain or above will monitor the 911 talk group for any emergency communications. To promote clarity of communications with non-police individuals, for radio traffic on tactical talk groups during a local emergency, city employees shall use "plain talk" language, and shall avoid use of the "10-code" language. 
(b)  Other radio systems. Communications of limited duration between users of the 800 MHz radio system may be patched through to other agencies with the assistance of E-911 using GIN/Motorbridge system, if authorized by the police chief during any local emergency. Use of other radio systems, such as the metro Atlanta UASI network, may occur during a local emergency and may be requested by any police employee at the ranks of captain or above, and may be authorized by the police chief. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-13. - Transportation of citizens. 
Transporting people from the emergency site to safe areas or relocation centers where family members will reunite will be done by mobilized city employees per the Douglas County Transportation plan Emergency Support Function #1 a copy of which is maintained by the city clerk. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-14. - Traffic control and law enforcement. 
The Douglasville Police Department has the overall responsibility for traffic control and law enforcement during local emergencies. The police chief shall instruct and direct the traffic control and law enforcement operations within the city limits during any local emergency. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-15. - Personnel distribution during local emergencies. 
Mobilized employees other than police will report initially to their daily work staging area to be issued instructions. On-duty police employees will report initially to the locations directed by their supervisors. Mobilized off-duty police employees shall be notified by police staff of any local emergency, and upon reporting initially shall contact the officer in charge of the local emergency for directions and instructions as needed. Mobilized employees shall remain at their assigned posts until excused or ordered to relocate by the unit supervisor, department head, or the mayor or city manager. Areas designated for various purposes may be modified during any local emergency, and personnel may be assigned to other locations. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-16. - Control of the emergency area. 
After any site-specific local emergency has been declared, the maintenance and sanitation director shall arrange the delivery of traffic barriers and any other useful maintenance equipment to secure the site, and the mayor or the city manager shall direct establishment of a perimeter. After establishment of the perimeter, only residents within the perimeter, their immediate family members, and those who have a business interest in the area will be allowed to enter the perimeter, and only if deemed reasonably safe. Authorization cards, obtainable by residents of the area at the EOC will be issued to non-emergency vehicles allowed to enter the perimeter and shall be distributed only at the time of the local emergency and immediately afterward. Authorized drivers within the perimeter must display a card on the dash of the vehicle while the vehicle is within the perimeter. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-17. - Special emergency business license. 
(a)  Generally. Authorization cards, obtainable at city hall will be issued to licensed repair personnel who have been called to the area to make emergency repairs to buildings. Persons other than residents of the emergency site, government staff and health care professionals may enter only with a valid authorization card. Personnel from the utility companies and private repair personnel who have been called to the area for a specific purpose by a specific resident or business in the area shall be excluded unless they possess an authorization card. Unlicensed repair personnel who have not been requested to come to the area shall be directed to the EOC for instructions and information about obtaining a business license and an authorization card. These restrictions will remain in effect until the emergency is terminated by expiration or by order of the mayor, or city manager. 
(b)  Application. When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required. 
(c)  Gouging prohibited. 
(1)  Generally. To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health or safety of persons or property within a designated area upon the declaration of emergency or disaster, it shall be unlawful, during the duration of the emergency or subsequent recovery period, for any person, firm or corporation located or doing business within the city limits of Douglasville too overcharge for any goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses sold or rented within Douglasville. 
(2)  Defined. Overcharging means charging prices for goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses, which exceed the customary charges by at least 25 percent or, in applicable cases, which exceed by at least 25 percent the suppliers' or providers' costs for such goods, materials, foods, equipment, supplies, services, labor, motel rooms, temporary lodging or houses. The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a 25 percent or greater increase in the price at which the merchandise or rate, fee or cost/rental of housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency or disaster, but shall not include increases in cost to the supplier directly attributable to the higher cost of material, supplies and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-18. - Agreements with other jurisdictions. 
The City of Douglasville may enter into agreements with other jurisdictions to send or receive help, if needed, during emergency operations. It is the responsibility of the mayor, city manager or their designee, to request assistance from the various organizations. A list of contact people at such organizations shall be maintained at the ECC and the police department, and this list shall be updated periodically by the police department. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-19. - Conforming to NIMS and ICS requirements. 
The City of Douglasville shall implement its civil emergencies ordinance in conformity with the requirements of the federal government's National Incident Management System (NIMS) and Incident Command System (ICS). The city shall ensure that individuals in the employee positions identified in NIMS and ICS for basic level instruction and certification shall complete said training in accordance with NIMS and ICS guidelines and deadlines. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Sec. 30-20. - Post-occurrence. 
(a)  Unsafe building abatement. As soon as feasible after any local emergency, the building official of the City of Douglasville shall inspect all affected structures, buildings, residences, and living quarters within the city, to determine if the structures are safe to be occupied. When any structure is found to be unsafe, the city implement abatement procedures, and the police department shall maintain a list of unsafe structures. The police department shall regularly patrol newly condemned structures to prevent looting and unauthorized entry into the condemned structures. 
(b)  Discussion meeting. Within one week after termination of any unusual occurrence, the city manager shall call a meeting of the city departments that were mobilized for the unusual occurrence, and discuss personnel performance, improvement of service delivery and related issues. 
(c)  Annual review. The city manager shall periodically review annually the city's civil ordinance to assure that the plan remains current and within federal and state guidelines for emergency operations, and suggest any needed changes to assure clarity, efficacy and efficiency. Reviews should be conducted with input from city department heads, and reports, written or verbal, shall be submitted to the mayor for review. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-15, § 1(Exh. A) , 4-20-15) 
Chapter 33 - CABLE AND OTHER TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-08-001, adopted Jan. 22, 2008, amended ch. 33 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 33, consisted of §§ 33-1—33-9, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-06-03, adopted Feb. 6, 2006. 

Sec. 33-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable service means "cable service" as defined in O.C.G.A. section 36-76-2. 
Cable service provider means "cable service provider" as defined in O.C.G.A. section 36-76-2. 
Cable system means "cable system" as defined in O.C.G.A. section 36-76-2. 
Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city or by the Georgia Secretary of State, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of Douglasville streets to provide telecommunications services. 
Gross revenues means "gross revenues" as defined in O.C.G.A. section 36-76-2. 
Local franchise means a franchise granted by the City of Douglasville. 
Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
State franchise means a franchise granted by the Georgia Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 36-76-1 et seq. 
Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more video, audio, voice or data signals. Telecommunications services includes both cable services and non-cable telecommunications services. 
Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station, as set forth in 47 U.S.C. Section 522(20). 
Video service means the provision of video programming through wireless facilities located at least in part in the public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol technology. This term shall not include any video programming provided by a provider of commercial mobile service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(d) or video programming provided as part of and via a service that enables user to access content, information, e-mail, or other services offered over the public internet. 
Video service provider means an entity providing video service as defined in this Code section. This term shall not include a cable service provider. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-2. - Granting authority and local franchising procedures. 
(a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a without a state franchise or a local franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a local franchise or license granted by the city. 
(b)  The city council may grant one or more local franchises in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any local franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in such separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the local franchisee. 
(d)  Any local franchise or license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional local franchises and licenses as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)  A local franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(f)  The grant of local franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof, and O.C.G.A. section 36-76-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-3. - Local franchise and license applications. 
(a)  Applications for local franchises and licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a local franchise or license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed local franchise or license and such other information as the city council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of the applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by the applicant. 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application pursuant to this chapter, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise or license, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchise or license awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of such franchise with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system; and the amount of the applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof. 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications or rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of such classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges and any other telecommunications service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the local franchise or license. 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the local franchise or license area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to poles, lines or conduits. 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-4. - Nonrefundable application fees for new local franchises and licenses. 
(a)  Generally. No application for a new local franchise or license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a local franchise or license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the applicant. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(b)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant and granting a local franchise or license, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal and consultant's expenses. 
(c)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the form of a certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city in the amount set forth in the schedule of fees on file with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-5. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a local franchise or license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-6. - Reserved. 
Sec. 33-7. - Evaluation criteria. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a local franchise or license, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; the adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; the legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the local franchise or license; the ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the local franchise or license; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the local franchise or license; the value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided, as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the local franchise or license; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the local franchise or license; and the willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the local franchise or license; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent by the city for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-8. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for local franchises and licenses and determine whether a local franchise or license should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the city council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the city council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the applications, fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the city council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed local franchise or license. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the local franchise or license, and may specify the conditions under which it is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that the city shall not grant an exclusive local franchise or license and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive local franchise or license. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-9. - Terms and conditions of local franchise. 
The terms and conditions applicable to any local franchise or license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the local franchise or license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the local franchise or license; 
(2)  The local franchise or license area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the local franchise or license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the local franchise or license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's or licensee's obligations under the local franchise or license; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the local franchisee or licensee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the local franchisee or licensee; 
(8)  The obligation of the local franchisee or license to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the local franchisee or license will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the local franchisee or license by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the local franchise or license without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the local franchisee's or licensee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the local franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the local franchisee or licensee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from, and comply with, all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over the local franchisee or license, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the local franchisee or licensee will protect the property of the city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption of operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the local franchise or license; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the local franchise or license; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Sec. 33-10. - State franchises. 
(a)  Every holder of a state franchise within the city shall: 
(1)  Notify the city manager at least at least ten days before providing service within the geographic boundaries of the city; 
(2)  Update not less often than annually its description of its service area provided in its application to the Georgia Secretary of State; and 
(3)  Maintain a point of contact that shall be available during normal business hours. 
(b)  The city hereby requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any state franchise issued for its corporate boundaries. The city hereby authorizes the city manager to provide written notice to the Georgia Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. No. O-08-001, § 1(Exh. A), 1-22-08) 
Chapter 34 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; energy code for buildings, § 22-286 et seq.; housing code, § 22-311 et seq.; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; signs, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 86; zoning, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, adopted April 16, 2018, amended Art. I in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 34-1—34-9, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-01-23, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 7, 2001; and Ord. No. O-04-57, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2004. 

DIVISION 1. - KEEP DOUGLASVILLE BEAUTIFUL BOARD 

Sec. 34-1. - Establishment; purpose. 
This article establishes a Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board for the purpose of assisting the mayor and city council in establishing a city-wide policy for beautification projects and other environmental issues, but excluding the management of trees on city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-2. - Short title; citing ordinance. 
This article shall be known as "The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board Ordinance of the City of Douglasville, Georgia," and shall be cited as "Keep Douglasville Beautiful." 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-3. - Membership. 
(a)  The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall be comprised of an eight-member board, all of whom are residents of Douglas County or have a business in Douglasville. Each board member shall be appointed by vote of the city council and mayor, and shall serve in an advisory capacity. Each member of the board shall be appointed to one of eight designated posts numbered 1 through 8. The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board will also have an executive coordinator, who shall be a city employee. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-4. - Term of office. 
(a)  The initial terms of office for Posts 1, 2, 3 and 4 shall expire December 31, 2002, and the initial terms of office for Posts 5, 6, 7 and 8 shall expire December 31, 2003. All terms for Posts 1, 2, 3 and 4 after the initial term shall expire in even-numbered years, and all terms for Posts 5, 6, 7, and 8 after the initial term shall expire in odd-numbered years. Each board member shall serve until the later of the end of his or her term or until a successor is named. 
(b)  The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall elect from its membership a chair, vice-chair, secretary and treasurer and such other officers as may be desired. The first officers shall be elected to terms to extend until December 31, 2002; thereafter, officers shall be elected on a calendar year basis, shall serve until a successor is named, and may be re-elected for succeeding terms. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-5. - Duties of executive coordinator. 
(a)  The executive coordinator of the Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall be its facilitator for purposes of meetings and shall be the custodian of all minutes and records of the board, and shall perform such other duties as the board may deem necessary and desirable. The executive coordinator shall work under the supervision and control of the city for purposes of implementing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-6. - Board's duties. 
(a)  The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall recommend refuse and environmental management policies to the mayor and council in order that all city refuse, beautification and other Keep Douglasville Beautiful activities may follow a common purpose, except that the Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall have no authority over trees on city-owned property. The Board shall have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Develop city-wide beautification efforts and other environmental projects and recommendations; 
(2)  Determine and recommend to the mayor and council program environmental and beautification priorities on a city-wide basis; 
(3)  Recommend enforcement and additional program alternatives; 
(4)  Study city performance from data collected and examined under the Keep America Beautiful, Inc., Clean City Council; 
(5)  Encourage and plan landscaping, planting and/or preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubs and other objects or ornamentations other than trees on city-owned property; 
(6)  Carry out such other tasks as the mayor and council may designate. 
(b)  To accomplish the responsibilities outlined in subsection (a) of this section, the board may establish subcommittees including, but not limited to, the areas of business and industry, communications, community organizations, municipal operations, schools, finance and recycling. Each subcommittee shall be chaired by a board member, with any number of community volunteers chosen by the board as a working subcommittee staff. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-7. - Conducting business. 
(a)  The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall meet regularly and shall designate the time and place of its meetings. 
(b)  The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall hold an organizational meeting in January of each year to elect officers. 
(c)  Four members of the Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business. The members of the board shall regularly attend its meetings and public hearings and shall serve without compensation, except for reimbursement for authorized expenses attendant to the performance of their duties, which may be paid as authorized by the mayor and council from time to time or in conjunction with the city budgeting process. 
(d)  The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board shall adopt rules of procedure and keep a record of its proceedings in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Open Meetings Act. Newly appointed members shall be installed at the first regular meeting after their appointment. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-8. - Office operations. 
(a)  Office space, supplies, telephone, postage and secretarial support for the executive coordinator may be furnished by the city, in its sole discretion, within the budgetary appropriation process. Additional funds for the Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board activities involving travel or training for the executive coordinator may also be supplied by the city within council-imposed budgetary restraints. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-9. - Management of funds. 
(a)  The Keep Douglasville Beautiful Board will submit an annual budget for approval by the mayor and council in sufficient time to be considered with budgetary requests from city departments, for each budgeting year. Any such funds received from the city shall be spent exclusively for office operations and reimbursement of board member expenses; no portion of any such funds shall be spent for improvements to property, gifts or grants. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Secs. 34-10—34-19. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TREE ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 34-20. - Creation; purpose. 
(a)  The tree advisory board is hereby created for the purpose of establishing and giving direction to the tree management aspects of the city-wide beautification plan and programs of the city for city-owned property. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-21. - Membership. 
(a)  The tree advisory board shall be composed of five members, four of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and council for the terms hereinafter specified. The fifth member shall be the Douglas County Cooperative Extension Agent, who shall serve ex officio. Each appointed member shall be either a Douglas County resident, an owner of real property located in the city, or a holder of a city business license. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-22. - Terms. 
(a)  The appointed members of the tree advisory board will be appointed to serve staggered terms, with the Post One member to serve an initial term of one year, the Post Two member to serve an initial term of two years, the Post Three member to serve an initial term of three years, and the Post Four member to serve an initial term of four years. After the expiration of each initial term, each succeeding term shall be for four years. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-23. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The tree advisory board will be responsible for directing attention to the planting, care, preservation, replanting, pruning, removal and disposition of trees on all property owned by the city. The tree advisory board is further authorized and encouraged to recommend annually the establishment of Arbor Day, to recommend to the mayor and council the day annually fixed for such celebration and to recognize the same with the appropriate planting of a tree on city owned property or such other action as may be deemed appropriate. 
(b)  The board shall be authorized to review provisions of the Code of the city as pertains to the maintenance of trees and the tree management programs of the city and make such recommendations to the mayor and council as they may deem appropriate for action by that body. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 34-24. - Organization and operation. 
(a)  The tree advisory board will have the right to adopt such rules and regulations for its internal operation as it may deem appropriate, including but not limited to, the fixing of an annual meeting at least once each calendar year and such other special meetings as the board may deem appropriate; provided however, that no action taken by the tree advisory board shall have any legal effect or be binding upon the mayor and council of the city or the city unless or until the same is later adopted by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-19 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Secs. 34-25—34-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ZONING BOARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, repealed article II, §§ 34-36—34-48 in its entirety and replaced it with a new article II, §§ 34-36—34-47. Former article II pertained to the planning commission and derived from the Code of 1977, §§ 19-16—19-28; and Ord. No. O-93-4, §§ 1, 2. 

Sec. 34-36. - Effective date of provisions. 
The provisions of this article II shall be effective on July 7, 1999. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
Zoning board means the City of Douglasville Zoning Board, originally known as the Douglasville-Douglas County Planning Commission and initially appointed on May 17, 1999. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-38. - Composition; chairman's vote. 
The zoning board shall be composed of five members plus a chairman member. The chairman shall preside at meetings and shall vote only in the case of a tie vote among the other members. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-39. - Appointment. 
The five non-chair members of the zoning board shall be appointed to posts by the mayor and council. The chairman shall be nominated by the mayor and appointed by the mayor and council. The chairman and all members shall be residents of the city. Neither the chairman nor any member of the zoning board shall serve as a member or officer of any other zoning board, planning and zoning commission or other like body. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99; Ord. No. O-01-60, § 1, 8-20-01; Ord. No. O-02-21, § 1, 5-20-02) 
Sec. 34-40. - Terms. 
The chairman and all members of the zoning board shall serve for five-year staggered terms. Except for the initial members of the zoning board, all members shall serve five-year terms. The terms of the initial members of the zoning board shall expire as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-41. - Removal. 
Any member of the zoning board may be [removed] without cause at any time as provided in section 3.11 of the city Charter. Failure of any member or the chairman to attend three consecutive meetings of the zoning board shall be grounds for removal. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99; Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 5, 9-21-15) 
Sec. 34-42. - Filling vacancies. 
Vacancies on the zoning board shall be filled in the same manner as appointments. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-43. - Compensation. 
All members of the zoning board shall serve at the rate of compensation as may be set by the mayor and council from time to time and may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-44. - Vice-chairman. 
The zoning board shall elect its vice-chairman from among its members. The term of the vice-chairman as such officer shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-45. - Meetings, rules. 
The zoning board shall determine its time of meeting and use Roberts' Rules of Order except where there is an affirmative vote to suspend such rules. All meetings of the zoning board at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the zoning board shall be public records. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by the vice-chairman and two other members. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-46. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the zoning board shall have organized and selected its vice-chairman, then the zoning board shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the appendix A zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Sec. 34-47. - Exercise of powers under former General Planning Enabling Act. 
The zoning board, as established in this article, shall exercise all powers granted to planning commissions under the former General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, and shall serve as the planning and zoning commission for the city. 
(Ord. No. O-99-17, § 1, 5-17-99) 
Secs. 34-48—34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Sec. 34-71. - Created. 
There is hereby created in the city a public body corporate and politic known as the Development Authority of the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
(Code 1977, § 2-164; Ord. No. O-2010-32, § 1, 9-16-10) 
Sec. 34-72. - Composition. 
The composition of the development authority shall be in conformance with state law. 
(Code 1977, § 2-165) 
Sec. 34-73. - Terms of board of directors. 
At the time of appointment of the first board of directors, and after or concurrent with any activation or reactivation of the development authority, the mayor and city council shall appoint four directors for two-year terms, and two directors for four-year terms, and the mayor shall be appointed ex officio for a four-year term; thereafter, the mayor shall not be an ex officio member, and the mayor and council shall fill that director seat with either a city elected official or an individual who is not a city elected official. After appointment of the first board of directors, the terms of all directors shall be for four-year terms or as otherwise provided by state law. If, at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor has not been appointed, the director whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor has been appointed. 
(Code 1977, § 2-168; Ord. No. O-08-043, § 1, 7-23-08; Ord. No. O-2016-11, § 1 , 5-2-16) 
Sec. 34-74. - Organization, powers and duties. 
The development authority shall organize itself and shall carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the development authorities law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 1977, § 2-169) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, adopted Oct. 18, 2004, deleted former ch. 38 in its entirety and added new provisions as ch. 38. Former ch. 38, 38-36—38-40, 38-61—38-67, 38-81—38-91, 38-101—38-103, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1977 Code, §§ 14-16—14-22, 14-81—14-85; Ord. No. O-97-47, § 1, adopted July 21, 1997; Ord. No. O-04-12, Pt. I, adopted April 19, 2004; and Ord. No. O-04-40, § 1, adopted Sept. 20, 2004. 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 26; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; floods, ch. 46; solid waste, ch. 70; abandoned or dismantled motor vehicles, § 82-151 et seq.; required improvements in subdivisions, app. B, § 110 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1—38-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 38-11. - Findings of the existence of nuisance. 
(a)  The governing authority of City of Douglasville finds that there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with the applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the jurisdiction where the property is located; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  The governing authority of City of Douglasville further finds that there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of this state and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. Whenever the governing authority of any county or municipality of this state finds that there exist in such county or municipality dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or where other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such municipality or those working in or visiting the area. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the county to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this section shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-12. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2 after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act in violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the mayor and council of the City of Douglasville. 
Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. "Interested parties" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(6)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the City of Douglasville relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by ordinances adopted under the aforementioned sections to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-13. - Duties of owners. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-14. - Appointment and designation of public officers. 
The chief of police and the health officer are each hereby authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the city as prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-15. - Powers of public officers. 
The public officer(s) designated in this article shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-16. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure, of the occupants of neighborhood dwelling, buildings, or structures; or of other residents or visitors to the City of Douglasville. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing). 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-17. - Jurisdiction. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, if the existence of a nuisance is complained of in a county or city of this state, the municipal court of the city, if the nuisance complained of is in the city, shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine the question of the existence of such nuisance and, if found to exist, to order its abatement. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-18. - Nuisance abatement procedure. 
(a)  That whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the City of Douglasville charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held in the municipal court of the City of Douglasville at a certain date and time. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(b)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order. 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  For purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(c)  That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(e)  That the amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the Douglas County tax commissioner and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for above shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in Douglas County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(c). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(2)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the public officer responsible for enforcement actions in accordance with this article shall transmit to the Douglas County tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the public officer shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4. The limitation requiring 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the county. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(3)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(4)  The county may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the county or municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(5)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(6)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this section. 
(7)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the county or City of Douglasville to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-19. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  For complaints, at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this Code section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-2010-47, § 4, 11-15-10) 
Secs. 38-20—38-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 38-36. - Findings of fact; purpose. 
It is found and declared that: 
(1)  The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the limits of the City of Douglasville is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises is increasing; 
(2)  The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use, affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the City of Douglasville; and 
(3)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article, is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and the quiet of the City of Douglasville and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-37. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the provisions thereof shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued and, upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits of and as provided by section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-38. - Additional remedy. 
As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of any provision hereof and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order of injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-39. - Prohibited noise—Generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-40. - Same—Enumeration. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, street car or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable amount of time. The use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public street for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a permit from the council. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public street, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any person in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhaust. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading; unloading; opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repairing of building or building site. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, or the clearing, grading or paving of any building site, or the delivery of materials at any building site other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building official should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, or the clearing, grading or paving of any building site or the delivery of materials at any building site or the excavation of street and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Drums. The use of drums or other instruments or devices for the purpose of attracting attention, by creation of noise, to any performance, show or sale. 
(14)  Metal rails, pillars and columns; transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such street or other public places. 
(15)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electrical hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Secs. 38-41—38-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OTHER NUISANCES AND OFFENSIVE CONDITIONS 

Sec. 38-61. - Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance or offensive condition on any property within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-62. - Enumeration. 
The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
(1)  Things interfering with peace or comfort. Sounds, animals or things which interfere with the peace or comfort or disturb the quiet of any person in the city constitute a public nuisance. 
(2)  Obnoxious, offensive odors. The emission of obnoxious and offensive odors; the tainting of the air rendering it offensive and/or unwholesome so as to affect the health or comfort of persons residing in the neighborhood thereof, shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(3)  Discharging of offensive matter. The placing or throwing or discharging from any house or premises and flow from or out of any house or premises, of any filthy, foul or offensive matter or liquid of any kind, into any street, alley or public place, or upon any adjacent lot or ground, shall constitute a public nuisance. 
(4)  Water pollution. The obstruction or pollution of any watercourse or source of water supply in the city. 
(5)  Stagnant water. Any stagnant pool of water in the city. 
(6)  Emission of dense smoke. The emission of dense smoke from any fire, chimney, engine, oil burner or other agency in the city so as to cause annoyance or discomfort to the public. For the purpose of testing and grading the density of smoke, the Ringelmann Smoke Chart as published and used by the United States Geological Survey shall be the standard for such grading, and smoke shall be defined as and declared to be dense when it is of a degree of density of number three on the chart, or greater, for more than six minutes in any one hour, whether such period of time is consecutive or not. 
(7)  Certain weeds. Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur or other weeds of a like kind, or any grass or plants, other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, growing to a height exceeding 12 inches anywhere in the city. 
(8)  Graffiti. Any inscription, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner of occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-07-07, § 1, 2-5-07) 
Sec. 38-63. - Abatement authorized. 
The chief of police and the health officer are each hereby authorized to abate any nuisance existing in the city, whether such nuisance is one specifically recognized by ordinance or not. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-64. - Notice to abate. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to serve or cause to be served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which weeds or plants are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this article and to demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten days. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 11, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 38-65. - When city may act. 
If the person served by a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of this article does not abate the nuisance within the time stated in such notice, the city may proceed to abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-66. - Liability for costs. 
Any cost or expense incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be paid by the owner of the property involved, and the city shall have a lien against such property for the same. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-67. - Execution to recover costs. 
If the expenses and costs incurred by the city in the abatement of a nuisance under the provisions of this article shall remain unpaid after demand, the city clerk may issue execution therefor in the same manner as for unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-68. - Abatement of graffiti. 
(a)  In order to provide a form of compensation by the state to innocent victims of criminal trespass or criminal damage to property in the second degree either of which crime involved the unlawful placement of graffiti upon private property by a person who was not the owner of such property, the City of Douglasville authorizes the use of labor by inmates from any penal institution or jail under its authority to remove or obliterate such unlawfully placed graffiti when such graffiti is visible from any public road or other public property. 
(b)  No property owner or operator shall be subject to a fee for the removal of graffiti from such property pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. O-07-07, § 2, 2-5-07) 
Secs. 38-69—38-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT 

Sec. 38-81. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited and referred to as the City of Douglasville Clean Air Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-82. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The Douglasville Mayor and City Council do hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Second-hand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the Douglasville Mayor and City Council find and declare that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in certain public places and in certain public and private places of employment; and 
(2)  To balance the need of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air with the desire of smokers to enjoy tobacco products in public places. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-83. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bar means an indoor area where alcoholic beverages are poured and served. 
Business means any corporation, sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability corporation, limited liability partnership, professional corporation, enterprise, franchise, association, trust, joint venture, or other entity, whether for profit or nonprofit. 
Children's daycare facility means as a structure where care and supervision of children is provided, away from their place of residence, for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For purposes of this article, the term shall include but not be limited to nursery schools, early learning centers, pre-kindergartens, private kindergartens, play schools, pre-schools and tutoring services. 
Designated bar area within a restaurant means an area that has signage specifically informing patrons that smoking is allowed in the area; and the area shall include the bar itself and the immediately adjacent bar service area and shall not include the common areas of the enclosed restaurant. 
Dining area means the interior patron portion of a restaurant, containing a counter or tables, upon which food is served. 
Employer means any person who employs the services of one or more individuals. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Enclosed area means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways, which extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term includes but is not limited to the indoor building space of the following: 
(1)  Automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; 
(2)  Grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; 
(3)  Service stations, stores or shops for the repair of maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items, or products; 
(4)  Barber shops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; 
(5)  Video arcades, pool halls, and other amusement centers; 
(6)  Offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, or architectural services; 
(7)  Banks savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; 
(8)  Restaurants and cafeterias; 
(9)  For hotels, motels and extended-stay residences rented for 14 days or less, all indoor areas except guest rooms for sleeping and the adjoining suite areas; and 
(10)  Health care facilities, intermediate care facilities, and personal care homes. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, homes for the chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentist, and all specialists within these professions, or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1 as amended. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. This definition shall not include long-term care facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-8-81(3). 
Infiltrate means to permeate an enclosed area by passing through its walls, ceilings, floors, windows, or ventilation systems to the extent that an individual can smell secondhand smoke. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
Personal care home means a residential facility having at least 25 beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, non-related persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area of a building under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A motor vehicle is not a place of employment. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. 
Private residence means a privately-owned place of permanent residence. The term includes leased apartments and boarding houses, but does not include motel or hotel rooms, or extended stay residences for rent or lease for periods less than 14 days. The term does not include health care facilities, intermediate care facilities, or personal care homes. 
Public place means any enclosed area within a building to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, restaurants, stores, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, restrooms, enclosed shopping malls, elevators, indoor service lines, the building interior of service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational, recreational and health care facilities, child care facilities, auditoriums, indoor theaters, meeting rooms, repair shops, indoor automobile dealerships, convention halls, bowling facilities, polling places, and indoor bingo parlors. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall not be considered public places. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult daycare facility or a healthcare facility. 
Restaurant means an indoor eating and/or drinking establishment, including but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, private clubs, sandwich shops, and private school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food or drink to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as restaurants under this article. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Secondhand smoke means smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering, or burning tobacco when the person smoking is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff drawing, and smoke exhaled by the person smoking. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall mean an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed or plant in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-84. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, smoking is prohibited in all enclosed public places, all public parks, and places of employment within the City of Douglasville. Smoking shall also be prohibited in all enclosed areas of employment, including, but not limited to, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-85. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to city property. 
This article shall apply to, and smoking is prohibited in, all enclosed facilities including buildings and vehicles owned, leased or operated by the City of Douglasville. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-86. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  Any restaurant to which access is denied at all times and on all days to any person under the age of 18 and that does not employ at any time and on any day any individual under the age of 18, provided that smoking is allowed only within the designated bar area; 
(2)  Any retail tobacco store provided that secondhand smoke from such stores does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited; 
(3)  Any guest room for sleeping and the adjoining suite areas of any hotels, motels and extended-stay residences rented for 14 days or less, provided that not more than 20 percent of the rooms rented to guests are designated as smoking rooms; 
(4)  Any private residence, including a private residence which may serve as an office workplace (except if used as a children's daycare, an adult day care or health care facility); 
(5)  Any private or semiprivate room in health care facilities licensed under Title 31 [of the Official Code of Georgia] that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom have written authorization by their treating physician to smoke. 
(6)  Any outdoor area of any place of employment. 
(b)  Except for private residences, any area listed above shall post conspicuously at every entrance a sign indicating that smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05; Ord. No. O-06-32, § 1, 9-18-06) 
Sec. 38-86.1. - Restaurants—Election as to smoking establishment. 
In conjunction with annual occupation tax registration, the proprietor of each restaurant shall elect in writing whether the restaurant is to be a smoking establishment which allows smoking in a bar area pursuant to subsection 38-86(a)(1), or a non-smoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-06-32, § 1, 9-18-06) 
Sec. 38-86.2. - Same—Split-time registration prohibited. 
No restaurant may operate on a continuing basis as a smoking establishment for part of the day or year, and as a non-smoking establishment for any other part of the day or year. A smoking establishment must have a designated bar area, approved in writing by the building official or the city council, prior to issuance of tax registration; a smoking establishment shall not allow access at any time or on any day to any person under the age of 18 or employ at any time or on any day any individual under the age of 18. A non-smoking establishment shall not allow smoking at any time on any day of the year. A restaurant may change its registration as either smoking or non-smoking not more than twice in any calendar year, upon written approval by the city council or the building official. 
(Ord. No. O-06-32, § 2, 9-18-06) 
Sec. 38-87. - Employers' responsibility. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees in public places and places of employment. 
(b)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-88. - Posting of signs and notification. 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted inside every building where smoking is prohibited by this article, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  Every public place where smoking is prohibited by this article shall have posted at the exterior of the main entrance door a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited, or that smoking is permitted only in designated areas. 
(c)  Notice of the provisions set forth in this article shall be given to all applicants for an occupation tax certificate in Douglasville. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-89. - Interpretation and enforcement. 
(a)  The city building official shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions or any other portion of this article. Interpretations of the building official may be appealed to the city council by written request filed with the city clerk within 30 days of any interpretation by the building official. 
(b)  Any person smoking in violation of this article shall be subject to citation. 
(c)  Any code compliance officer or any police officer, as defined by Georgia law, may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(d)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the Douglasville Police Department. 
(e)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this article shall inform persons therein witnessed to be smoking in violation of this article of the appropriate provisions, and shall request compliance. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05; Ord. No. O-2018-9 , § 3, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 38-90. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding $50.00 for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding $75.00 for a second violation of this article within one year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding $100.00 for each additional violation of this article within one year. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Sec. 38-91. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 1, 6-6-05) 
Secs. 38-92—38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HEALTH CODES 

Sec. 38-101. - Health codes adopted. 
For purposes of establishing standards for public health, and related sanitation and safety matters, the City of Douglasville hereby adopts the following rules and regulations of the Douglas County Health Department, copies of which shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk: 
(1)  Rules and Regulations for On-Site Sewage Management Systems, Chapter 290-5-26, as revised by the Department of Human Resources and as adopted by the Douglas County Board of Health on August 15, 2003; 
(2)  Regulations Concerning Trailer Parks pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6 and as adopted by the Douglas County Board of Health on June 18, 1999; 
(3)  Rules and Regulations for Food Service, Chapter 290-5-14, as revised by the Department of Human Resources and as adopted by the Douglas County Board of Health on August 15, 2003; 
(4)  Rules and Regulations for Swimming Pools as adopted by the Douglas County Board of Health on February 3, 1995; and 
(5)  Rules and Regulations for Tourist Accommodations as adopted by the Douglas County Board of Health on August 21, 1998. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Sec. 38-102. - Health codes enforced. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Douglas County Board of Health, the Douglasville Police Department and the Douglasville Code Compliance Division. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04; Ord. No. O-2018-9 , § 3, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 38-103. - Penalties. 
There shall be a maximum fine penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation of this article, and a maximum incarceration penalty of 60 days. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-46, § 1, 10-18-04) 
Secs. 38-104—38-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - FORECLOSED AND VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRY 

Sec. 38-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state in which he or she is authorized to accept inquiries, notices, and service of process on behalf of a vacant or foreclosed real property owner. The definition of 'agent' shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. section 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by a county or municipal corporation and is held pursuant to a judicial or non-judicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owned to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. section 44-14-14, should that definition differ. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. The definition of 'street address' shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. section 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least 60 days, and has no evidence of utility usage within the past 60 days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
Such term shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. The definition of 'vacant real property' shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. section 44-14-14 should that definition differ from the definition in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-122. - Registration of foreclosed or vacant property. 
(a)  Owner or agents of foreclosed real property or vacant real property, including foreclosed real property and vacant real property which is also residential rental property, are required to register such property with the police chief within 30 days of such property becoming foreclosed or vacant real property by following the provisions of this section unless otherwise exempted by this article or state law. 
(b)  Any such owner or agent of foreclosed real property or vacant real property located within the jurisdiction of the city is required to file with the police chief a registration form in paper or electronic format, in the standard form promulgated by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(c)  Registration is required for all vacant or foreclosed real property unless otherwise exempted, pursuant to this article, but is not required for vacant or foreclosed real property within 90 days of such real property's transfer: 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A. section 44-14-160, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(d)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-123. - Exemption. 
Registration or payment of any administrative fees of foreclosed real property pursuant to this article is not required of any transferee who acquires any real property by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A. section 44-14-160 or acquires any real property pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure if: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in subsection (3)a. of this section; 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of the superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office or the officer in charge of the city foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-124. - Updates to registration. 
Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in this article within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-125. - Removal from registry. 
(a)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property may apply to the city to remove a vacant or foreclosed real property from the city registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes a vacant or foreclosed real property. 
(b)  Any application for removal allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall be granted or denied by the police chief within 30 days, and if no such determination is made within 30 days then the application for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-126. - Administrative fee. 
Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered with the city under this article shall be required to make a payment for administrative fees for the approximate the cost to the city of the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration of the registry, in the amount of $65.00. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-127. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of Police Chief in the administration of this article may appeal to the municipal court of the city. All appeals hereunder must be taken within 30 days of the decision in question by filing with the police chief a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(b)  The police chief shall forthwith transmit to the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the municipal court clerk who shall schedule an appeal hearing within 60 days following the date the appealing party submits its completed written appeal with subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The municipal court judge may call for further information to be provided within the next 35 days following the hearing, and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the municipal court judge deems appropriate. 
(d)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the police chief certifies to the municipal court, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the municipal court judge on notice to the police chief, and on due cause shown. 
(e)  The municipal court judge may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the police chief appealed from by the owner or agent and may make such decision, requirement, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-128. - Administration. 
(a)  The foreclosed and vacant real property registry is subject to the Open Records Act of the State of Georgia and the city may make such registry information available online. 
(b)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-129. - Nuisances. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of the city to enforce any applicable codes, as defined in state law, or to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 38-130. - Penalties. 
Any owner or agent required to register a vacant or foreclosed real property under this article who fails to register or fails to update the information specified in this article, may be fined up to $1,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-38, § 1, 8-6-12) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to prescribe fire prevention standards, § 1.03(m). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; entertainment at pouring outlets, § 10-155; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; electricity, § 22-86 et seq.; gas code, § 22-226 et seq.; fire sales, § 26-216 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 30; divisions of emergency management corps, § 30-112; environment, ch. 38; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; fireworks, § 58-3; solid waste, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 86; storage of flammable liquids, app. A, § 750; subdivision regulations, app. B; required improvements in subdivisions, app. B, § 110 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - False fire alarms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully give a false alarm of fire within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-1) 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 58. 
Sec. 42-2. - Damage to apparatus. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or carelessly break, destroy or carry away any fire engine or apparatus belonging thereto, or used by the fire department. 
(Code 1977, § 11-2) 
Sec. 42-3. - Hindering fire fighting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay or interfere with the personnel or apparatus of the fire department in the fighting of any fire or the discharge of the duties of the fire department in any manner whatsoever. 
(Code 1977, § 11-3) 
Sec. 42-4. - Tampering with fire hydrant. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, without written authority from the fire chief, to tamper with or take water from or release water from a public fire hydrant. 
(Code 1977, § 11-4) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 86. 
Sec. 42-5. - Obstructing fire hydrants or fire lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building materials or in any other manner whatsoever within 15 feet of any cistern or fire hydrant which would obstruct approaches to the same by any member of the fire department. No person shall put any post or installation of any nature whatsoever within 18 inches of any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the city council. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with any vehicle or other object any designated fire lane. 
(c)  A person who shall violate a provision of this section or fail to comply therewith or with any requirement thereof, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished as provided in Section 4.13 of the Charter of the City of Douglasville, Georgia. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance shall be deemed a separate offense. Citation for violation may be issued by any police officer of the city, or by any officer or official of the county fire department if so authorized by the fire chief. 
(Code 1977, § 11-5; Ord. No. O-01-41, § 8, 6-18-01) 
Secs. 42-6—42-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Adoption of standard code of technical regulations, § 2.11(d). 

Sec. 42-36. - Code adopted. 
The Standard Fire Prevention Code, as referenced in City Code section 22-1, of which code not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of the building official, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length in this section, and except as hereinafter amended, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-16; Ord. No. O-91-32, 10-7-91; Ord. No. O-04-43, § 1, 10-4-04) 
Sec. 42-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in the code adopted by this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire authority means the City of Douglasville. 
Misdemeanor or violation means a violation which is punishable as a violation of the city charter. 
(Code 1977, § 11-18) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 42-38. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The fire prevention code adopted by this article shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention. The fire department of the city shall also have authority to enforce the provisions of this code if such is necessary for the protection of the citizens. 
(b)  The bureau of fire prevention shall be under the direction of the fire official. In the absence of the fire official the chief of the fire department shall perform any duties required of the fire official unless there is a duly appointed deputy to the fire official available to carry out the provisions of this code. 
(c)  The fire official may from time to time, as necessary, and with the consent of the chief of the fire department, detail members of the fire department as his authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 11-17) 
Sec. 42-39. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted by this article, or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken within the time affixed in this article, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a violation of this Code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the fire prevention code is committed or continued. Upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits of and as provided by section 1-3 of this Code. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions, or the requirement that each person shall be required to correct or remedy such violation or defects within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1977, § 11-22) 
Sec. 42-40. - Life Safety Code—Adopted. 
The Life Safety Code, published by the National Fire Protection Association, as modified by the Rules and Regulations of the Safety Fire Commissioner, Chapter 120-303 of the Rules and Regulations for the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-4, of which code not less than one copy has been and now is filed in the office of the building official, is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set forth at length in this section, and except as hereafter amended, the provisions therein shall be controlling within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 11-23; Ord. No. O-04-43, § 2, 10-4-04) 
Sec. 42-41. - Same—Administration. 
The life safety code adopted by the provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced jointly and/or severally by the building official and the fire official or their duly appointed deputies. 
(Code 1977, § 11-24) 
Sec. 42-42. - Same—Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate a provision of the life safety code adopted by the provisions of this article or fail to comply therewith or with any of the provisions thereof, or violate a detailed statement or plans submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the life safety code is committed and continued, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished within the limits of and as provided by section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 11-25) 
Sec. 42-43. - Conflicts. 
If any conflict exists between the provisions of the codes adopted by the provisions of this article and applicable provisions of this Code of Ordinances, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the more stringent provisions shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Code 1977, § 11-26) 
Sec. 42-44. - Automatic sprinkler systems and fire alarms. 
(a)  Buildings of any type construction or occupancy of 5,000 square feet or more per floor, or buildings of two or more stories in height shall be protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the current State of Georgia adopted edition of the NFPA 13, as modified, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. A sprinkler control valve and water flow device shall be provided for each floor. The building official or the fire official may additionally require the installation of a water-based fire protection system and/or smoke detection system, where the public interest, the health and welfare of the fire fighters, or the protection of human life, would be protected by the same, due to the type of construction, hazard of content, limited access to the structure, or other safety factors. 
(b)  All hotels, motels, dormitories, apartments, lodging facilities, townhouses, rooming houses, all residential board and care facilities, and all day care facilities, and all personal care facilities with more than seven clients as defined by NFPA 101, Life Safety Code shall be protected by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the current State of Georgia adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 13 or 13R, as modified or amended, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and including three stories in height. Based on the type of construction and the tenants' ability to evacuate, the building official or his designee shall designate which system is best suited in each situation. Residential occupancies exceeding three stories in height shall be protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13. 
(c)  Existing buildings, when required to have automatic sprinkler protection by subsections (a) or (b) above, shall be retrofitted for automatic sprinklers as required by the building official or his designee in accordance with NFPA 13 or 13R, when: 
(1)  A building is renovated and the cost of renovation exceeds 50 percent of the latest approved tax assessed value of the building; or 
(2)  There is a change in occupancy classification. 
Whenever such retrofitting is required by this section, the buildings shall be required to upgrade to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances for fire protection and life safety systems, and the owner shall have the system inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 25, as modified, Standards for the Inspection, Testing and Maintenance of Water-based Fire Protection Systems. 
Exceptionally, buildings located in the historic district or on any historic site may use standards set forth by article IV of chapter 22 of the City Code. As a further exception, for buildings located within the historic district and lying south of Broad Street, north of Spring Street, east of Club Drive, and west of Duncan Street, installation of sprinklers shall not be required. 
(d)  Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all newly constructed multifamily dwellings, regardless of the type of construction or square feet. In addition, automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all new single-family and duplex dwellings, regardless of the type of construction, whenever side yard setbacks are to be 7.5 linear feet or less; said systems shall conform to the NFPA standard 13R, current edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes. "New", for the purpose of this section, includes any addition to existing buildings, whether vertical or horizontal; any existing building or structure shall be subject to this requirement where there is substantial renovation due to fire or other hazard of serious consequence. For purposes of this paragraph, "substantial" means any construction project involving exits or internal/external features of such buildings or structure costing more than or equal to 50 percent of the building's or structure's gross tax assessed value at the time of such renovation, repair, remodeling, or replacement. 
(e)  Where required, post indicator valves (PIV) and fire department connections (FDC) shall be located at or near the main entry to the site but no closer than 1½ times the height of the building. Appropriate signage shall be provide to designate PIV and FDC connections. Minimum diameter of FDC coupling shall be 2½ inch. 
(f)  All water-based fire protection systems shall have electronically supervised monitoring; all fire alarm systems installed in commercial buildings shall be supervised at all times, and shall include installation of horns and strobes; and pull stations shall be provided at all required exits as designated by the fire official. 
(g)  No person shall shut off or disable any automatic fire sprinkler system or fire alarm system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm or allow disarming of such systems. Exceptionally, such systems may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the systems during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire official and Douglas County Emergency E-911. A fire watch may be required during the time the water-based fire protection system or fire alarm system is removed from service, and shall remain in place until such time as the systems are returned to full functioning capacity. 
(Ord. No. O-04-41, § 1, 10-4-04; Ord. No. O-07-44, § 2, 8-2-07; Ord. No. O-07-64, § 4, 11-19-07; Ord. No. O-2010-17, § 2, 4-19-10) 
Sec. 42-45. - Fire-fighting accessibility; standards for hydrants, mains and pipes. 
(a)  Fire-fighting accessibility. 
(1)  Accessibility shall be provided to and around all buildings for fire fighting equipment, including ladder trucks on multiple-story projects. 
(2)  Accessibility for fire fighters' equipment shall be maintained throughout all stages of construction. 
(3)  Minimum widths of access driveways, excluding parking, shall be 20 feet. Minimum turning radius shall be 32 feet. 
(b)  Fire hydrant installation prior to construction. 
(1)  Water mains and fire hydrants, shall be installed, under water pressure and ready for fire fighting, before any combustible materials are brought onto construction sites. 
(2)  All fire hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority and the Douglas County Fire Department. Fire department connections shall not be less than 18 inches nor more than 36 inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the fire department. 
(3)  The size and shape of the operation nut, as well as the direction the hydrant stem operates, shall be uniform the hydrant stem operates, shall be uniform with construction standards and specifications of the Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority for hydrants and for water distribution systems. 
(c)  Fire hydrant installation standards for minimum size water mains and spacing of fire hydrants for all new construction. 
(1)  In single-family residential subdivisions, at least eight-inch ductile iron pipe shall be installed. Fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed 400 feet. Three-way fire hydrants shall be used. 
(2)  In multi-family residential subdivisions, multi-family apartment complexes, industrial areas and commercial areas, (including but not limited to motels, hotels, nursing homes, hospitals, education buildings, all office buildings and churches) at least eight-inch ductile iron pipe water mains shall be installed to provide a minimum water flow of 1,000 gallons per minute. Larger mains and flows may be required by the building official or his designee. Fire hydrants shall be three-way hydrants and shall be spaced not to exceed 400 feet, with additional hydrants located as necessary, to permit all portions of the exterior buildings and combustible storage to be reached by hose lays of not more than 400 feet. Fire hydrant locations shall be approved by the building official or his designee to allow fire fighting equipment to be placed within 15 feet of said hydrants. 
(3)  In mobile home parks, fire hydrants shall be spaced not to exceed 400 feet, with a minimum of an eight-inch ductile iron pipe waterline, which shall be installed to provide a water flow of at least 700 gallons per minute. 
(4)  Prior to any preliminary subdivision plat submission for approval, the applicant shall obtain approval of the building official or his designee for the spacing of all fire hydrants, main size and water flows. 
(5)  No pipe smaller than a standard eight inch in diameter shall be used to supply more than one hydrant or one hydrant on dead-end mains over 500 feet but not exceeding 999 feet, and no smaller than a ten inch in diameter for dead-end main for 1,000 feet or more. 
(6)  No pipe smaller than a standard eight inch in diameter shall be used to supply one hydrant and automatic extinguishing systems. 
(7)  No pipe smaller than a standard eight inch in diameter shall be used to supply more than one hydrant and automatic extinguishing systems on looped mains of 1,000 feet. 
(Ord. No. O-04-42, § 1, 10-4-04) 
Chapter 48 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Oct. 19, 2009, amended Ch. 48 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 48, §§ 48-1—48-7, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 48-1. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of Douglasville, Georgia is among its most valued and important assets and the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits and other relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The City Council of Douglasville, Georgia, hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), 10-19-09) 
Sec. 48-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. and includes changes which may be authorized only by the historic preservation commission upon application, or by the mayor and council on appeal. The city council may further define and interpret said phrase by means of resolution. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographical definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 48-4(b) of this chapter. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council of Douglasville as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 48-4(c) of this chapter. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect the exterior architectural features of a historic property or a building, structure, site, or object, within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal of alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including exterior building walls or other appurtenant features. 
Material change in appearance does not include construction, alteration or removal of walls or fences, signs, plants and trees, swimming pools, accessory pool buildings in rear yards, paint, excavation or pavement. 
Material change in appearance may be further defined by enactment of resolutions of the mayor and council. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), 10-19-09) 
Sec. 48-3. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Douglasville Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "commission"). 
(b)  Commission members; number, appointment, terms and compensation. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of Douglasville and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
Commencing with the date of effectiveness of this chapter, members shall serve three year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year, two members for two years, and two members for three years. Members shall serve until their successors are appointed. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(c)  Statement of the commission's powers. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within Douglasville having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the City Council of Douglasville specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the City Council of Douglasville that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district by revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by Douglasville; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by Douglasville of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the "Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992" (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-5) as now or hereafter amended; 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within Douglasville and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, which the City Council of Douglasville or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the City Council of Douglasville concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the Douglasville historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The commission shall not obligate the City of Douglasville without prior consent of the city council; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and, with the consent of the City Council of Douglasville, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(d)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of three members. 
(e)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia statutes and in the City of Douglasville Charter, the provisions of which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(f)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(g)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), 10-19-09; Ord. No. O-2018-35 , § 1, 9-17-18) 
Sec. 48-4. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historic resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within Douglasville. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to City Council of Douglasville for designation. The commission shall present to the City Council of Douglasville recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the City Council of Douglasville for designation, the commission shall prepare or require to be prepared a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description of the property(ies) proposed for designation, including: 
1.  Street number (if any); 
2.  Legal description of the property(ies) showing metes and bounds thereof or making reference to plat(s) recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Douglas County Superior Court; 
3.  Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the property(ies) and a copy of recorded deed(s) showing the ownership or current title certificate(s) or opinion of title letter from a licensed Georgia attorney dated not earlier than 90 days prior to submission of the application, setting forth the names of all legal owners of the property; 
4.  A letter from the zoning official of the City of Douglasville stating what zoning classification(s) and special use restrictions that the property(ies) currently bear under the city zoning map and regulations; 
5.  A description of the specific place, district, site, building, structure, object, or exterior environmental features proposed. 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., historic, nonhistoric, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state, or region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinance designating such district and shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map of Douglasville, Georgia. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic (contributes to the district); 
b.  Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1)); and 
c.  Intrusive (detracts from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1)). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy or preservation by reason of value to the nation, the City of Douglasville, or the State of Georgia, for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Douglasville, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Applications for designation must be filed with the historic preservation official of the City of Douglasville. Designation may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. 
b.  For historic properties a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designated ordinance. Any ordinance designation of any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the Official Zoning Map of Douglasville, Georgia and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Required public hearings. The Commission and the City Council of Douglasville shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner of the Douglas County tax roll and a notice sent via United States Mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. Signage shall be posted on the property(ies) by the city in a manner consistent with posting of zoning changes. In the case of a historic property, sign(s) shall be placed on the property visible from a public street. In the case of a historic district, signs shall be placed at each point where the district boundary intersects a public street. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation section. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection 48-4(a)(3), to the historic preservation section of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the City Council of Douglasville. 
(6)  City Council of Douglasville action on commission recommendation. Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the City Council of Douglasville may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments in deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the City Council of Douglasville, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the City Council of Douglasville which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States Mail to last known owner of the property shown on the Douglas County tax roll and a notice sent via United States Mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within Douglasville of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission and the City Council of the City of Douglasville shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property, including but not limited to a moratorium on all grading permits, building permits, demolition permits, and the like. 
(Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), 10-19-09; Ord. No. O-2013-36, § 1, 9-13-13) 
Sec. 48-5. - Application to commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a historic, nonhistoric, or intrusive building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness approved by the commission. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for certificate of appropriateness shall be submitted to the historic preservation official, accompanied by: 
(1)  A physical description of the property(ies) proposed for designation, including: 
a.  Street number (if any); 
b.  Legal description of the property(ies) showing metes and bounds thereof or making reference to plat(s) recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Douglas County Superior Court; 
c.  Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the property(ies); verified statement or a copy of the warranty deed showing each and every individual person having legal and/or equitable ownership interest in the property; and an affidavit letter from each of the owners to authorize the request when the applicant is not the owner(s) of record; 
d.  A letter from the city zoning official stating what zoning classification(s) and special use restrictions that the property(ies) currently bear under the city zoning map and regulations; and 
e.  A description of the specific place, district, site, building, structure, object, or exterior environmental features and their historical, cultural, architectural, and/or aesthetic significance. 
(2)  Drawings, photographs, plans, and documentation as required by the commission and the historic preservation official necessary for consideration of the preservation of the material change(s) proposed. 
(3)  A fee in an amount that may be established by the governing authority, a copy of which will remain on file in the community and downtown services department, to partly defray the public expense in processing such application. 
(4)  Proof that the property taxes for the parcel(s) in question have been paid. 
(5)  Other information as may be deemed necessary by the commission or the historic preservation official. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the county and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners, known occupants, and adjacent property owners of the subject property. The written and publish ed notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. The city shall require signage to be posted on the property at a location visible from a public street in a manner consistent with posting of zoning changes. Unauthorized tampering with any such posted sign shall constitute an offense punishable by the municipal recorder's court. The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant, the city staff, and other effected parties an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Commission ruling on applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or deny it. 
(1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making the determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for an application if the proposed action conforms in design, scale, building material, and setback consistent with any design review guidelines which may be developed by the commission and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a application for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic, or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for reuse of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those planned on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of historic preservation guidelines would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon application or appeal, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter and the guidelines. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or denial of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The historic preservation official, within three working days of acceptance of a complete application for a certificate of appropriateness, shall log and schedule such application for review by the commission within 45 days after acceptance of the application. 
(2)  The commission shall approve or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the acceptance of an application as set forth in subsection (h)(1) by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building, structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States Mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(3)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed; however, any such approval shall be automatically appealed to the city council. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon denial of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission denies an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it denies the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at anytime after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the denial of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  No work toward a material change shall be done unless a copy of the certificate of appropriateness is posted on the subject property. All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission may issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease; additionally, the building department or the code compliance division may issue stop work orders for this purpose. 
(2)  The City Council of Douglasville or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for an effective period of 12 months and are renewable by the commission. 
(l)  Recording of applications for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the City Council of Douglasville and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, including the city attorney on behalf of the city, may appeal such determination to the City Council of Douglasville. Any such appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the city clerk within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection 48-5(h)(1) of this chapter or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for commission action, subsection 48-5(h)(2) of this chapter. The City Council of Douglasville may approve, modify, or deny the determination made by the commission, if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decision of the City Council of Douglasville may be taken to the Superior Court of Douglas County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for Douglasville ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), 10-19-09; Ord. No. O-2013-36, §§ 2, 3, 9-13-13; Ord. No. O-2018-9 , § 4, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 48-6. - Maintaining of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, and the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days to complete such maintenance or repair. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner may be prosecuted as provided in section 48-7 of this chapter. At the direction of the City Council of Douglasville, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), 10-19-09) 
Sec. 48-7. - Penalties. 
There shall be a minimum fine of $100.00 per day, and a maximum fine of $500.00 per day, for each violation of this chapter. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. The fines prescribed in this section may be imposed in addition to any nonmonetary penalties authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. O-09-053, § 1(Exh. A), 10-19-09) 
Chapter 50 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1—50-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FAIR HOUSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; housing code, § 22-311 et seq. 

Sec. 50-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Discriminatory housing practice means an act that is unlawful under this article. 
Dwelling means any building, structure, or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of any such building, structure, or portion thereof. 
Familial status means, with respect to a person who is: 
(1)  A parent of or has legal custody of one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years and such individuals are being domiciled with such parent or legal custodian; 
(2)  The designee of a parent or other person having legal custody, with the written permission of the parent or other person, and that one or more individuals who have not attained the age of 18 years are being domiciled with such person; or 
(3)  Pregnant or is in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
Family includes a single individual. 
Handicap means, with respect to a person: 
(1)  A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more of such person's major life activities; 
(2)  A record of having such an impairment; or 
(3)  Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance. 
Person means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint-stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, or fiduciaries. 
To rent means to lease, to sublease, to let, and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(Code 1977, § 15-32) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-201. 
Sec. 50-37. - Unlawful practices in selling or renting dwellings; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as exempted by subsection (c) or (e) of this section or section 50-41, it shall be unlawful to: 
(1)  Refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin; 
(2)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin; 
(3)  Make, print, or publish or cause to be made, printed, or published any notice, statement, or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, or discrimination; 
(4)  Represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale, or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; 
(5)  Induce or attempt to induce, for profit, any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person of a particular race, color, religion, sex, familial status, or national origin or with a handicap; 
(6)  Discriminate in the sale or rental, or to otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any buyer or renter because of a handicap of: 
a.  That buyer or renter; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that buyer or renter; or 
(7)  Discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such dwelling, because of a handicap of: 
a.  That person; 
b.  A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after it is sold, rented, or made available; or 
c.  Any person associated with that person. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a) of this section, discrimination includes: 
(1)  A refusal to permit, at the expense of the handicapped person, reasonable modifications of existing premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be necessary to afford such person full enjoyment of the premises, except that, in the case of a rental, the landlord may where it is reasonable to do so condition permission for a modification on the renter's agreeing to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted; 
(2)  A refusal to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling; or 
(3)  In connection with the design and construction of covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy after March 13, 1991, a failure to design and construct those dwellings in such a manner that: 
a.  The public use and common use portions of such dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by handicapped persons; 
b.  All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises within such dwellings are sufficiently wide to allow passage by handicapped persons in wheelchairs; and 
c.  All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of adaptive design: 
1.  An accessible route into and through the dwelling; 
2.  Light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls in accessible locations; 
3.  Reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later installation of grab bars; and 
4.  Usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space. 
(4)  Compliance with the appropriate requirements of the American National Standard for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usableness for physically handicapped people, commonly cited as "ANSI A117.1," suffices to satisfy the requirements of subsection (b)(3)c. of this section. 
(c)  Nothing in this section, other than subsection (a)(3) of this section, shall apply to: 
(1)  Any single-family dwelling sold or rented by an owner, if: 
a.  Such private individual owner does not own more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; 
b.  Such bona fide private individual owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such single-family dwellings at any one time; 
c.  Such dwelling is sold or rented: 
1.  Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent, or salesman, or of such facilities or services of any person in the business of selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker, agent, salesman, or person; and 
2.  Without the publication, posting, or mailing, after notice, of any advertisement or written notice in violation of subsection (d) of this section; but nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies, and other such professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; or 
(2)  Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of such living quarters as his residence. 
In the case of the sale of any such single-family dwelling by a private individual owner not residing in such dwelling at the time of such sale or who was not the most recent resident of such dwelling prior to such sale, the exemption granted by this subsection shall apply only with respect to one such sale within any 24-month period. 
(d)  For the purposes of subsection (c) of this section, a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; 
(2)  He has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall require that a dwelling be made available for rental or lease to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. 
(Code 1977, § 15-34) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-202. 
Sec. 50-38. - Unlawful denial of or discrimination in membership or participation in service or organization relating to selling or renting dwellings. 
It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or to discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access, membership, or participation on account of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(Code 1977, § 15-36) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-203. 
Sec. 50-39. - Discrimination in residential real estate related transactions; appraisals. 
(a)  As used in this section, the term "residential real estate related transaction" means any of the following: 
(1)  The making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance: 
a.  For purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling; or 
b.  Secured by residential real estate; or 
(2)  The selling, brokering, or appraising of residential real property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity whose business includes engaging in residential real estate related transactions to discriminate against any person in making available such a transaction or in the terms or conditions of such a transaction because of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit a person engaged in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking into consideration factors other than race, color, religion, national origin, sex, handicap, or familial status. 
(Code 1977, § 15-35) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-204. 
Sec. 50-40. - Coercion, intimidation, threats, or interference. 
It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of such person's having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of such person's having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-222. 
Sec. 50-41. - Permissible limitations in sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings by religious organizations or private clubs; housing for older persons. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall prohibit a religious organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or organization operated, supervised, or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association, or society, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of dwellings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion or from giving preference to such persons unless membership in such religion is restricted on account of race, color, sex, handicap, familial status, or national origin. Nothing in this article shall prohibit a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of such lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. 
(b)  As used in this subsection, the term "housing for older persons" means housing: 
(1)  Provided under any state or federal program that the administrator determines is specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons as defined in the state or federal program; 
(2)  Intended for, and solely occupied by, persons 62 years of age or older; or 
(3)  Intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit. In determining whether housing qualifies as housing for older persons under this subsection, the administrator shall develop regulations which require at least the following factors: 
a.  The existence of significant facilities and services specifically designed to meet the physical or social needs of older persons, or, if the provision of such facilities and services is not practicable, that such housing is necessary to provide important housing opportunities for older persons; 
b.  That at least 80 percent of the units are occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per unit; and 
c.  The publication of and adherence to policies and procedures which demonstrate an intent by the owner or manager to provide housing for persons 55 years of age or older. 
(4)  Nothing in this article limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy a dwelling. The provisions in this article regarding familial status shall not apply with respect to housing for older persons. 
(c)  Housing shall not fail to meet the requirements for housing for older persons by reason of: 
(1)  Persons residing in such housing as of July 1, 1990, who do not meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section; provided, however, that new occupants of such housing meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section; or 
(2)  Unoccupied units; provided, however, that such units are reserved for occupancy by persons who meet the age requirements of subsection (b)(2) or (3) of this section. 
(d)  Nothing in this article prohibits conduct against a person because such person has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance. 
(Code 1977, § 15-33) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-205. 
Sec. 50-42. - Administration, authority and responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the building official to enforce and administer this article. 
(b)  The building official shall seek to have the parties resolve any alleged violations. If resolution can not be made then the building official may issue a citation to the violator to appear in recorder's court for disposition under the charter of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 15-37) 
Sec. 50-43. - Publicizing fair housing through community block grant activities. 
Whenever the city administers a community development block grant, the community and downtown services department shall: 
(1)  Distribute brochures outlining fair housing to all persons attending public hearings and community meetings related to any grant project; 
(2)  Post and maintain a fair housing information document at city hall for public viewing. 
(3)  Keep and maintain records of city activities related to fair housing in connection with any grant project. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-58, § 1 , 12-21-15) 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; drunkenness, drinking in open public places, § 10-3; general liquor regulations, ch. 10-121; pouring outlet regulations, § 10-154; animals, ch. 18; cruelty to animals, § 18-101 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 30; false fire alarms, § 42-1. 

Sec. 58-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-20, § 1, adopted April 2, 2001, repealed § 58-1 in its entirety. Formerly said section pertained to interference with officers. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 58-2. - Attempting or assisting escape. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to attempt to escape or to assist in any way the escape of any person in the custody of any officer, or from any jail when confined therein, or from the custody of any guard or superintendent of the work detail, or from any place of confinement. 
(Code 1977, § 17-3) 
Sec. 58-3. - Missiles and firearms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any firearms or to throw or shoot, either by hand or with any bow, sling, flip or other instrument, any arrow, shot, bullet, stone or other missile at any location within the city except: 
(1)  By any law enforcement officer or animal control officer when acting within the scope of his duties; or 
(2)  By any patron at a licensed private shooting range; or 
(3)  By any participant in an authorized recreational event or practice held at a city park; or 
(4)  By any person on property for which a current hunting permit has been issued by the city as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 17-5; Ord. No. O-98-79, § 1, 11-16-98) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 
Sec. 58-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2013-8, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 2013, repealed § 58-4, which pertained to hunting and derived from Ord. No. O-98-79, § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 1998. 
Sec. 58-5. - Camping. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to camp anywhere in the city except at such places as may be designated by the mayor and council for that purpose. 
(Code 1977, § 17-9) 
Cross reference— Camping in parks, § 62-42. 
Sec. 58-6. - Disorderly conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to do or commit any of the following: 
(1)  Use any obscene, vulgar or profane language; 
(2)  Behave in a rude, boisterous or violent manner; 
(3)  Engage in quarreling, fighting, or acting in a tumultuous or riotous manner; 
(4)  Commit any act tending to disturb the peace and quiet of the city; or 
(5)  Otherwise act in a disorderly manner. 
(Code 1977, § 17-11) 
Cross reference— Prohibited conduct in parks, § 62-38. 
State Law reference— Offenses against public order, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-30 et seq. 
Sec. 58-7. - Possession of marijuana unlawful; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  A person guilty of violating this section shall be punished in accordance with the city charter. 
(c)  The recorder shall exercise such jurisdiction and authority as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-32-6. 
(Code 1977, § 17-14) 
State Law reference— Conditional discharge for possession of controlled substances as first offense, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-2. 
Sec. 58-8. - Entry on city reservoir property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to enter upon the city water reservoir or the surrounding property of the city for any purpose. City employees, officers and agents may enter upon the property to perform the duties of their employment. Other government officials may enter upon the property in carrying out their official duties. 
(Code 1977, § 17-15) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 86. 
Sec. 58-9. - Deposits on city reservoir property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to put, place or locate, or cause to be put, placed or located, any material of whatever kind or nature on the water reservoir property, either directly or indirectly, without the express permission of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 17-16) 
Sec. 58-10. - Pollution prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge, or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly, into the water impounded in the city reservoir any waste matter, polluted materials or substances likely to cause pollution to such water, or any material likely to cause a degradation of the quality of the water in the reservoir. 
(Code 1977, § 17-17) 
Sec. 58-11. - Safety of public areas; loitering. 
(a)  No person shall remain or loiter upon any premises to which the public has access, including but not limited to such places as shopping center parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(b)  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages, beer or wine upon any premises to which the public has access, including but not limited to such places as shopping center parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(c)  No person shall deposit any garbage, refuse, rubbish, or litter which would constitute a danger to a pedestrian or a motor vehicle upon any premises to which the public has access, including but not limited to such places as shopping center parking lots, where the person's presence upon such premises is unrelated to the normal activity, use or business for which such premises are made available to the public. 
(d)  No person shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any other person is placed in fear for the safety of his life, limb or health, or whereby the property of another is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(e)  No person shall endanger the lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats or abusive conduct. 
(f)  No person shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another. 
(g)  No person shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl. 
(h)  No person shall jostle, roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. 
(i)  No person shall use fighting words or loud and boisterous language directed towards another so as to create a breach of the peace potentially dangerous to the safety of person or property. 
(j)  No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public way or place when ordered by the city police. 
(k)  For the purpose of this section, private parking facilities and associated walkways shall be considered a public way or place if such facilities are intended for use by the general public. 
(Code 1977, § 17-18) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; entertainment at pouring outlets, § 10-155; solid waste, ch. 70. 
Sec. 58-12. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
(a)  The city, pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252(c), hereby adopts by reference the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252(a), defining the offense of parking, standing or driving a vehicle in a private parking area after a request not to do so. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a monetary fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second such violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third or subsequent such violation. 
(Code 1977, § 17-19) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 82. 
Sec. 58-13. - Limitations on discharge of phosphates. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. O.C.G.A. § 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local governmental entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local governmental entity shall pass an ordinance and/or resolution mandating the retail sale of low-phosphorus household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus-reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the authority, the city and the county to encourage the use of clean, phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than one-half percent phosphorus by weight. The authority, the city and the county find that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect the state's rivers and lakes downstream and promote the health, safety and welfare and to prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life and property. It is vital to the health, well-being and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the city and the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authority means the Douglasville-Douglas County water and Sewer Authority. 
City means the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
County means Douglas County, Georgia. 
Household laundry detergent means a laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term household laundry detergent shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage or food-processing cleaning equipment; 
(3)  A phosphorus-acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner or metal conditioner; 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics or health-care facilities or in agricultural production; 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory and engineering laboratory; or 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry service for hospitals, health-care facilities or veterinary hospitals. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Phosphorus means elemental phosphorus. 
(c)  Restricted use. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than one-half percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(d)  Penalties for violation. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each such violation. 
(e)  Compliance. In addition to the penalty provided in subsection (d) of this section, the authority, the city and the county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this section. 
(f)  Right to damages. Nothing in this section shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this section and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding therefor. 
(g)  Severability. Should any subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of this section in its entirety or any part hereof other than that so declared to be invalid. 
(Code 1977, § 17-20) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 86; sewers, § 86-71 et seq. 
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; amusements and entertainments, ch. 14; swimming pool code, § 22-366 et seq.; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; zoning, app. A; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-99, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2000, amended Art. I in it's entirety. Further, said ordinance repealed § 62-4 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 62-1. - Douglasville Parks and Recreation Advisory Board—Created, terms. 
There is hereby created the Douglasville Parks and Recreation Advisory Board. This board shall consist of 13 adult members over the age of 18, appointed by the mayor and city council. The post one member shall be a city resident of city election ward one at the time of his appointment. The post two member shall be a city resident of city election ward two at the time of his appointment. The post three member shall be a city resident of city election ward three at the time of his appointment. The post four member shall be a city resident of city election ward four at the time of his appointment. The post Five member shall be a city resident of city election ward five at the time of his appointment. The post six member shall be a city resident of city election ward two at the time of his appointment. The post seven member shall be a city resident of city election ward three at the time of his appointment. The post eight member shall be a Douglas County resident recommended by or chosen to represent the Cultural Art Council of Douglasville/ Douglas County Inc. The post nine through 13 members shall be Douglas County residents who are participants, parents of a minor participant, coaches, umpires or administrators for athletic teams which use city facilities as their home location. No appointed member shall lose eligibility to hold his post by reason of moving his residence during his term, but each individual must meet eligibility standards at the time of appointment and any reappointment. 
The members for posts one, four, seven, ten and 13 shall serve an initial term ending on February 15, 2022, with subsequent terms ending on the three-year anniversary of that date. The members for posts two, five, eight and 11 shall serve an initial term ending on February 15, 2021, with subsequent terms ending on the three-year anniversary of that date. The members for posts three, six, nine and 12 shall serve an initial term ending on February 15, 2020, with subsequent terms ending on the three-year anniversary of that date. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1 , § 1, 1-14-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2019-1 , § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, amended § 62-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 62-1 pertained to Douglasville Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee—Created, terms and derived from Code 1977, § 17½-1; Ord. No. O-00-99, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2000; Ord. No. O-01-30, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 21, 2001; Ord. No. O-02-51, § 1, adopted Dec. 3, 2002; Ord. No. O-03-50, 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 16, 2003; and Ord. No. O-06-48, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2006. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 62-2. - Same—Officers, rules and procedures, meetings. 
The advisory board shall elect officers from among its members and shall adopt rules and procedures for the conduct of its meetings. Meetings shall be held regularly and as specially set, shall be open to the public and shall be conducted in compliance with the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1 , § 1, 1-14-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2019-1 , § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, amended § 62-2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 62-2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, § 17½-2; and Ord. No. O-00-99, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2000. 
Sec. 62-3. - Same—Duties. 
The duties of the advisory board shall be to: 
(1)  Assist in the preparation of a periodic appraisal of the city's parks and recreation department's programs, services and facilities. 
(2)  Monitor and identify the community's needs for parks and recreation services and facilities. 
(3)  Make recommendations to the city council regarding the planning and functioning of the parks and recreation department through the parks and recreation department director and the city manager. 
(4)  Resolve any disputes within the youth athletic associations brought before the advisory board. 
(5)  Support the recreation department in the enforcement of youth coaches certification and criminal background checks. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-1 , § 1, 1-14-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2019-1 , § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2019, amended § 62-3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 62-3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1977, § 17½-3; Ord. No. O-00-99, § 1, adopted Nov. 6, 2000; and Ord. No. O-01-30, § 3, adopted May 21, 2001. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Secs. 62-4—62-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PUBLIC PARKS AND FACILITIES GENERALLY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2013-11, § 1, adopted March 4, 2013, amended Art. II title to read as herein set out. Former Art. II title pertained to use of public parks and facilities. 

Sec. 62-36. - Violation, penalty. 
Any violation of this article shall be deemed a violation punishable as prescribed by the charter of the City of Douglasville. 
(Code 1977, § 17½-22) 
Charter reference— General penalty, § 6.03. 
Sec. 62-37. - Use of grounds and facilities in general. 
Each person, firm or corporation using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted, and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Code 1977, § 17½-16) 
Sec. 62-38. - Prohibited acts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation using public parks, grounds or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes, posts or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of such waters. 
(3)  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof. 
(4)  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any other animal. 
(5)  Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the grounds thereof but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same and properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(6)  Disturb the peace or use any profane or obscene language. 
(7)  Endanger the safety of any person by any conduct or act. 
(8)  Engage in fighting. 
(9)  Carry, possess or drink any alcoholic beverage, except at the West Pines Golf Course. 
(10)  Violate any rule for the use of a park made or approved by the parks and recreation board. 
(11)  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use. 
(12)  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor and in compliance with such regulations as may be adopted therefor. 
(13)  Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other place except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
(14)  Smoke, inhale, exhale, or carry any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed or plant in any manner or in any form, except outdoors at the West Pines Golf Course. 
(Code 1977, § 17½-17; Ord. No. O-05-25, § 2, 6-6-05; Ord. No. O-2012-33, §§ 1, 2, 7-2-12) 
Cross reference— Disorderly conduct, § 58-6. 
Sec. 62-39. - Hours of operation. 
The public parks shall be open daily to the public during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.; and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons other than city or county personnel conducting city or county business therein to occupy or be present in such parks during any other hours. Any section or part of a park, or an entire park, may be declared closed to the public by the director of parks and recreation at any time and for any interval of time, either temporarily or at regular or stated intervals. 
(Code 1977, § 17½-18) 
Sec. 62-40. - Group activity. 
(a)  Whenever more than ten members of any group, association or organization desire to use any park facilities for a particular purpose, such as picnics, parties or theatrical or other entertainment performances, a representative of such group, association or organization shall first obtain a permit from the director of parks and recreation for such purpose. 
(b)  The director of parks and recreation shall grant the application for a permit if it appears that the group, association or organization will not interfere with the general use of the park by individual members of the public and if the group, association or organization meets all other reasonable conditions which may be imposed by the director of parks and recreation. 
(c)  Such application may contain a requirement for an indemnity bond to protect the city or county from any liability of any kind or character and to protect city or county property from damage. 
(Code 1977, § 17½-19) 
Sec. 62-41. - Use of picnic areas. 
No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded unless permitted by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1977, § 17½-20) 
Sec. 62-42. - General regulations. 
(a)  Games. It shall be unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer is prohibited except on the fields, courts or areas provided therefor. 
(b)  Camping. It shall be unlawful for any person to set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used, or that could be used, for such purpose, such as a house trailer, camp trailer, camp wagon or the like unless permitted by the director of parks and recreation. 
(c)  Fires. It shall be unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director of parks and recreation. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any park area or on a highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(d)  Animals. It shall be unlawful to bring any dangerous animal into any park; and it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park. 
(e)  Motor vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within any area of a public park, playground or recreational facility if operation within such an area is prohibited by any clearly posted sign or notice in such area erected under the authority of the director of parks and recreation or the mayor and council. 
(f)  Sales. It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park unless permitted by the director of parks and recreation. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages. It shall be unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage of any kind whatsoever, except at the West Pines Golf Course. 
(h)  Signs. It shall be unlawful for anyone to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever upon and within public parks or playgrounds and recreational facilities unless same is permitted by the director of parks and recreation. 
(Code 1977, § 17½-21; Ord. No. O-96-50, §§ 1, 2, 10-21-96; Ord. No. O-05-40, § 1, 7-5-05; Ord. No. O-2012-33, § 3, 7-2-12) 
Secs. 62-43—62-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF ATHLETIC FIELDS 

Sec. 62-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliated sports association means a sports association which is a member and participant in a national, state-wide or regional sports competition league. 
Athletic field means any of the fields used for softball, baseball, soccer or football at any city park. 
Coach means a teacher or manager for a sports team, working with a team for an entire athletic season or other indefinite period of time, with authority to interact with players or to come onto the athletic field or sidelines before, during or after a game, practice or tournament. 
Director means the City of Douglasville Director of Parks and Recreation or his designee. 
Health care provider means a licensed physician or another licensed individual under the supervision of a licensed physician, such as a nurse practitioner, physician assistant, or certified athletic trainer who has received training in concussion evaluation and management. 
Instructor means a teacher for a sports team, working with a team for a limited period of time less than an entire athletic season, with authority to interact with players or to come onto the athletic field or sidelines before, during or after a game, practice or tournament. 
Sports association means any individual or legally constituted entity which organizes and operates one or more competitive amateur sports teams for which the home team members are primarily local residents, and having a usual predetermined competition season and competition schedule. 
Youth means a person or persons under the age of 19 years. 
Youth athletic activity means an organized athletic activity in which the majority of the participants are youth athletes and are engaging in an organized athletic game or competition against another team, club, or entity or in practice or preparation for an organized game or competition against another team, club, or entity, and renting an athletic field or using an athletic field as the home team. 
Youth sports association means any sports association having a majority of participants who are youths. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-11, § 2, 3-4-13; Ord. No. O-2014-24, §§ 1, 2, 4-21-14; Ord. No. O-2015-40, §§ 1, 2 , 9-8-15; Ord. No. O-2017-23 , § 1, 5-15-17) 
Sec. 62-52. - Regulations. 
(a)  Athletic fields may be reserved on a reasonable schedule for use by sports associations for competition, practice and tournaments. Any youth sports association which is a non-profit corporation shall apply for reservation at least 60 days in advance of the first proposed date for use of the athletic field, to allow adequate time for processing, and to assure proper consideration of the preference criteria stated in subsection (d); provided however, that the director may waive compliance with this requirement for good cause shown, where the subject field has not already been reserved by another applicant for the requested time period. 
(b)  Whenever an athletic field is not in use pursuant to reservation by a sports association, the director may in his discretion make that athletic field available for use by the public. 
(c)  All reservations of athletic fields shall be initiated by written application filed with the director on forms prescribed by the director. At a minimum, such application shall disclose the following: 
(1)  The legal name of the applicant, including the names of the sports association's principals, their addresses, and their telephone numbers; 
(2)  A proposed schedule for games and practices and tournaments, including make-up days, and a schedule showing times when field lights will be needed; 
(3)  Age groups for each team; 
(4)  Program registration information including registration dates, times, locations, fees, and the length of the season; 
(5)  A copy of the sports association's registration procedures, and try-out procedures, including a nondiscrimination statement substantially as follows: 
This association agrees that all persons shall be offered the opportunity to participate in all association programs regardless of race, color, national origin, religion, sex, handicap, or other non-merit factors. 
(6)  A financial statement for a minimum 12-month period concluding after the end of the last previous sports season, showing the name, address and phone number for the sports association's treasurer, along with one or more bank statements showing the funds on hand; 
(7)  A copy of the sports association's insurance binder showing not less than $1,000,000.00 in liability coverage with the city as an additional loss payee, and showing a provision requiring notification to the city if the policy is cancelled prior to expiration; and 
(8)  The names and completed consent forms for background check by the director and the City of Douglasville. 
(9)  If the sports association is a youth sports association, a full statement of all fees and charges to be paid to the youth sports association by any youth athlete member or his parents or legal guardian for participation in the youth sports association during the athletic season for which the athletic field will be rented, including but not limited to fees for uniforms, equipment, field rental, concessions, food and drinks, umpire fees, coaching fees, transportation, vending, advertising, copy costs and any other administrative charges. This statement may be amended in writing after submission to add further fees and charges, but new fees and charges shall not be implemented until filed with the director. 
(d)  The Douglas County Soccer Association, Inc. or its successor shall have priority to reserve the Fowler Field soccer facilities, pursuant to application. Youth sports shall have priority over adult sports. Affiliated sports associations shall have priority over unaffiliated sports associations. In all other cases where there are multiple applications for reservation of an athletic field for one time period, the director shall grant an application and award a reservation of the athletic field to one sports association per time period in his discretion based on the following criteria: 
(1)  Full use of the athletic field by the applicant during the immediately previous season for that sport; 
(2)  Past compliance with city laws, rules and regulations for use of parks and athletic fields by that sports association, including sportsmanlike conduct of all officials and players; 
(3)  Whether the proposed use of the athletic field is consistent with the intended and designed use for that athletic field; 
(4)  Ability and likelihood of the local public to join a team and participate in the proposed use based on factors including cost of participation, uniform cost, travel schedule and local schedule; 
(5)  Whether the proposed use of the athletic field is one already adequately provided to the community by another sports association with an existing reservation; 
(6)  Financial solvency and transparency of the applicant; and 
(7)  Ability of the sports association to provide sports programming that will meet the recreational needs of the local community. 
(e)  For pre-season practices, reservations shall not exceed three 90-minute practice sessions in any one calendar week; for practices during the playing season, reservations shall not exceed two 90-minute practice sessions in any one calendar week. A sports association shall have adults present to supervise all youth activities, from the time the first youth arrives until the last one departs. 
(f)  City parks close at 11:00 p.m. No one shall use an athletic field without an approved reservation, unless the gate is unlocked by the city indicating that the athletic field is open for public use. 
(g)  The property and cleaning deposit amounts for use of athletic fields shall be $250.00 per reservation or athletic season. The fee for use of a concession stand or storage building shall be $250.00 per reservation or athletic season. The fee amounts for use of athletic fields shall be as follows: 
(1)  For Fowler Field: 
a.  One thousand six hundred twenty dollars per year for up to 27 weeks for an affiliated sports association, including use of field lights; or 
b.  One hundred fifty dollars for up to six hours in one day for an unaffiliated sports association, plus $20.00 per hour for use of field lights as needed. 
(2)  For any football field: 
a.  One thousand four hundred eighty-five dollars per year for up to nine weeks for an affiliated sports association; or 
b.  One hundred fifty dollars for up to six hours in one day for an unaffiliated sports association, plus $20.00 per hour for use of field lights as needed. 
(3)  For any softball or baseball field: $125.00 per day per field or $75.00 for four hours per field; plus $20.00 per hour for use of field lights per field as needed. 
(h)  No one shall operate or enter the concession stands or storage buildings at an athletic field without express prior permission of the director. Storage of concession items at times when not open sales requires the written permission of the director. 
(i)  No one shall host or participate in a sports tournament at a city park without an approved reservation including a schedule for a tournament. 
(j)  No person or sports association shall restrict or interfere with any other activity at the park or the facility taking place off the boundaries of the athletic field reserved. 
(k)  The director may cancel any scheduled activity on any reserved athletic field due to severe weather when the director determines that such use would cause harm to the participants or damage to the athletic field. 
(l)  After each reserved use of an athletic field, the reserving sports association shall remove any litter and garbage from the athletic field and the surrounding area, including any dugouts or team areas, any concession areas used, and any bleachers adjacent to the athletic field. The director is authorized to withhold any clean-up deposit due to failure of a sports association to comply with this provision. 
(m)  No one shall construct any new fixed component, or repair, renovate, change, or relocate any fixed component of any city park without express written permission from the director. No one shall leave a privately owned storage vessel, trailer or building in a city park after same-day open hours for that park, without the prior written permission of the director. 
(n)  No one shall place a lock upon any city building, concession stand, gate or facility without the prior written permission of the director. When such permission is granted, the association shall furnish to the director a tagged key for each lock, prior to use of the lock. 
(o)  No individual shall serve as a coach, instructor or team parent for a sports association reserving an athletic field for youth sports who is not approved by the director. A criminal background check by the city and approval of the director is required before any individual may serve as a youth coach, instructor, or team parent for an affiliated sports association in connection with use of an athletic field. This requirement shall not apply to any coach, instructor or team parent for an event where a sports promoter has reserved the athletic field. 
(p)  Every sports association reserving an athletic field shall supply to the director, in advance of the first reserve date for any sports season, a complete roster of players, including the name, age and residence address for each player. This roster shall be updated and supplied to the director within 30 days of the addition of any new player. 
(q)  Every sports association reserving an athletic field shall supply to the director, in advance of the first reserve date for any sports season, a complete roster of coaches and instructors for the sports association. This roster shall be updated and supplied to the director prior to the use of any new coach or instructor in connection with an athletic field. 
(r)  After approval of a reservation, the director may revoke or terminate the reservation based any of the following: 
(1)  Persistent damage to city park facilities while in use by the sports association; 
(2)  Disorderly behavior and unbecoming conduct by any player, coach or instructor of the sports association occurring in connection with use of an athletic field; 
(3)  Noncompliance with or disobedience of any city ordinance or rule concerning city parks and recreation; or 
(4)  Failure to use the athletic field as approved or for significant periods of the reserved time, where failure is not due to inclement weather. 
(s)  Youth coaches, instructors and team parents requiring the criminal background check must wear a current city issued identification card, that indicates both criteria have been met, at all times while serving either of those roles at an athletic field. The minimum fine for violation of this provision shall be $50.00. 
(t)  Youth sports associations, their coaches, personnel and youths shall comply with the following protocol: 
(1)  Prior to the beginning of each athletic season of a youth athletic activity, every youth athletic association shall provide an information sheet to all youth athletes' parents or legal guardians which informs them of the nature and risk of concussion and head injury; 
(2)  If a youth athlete participating in a youth athletic activity exhibits symptoms of having a concussion, the youth sports association shall remove that athlete from the game, competition, tryout, or practice, and advise the youth's athletes' parents or legal guardians that the youth athlete must be evaluated by a health care provider for concussion before returning to play; and 
(3)  If a youth athlete is deemed by a health care provider to have sustained a concussion, the coach and youth sports association shall not permit the youth athlete to return to play until the youth athlete receives clearance from a health care provider for a full or graduated return to play; and 
(4)  This subsection (t) shall not create any liability for, or create a cause of action against, a the city or its insurers, agents, officers, employees, volunteers, other city personnel for any act or omission to act related to the removal or non-removal of a youth athlete from a game, competition, tryout, or practice pursuant to this subsection. This subsection (t) shall not create any liability for, or create a cause of action against any health care providers acting in a volunteer capacity for any act or omission to act related to the removal or non-removal of a youth athlete from a game, competition, tryout, or practice pursuant to this subsection. 
(u)  No youth sports association shall request or require any youth member or his parents or legal guardians to pay fees or charges other than those shown in the statement of fees or an amended statement of fees required by paragraph (c)(9) above. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-11, §§ 2, 4, 3-4-13; Ord. No. O-2013-39, § 1, 9-16-13; Ord. No. O-2014-24, §§ 3—5, 4-21-14; Ord. No. O-2015-40, §§ 3, 4 , 9-8-15; Ord. No. O-2017-23 , §§ 2, 3, 5-15-17) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to provide for collection, disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse, § 1.03(j). 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; safety of public areas, § 58-11; utilities, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the waste products of coal and other fuel used for heating and cooking from all public and private establishments and from all residences. 
Commercial container means a solid waste container supplied for continuing use to a commercial or industrial establishment or to an apartment complex, or a container supplied for temporary use at a construction site, including but not limited to all dumpsters, commercial compactor units, and commercial roll-off containers. 
Garbage means all putrescible wastes, except sewage and body wastes, including vegetable and animal offal and carcasses of dead animals, but excluding recognized industrial by-products, and includes all refuse or accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, consumption, merchandising or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables. 
Health officer means a representative of the county health department. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish, ashes and other putrescible and nonputrescible wastes, except sewage, from all public and private establishments and residences. 
Residential container means a solid waste container supplied for continuing use to premises used primarily for residential purposes. 
Trash means all nonputrescible wastes, except ashes, from all public and private establishments and from all residences. 
(Code 1977, § 12-1; Ord. No. O-95-20, § 1, 7-17-95) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 70-2—70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION REGULATIONS 

Sec. 70-36. - Authority of city. 
The mayor and council may provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, trash and refuse, regulate the manner and time of such collection and disposal, establish the rates to be charged therefor, and otherwise make such rules and regulations pertaining to garbage, trash and refuse as may be desirable to assure the public health and welfare. 
(Code 1977, § 12-17) 
Sec. 70-37. - Disposal generally. 
All garbage accumulating in private houses or on private premises, in hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses, fruit stands, stores, markets or elsewhere in the city shall be carried to a place designated and approved by the mayor and council. Such garbage as melon rinds, fruit parings, vegetables, leavings and liquid waste used as food or drink for fowl or animals may be kept on the premises temporarily, from one hauling period to the next, in such a manner as not to cause a nuisance or become a fly-attracting agent. 
(Code 1977, § 12-18) 
Sec. 70-38. - Accumulation prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or lessee of any building, yard or lot of ground within the city to allow garbage, trash or refuse of any kind to accumulate or remain in the building, or upon the yard or lot, unless placed in a container as required by this article. 
(Code 1977, § 12-19) 
Sec. 70-39. - Containers—Required. 
Every person and every business or commercial enterprise in the corporate limits of the city having vegetable or animal waste or other garbage shall keep the same on the premises in one or more containers at places where it may be conveniently reached and collected by the sanitary department of the city. Additionally every person shall affix a sign in a conspicuous location on each container (other than those exclusively for single-family residential use) prohibiting private dumping. 
(Code 1977, § 12-20; Ord. No. O-05-50, § 4, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 70-40. - Same—Specifications. 
Containers for the accumulation of garbage and refuse shall meet such specifications therefor as promulgated by the mayor and council and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1977, § 12-21) 
Sec. 70-41. - Fees. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse shall be as determined by the mayor and council from time to time and on file in the office of the finance director. Except as specifically exempted under this section, the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any home, building or commercial structure shall pay at least the minimum charge for garbage pick-up and disposal, as adopted by the mayor and council and on file with the finance director. Any single-family household in which any adult resident is over the age of 64 years shall be eligible for exemption from payment of the minimum charge for residential collection and disposal of garbage and refuse, upon written certification of the same to the finance director by the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee thereof. Fees for solid waste containers and services shall be incurred exclusively in the name(s) or the owner(s) and/or lessee(s) of the subject property, and not in the name(s) of any contractor(s) performing work upon the property. 
(Code 1977, § 12-23; Ord. No. O-96-26, § 1, 5-6-96; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 8, 12-3-01; Ord. No. O-05-29, § 1, 6-20-05; Ord. No. O-07-32, § 1, 6-4-07) 
Cross reference— Failure to pay utility charges, § 86-46. 
Sec. 70-42. - Maintenance of containers. 
Every garbage and trash container required by this article shall be maintained in as sanitary a condition as possible in view of the use to which it is put, and shall be thoroughly cleansed as needed by washing, sterilizing or otherwise. 
(Code 1977, § 12-24) 
Sec. 70-43. - Notice of damage to commercial containers. 
It shall be the duty of every person owning, controlling, managing, operating, policing, renting, or occupying any premises to which a commercial container is supplied to inspect the container regularly and to give notice to the city of any container which has jagged edges capable of causing injuries or which has deteriorated or been damaged to such an extent. 
(Code 1977, § 12-25; Ord. No. O-95-20, § 2, 7-17-95) 
Sec. 70-44. - Commercial containers furnished by city. 
(a)  The city will determine the size of each container needed by the user and such containers shall be placed in a manner as to be easily accessible to the city equipment making the pick-up. It shall be the responsibility of the user to remove all or any vehicles or objects blocking the container. 
(b)  The containers provided the user shall not be damaged or abused by the user. If such containers are damaged or abused by the user or its employees, the user shall be responsible for the expenses incurred by the city in repairing and/or replacing such container. 
(c)  No person shall ignite or set fire to the contents of any waste container provided by the city. Any person violating this provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. 
(d)  No person shall dispose of residential waste or refuse in a commercial container. No person shall place into any commercial container any waste or refuse not generated by the established to which the container is supplied. 
(e)  No person shall place into any commercial container any material which is highly acidic, radioactive, volatile, highly flammable, explosive toxic, hazardous or any material which is hazardous, damaged or dangerous waste as defined by federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 12-26; Ord. No. O-91-24, § 2, 8-5-91; Ord. No. O-95-20, § 3, 7-17-95) 
Sec. 70-45. - Cover required for vehicles hauling garbage, etc. 
All vehicles used in hauling garbage, trash or refuse of any kind whatsoever on any street or highway within the city shall have beds of tight construction to prevent the contents from falling or sifting onto the street, highway or ground, and shall at all times, except when loading or unloading, be covered with a canvas cover or some comparable cover. 
(Code 1977, § 12-27) 
Sec. 70-46. - Duty of customer to bag leaves and other common yard wastes. 
(a)  All leaves, small limbs, twigs, clippings, straw, bark, pine cones, grass and other such materials associated with common yard waste shall be properly bagged in an appropriate container in order for it to be disposed of by the city's trash disposal service. 
(b)  Plastic containers of sufficient size and strength of the generic term lawn bags or yard bags shall be utilized for the purpose of disposal of such waste. Bags shall be of such size as to allow the openings to be securely fastened so that no spillage shall occur upon loading or transporting by city employees. Bags shall be of sufficient strength not to split, open or tear under the load of the contents while being picked up, carried by the slack in the top of the bag or loaded onto the truck. Spillages due to improper bagging techniques or materials shall not be the responsibility of the city or its employees. 
(c)  No container shall be placed upon the paved or traveled portion of a city street or sidewalk while awaiting collection. 
(Code 1977, § 12-28) 
Sec. 70-47. - Residential containers furnished by city. 
(a)  The city shall furnish residential containers to all residential properties in the City of Douglasville. 
(b)  The containers shall be the property of the City of Douglasville and shall not be used for any purposes not approved by the city. 
(c)  The container shall not be damaged or abused by the user. If a container is damaged or destroyed, the property owner and tenant shall be jointly and severably liable to the city for the cost of repair or replacement of the container. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the user to place the container at the curb at the time specified by the city for garbage pick-up and to remove the container promptly after the city has emptied the container. 
(e)  The container lid shall be securely closed at all times except when the container is being filled or emptied to keep out animals and insects. 
(f)  No person shall ignite or set fire to the contents of any residential container provided by the city. Any person violating this provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 12-29) 
Sec. 70-48. - Reserved. 
Sec. 70-49. - Authorized residential containers; required. 
(a)  Every person disposing of household trash or garbage at any residence (other than apartment residences) within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville shall do so by enclosing all such household trash or garbage within one or more authorized residential containers supplied by the city or its franchisee, with the lid(s) fully and securely closed. The following described household waste shall be exempt from this requirement: 
(1)  All leaves, small limbs, twigs, plant clippings, straw, bark, pine cones, grass, and other common yard waste, which may be disposed of in non-authorized bags without city stickers and in non-authorized containers as provided in section 70-46; and 
(2)  Recyclable materials as authorized by the mayor and council and on file with the city clerk; and 
(3)  Household trash or garbage when disposed of in a bag upon which an authorized city sticker has been affixed, provided that such bag is strong enough to contain the contents throughout the disposal process; and 
(4)  Any solid waste disposed pursuant to an exempt "community clean-up" program authorized by city resolution. 
(b)  The city sanitation department shall assign an appropriate sized residential container for each household, considering, among other factors, the following: the request of the resident(s), the usual volume of waste generated by the household, the frequency with which waste is disposed of in bags which have or should have city stickers affixed, any history of non-compliance with this article, and availability of city containers in specific sizes. Where the city sanitation department determines that any assigned container size is inadequate for any household, the department may assign a different size container more appropriate to the needs of the residents, and the resident shall pay the lawful rate for the newly assigned container. 
(Ord. No. O-95-12, § 1, 5-15-95; Ord. No. O-97-36, § 1, 4-21-97; Ord. No. O-98-42, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. O-05-29, § 2, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 70-50. - Uncollected residential waste. 
The city sanitation department or its authorized franchisee may decline to collect household waste which is left at the curb for disposal not in compliance with section 70-49. Failure of the resident(s) to remove from the curb any rejected household waste within 48 hours of the regular collection time shall constitute unlawful accumulation. 
(Ord. No. O-95-12, § 1, 5-15-95; Ord. No. O-05-29, § 3, 6-20-05) 
Sec. 70-51. - City stickers not for resale or counterfeit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or business enterprise, other than the City of Douglasville or its authorized franchisees, to transfer or offer to transfer, within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville, any specially marked solid waste bag sticker authorized by the city for use in connection with disposal of household trash or garbage. It shall be unlawful for any person or business enterprise other than the City of Douglasville or its authorized franchisees to fabricate or to transfer within the corporate limits of the City of Douglasville any sticker substantially similar in appearance to any specially marked solid waste bag sticker authorized by the city for use in connection with disposal of household trash or garbage. 
(Ord. No. O-05-29, § 4, 6-20-05) 
Secs. 70-52—70-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT FOR PRIVATE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, adopted Sept. 2, 1997, repealed Art. III, §§ 70-76—70-82 and enacted a new Art. III, §§ 70-76—70-83, to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 70-76. - Required. 
No person, firm or corporation except the duly authorized franchisee or duly authorized agents or employees of the city, shall collect garbage or trash within the city or convey or transport garbage or trash on the streets, alleys, and public thoroughfares of the city for profit. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 70-77. - Filing application; investigation. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a permit for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, trash and rubbish shall make application for such permit to the city council, which shall make or cause to be made such investigation as it may consider necessary in order to determine whether or not the public convenience and necessity require the granting of such permit, and whether the applicant is a fit and proper person to conduct such business or activity for profit. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 70-78. - Contents of application. 
The application for a private collection and disposal permit shall set forth: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Whether the applicant is an individual, a corporation or a partnership; 
(3)  The trade name under which the applicant does or proposes to do business; 
(4)  The number of vehicles the applicant desires to operate; 
(5)  The class, size and design of each vehicle; 
(6)  The names, addresses, and drivers license numbers of all drivers and other information sufficient to obtain driving record reports on each driver; 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude; 
(8)  Sufficient information for the city to obtain a commercial credit report; 
(9)  Proof of public liability insurance to cover the operation of his vehicles for damage to property of others while operating such vehicles on the streets of this city; 
(10)  The nature and character of the service the applicant proposes to render; 
(11)  The experience he or it has had in rendering such service; 
(12)  The patrons for whom he proposes to render this service; and 
(13)  Such other information as the mayor and city council may require. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 70-79. - Fees. 
(a)  Application. The mayor and city council shall determine by resolution the amount to be charged as an application fee to cover the cost of the investigation. Such fee shall not be refundable. 
(b)  Permit. The mayor and city council shall determine by resolution the amount to be charged as a permit fee. Such permit fee shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, applicable business license fees and taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 70-80. - Insurance required. 
Any applicant making application for a permit under this section shall, for each and every vehicle to be used in collection, have issued to him and maintained by him by a company duly licensed to operate and do business in the state, a policy of indemnity insurance in the amount of at least $500,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for injuries to more than one person sustained in the same accident, and in the amount of $300,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such policy of indemnity may cover all of the vehicles operated by the same owner. A copy of such policy shall be furnished to the city upon application for a permit, and a copy shall be thereafter maintained with the city clerk should a permit be granted. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 70-81. - Nontransferable; revocation. 
All permits granted by the mayor and city council for collection, removal and disposal of garbage, trash and rubbish shall be nontransferable. Such permits may be revoked for a violation of this article by the city council at any time when, in its judgment, such action is deemed to be in the best interest of the public. The permit holder shall receive five days advance notice of the revocation and may request a hearing before the mayor and council to protest the revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 70-82. - Display; inspection. 
In all cases where permits have been issued for the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, trash and rubbish, each such permit shall be in the possession of the person rendering such service, and shall be subject to inspection at all times, and the permit numbers shall be painted on both sides of the vehicle used for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97) 
Sec. 70-83. - Penalty for violation; parties to a violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be held liable and punished as provided in Section 4.13 of the Douglasville City Charter. Any person who hires another to collect, remove or dispose of garbage, trash or rubbish within the city shall first inspect the hauler's permit and verify that the same has been duly issued by the city clerk and that the same is current and effective; failure to comply with this provision shall constitute a violation of this chapter. Any person who intentionally aids, abets, advises, encourages, hires, counsels or procures another to commit a violation of this chapter is a party to said violation, notwithstanding that the person alleged to have directly committed the violation has not been prosecuted or convicted, has been convicted of a different violation, or is not amenable to justice or has been acquitted. 
(Ord. No. O-97-59, § 1, 9-2-97; Ord. No. O-01-41, § 9, 6-18-01) 
Secs. 70-84—70-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicles dropping loads upon roadway, § 82-10. 

Sec. 70-101. - Short title. 
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Douglasville Anti-Litter Ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 14-51) 
Sec. 70-102. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aircraft means any contrivance used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word aircraft shall include helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
Authorized private receptacle means a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in the ordinances of the city. 
City means the City of Douglasville. 
Commercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of this city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
Litter means garbage, refuse, and rubbish and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare, and the term also includes materials of whatever nature which, although not waste or discarded material, have been placed on or scattered onto the property of another without permission and are not promptly removed. 
Newspaper means any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public. 
Noncommercial handbill means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
Park means a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Private premises means any dwelling, house, building or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for residential or commercial purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure. 
Public place means any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, natural fibers, man-made materials and similar materials. 
Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1977, § 14-52) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-103. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with section 1-3. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Code 1977, § 14-72) 
Sec. 70-104. - Duty of business owners, occupants to prevent littering. 
(a)  Generally. The owner or occupant of any store or other place of business situated within the city shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep his premises clean of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials thrown or left on the premises by customers of such business, and to take reasonable measures to prevent the same from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises. 
(b)  Receptacles. Receptacles of sufficient size and number shall be placed on the premises accessible to the customers of any business where the articles of waste referred to in subsection (a) of this section may be disposed of. 
(c)  Signs. Each and every business establishment shall place upon its premises in conspicuous places in close proximity to the receptacles required by subsection (b) of this section signs which shall, in essence, convey to its customers a request that they use such receptacles for the disposal of waste material. 
(Code 1977, § 12-4) 
Sec. 70-105. - Duty of customer to use litter receptacles. 
It shall be unlawful for any customer going upon the premises of another in any manner to dispose of wastepaper, wrapping paper, paper napkins, cartons, package containers and other used or waste materials, except in receptacles provided for such purposes. 
(Code 1977, § 12-5) 
Sec. 70-106. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Code 1977, § 14-54) 
Sec. 70-107. - Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited. 
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Code 1977, § 14-55) 
Sec. 70-108. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-06-51, § 2, adopted Dec. 4, 2006, repealed § 70-108, which pertained to a merchant's duty to keep sidewalks free of litter and derived from Code 1977, § 14-56. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 70-109. - Truck loads causing litter. 
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded or covered as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Code 1977, § 14-58) 
Sec. 70-110. - Dropping litter from aircraft. 
No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other object. 
(Code 1977, § 14-66) 
Sec. 70-111. - Posting notices prohibited. 
No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree within the right-of-way of any street, or upon any private property without the permission of the owner or occupant, or upon any public structure, building or property, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Code 1977, § 14-67) 
Sec. 70-112. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
The owner and/or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Code 1977, § 14-69) 
Sec. 70-113. - Clearing of litter from open private property by city. 
(a)  Notice to remove. The building official, health officer, city clerk, or chief of police, or their deputies, are hereby authorized and empowered to notify the owner of property within the city or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by certified mail addressed to such owner at his last known address as indicated on the tax records of the city. 
(b)  Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within seven days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (a) of this section, or within ten days after the date of such notice if the same is returned to the city because of the inability of the United States Postal Service to make delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such owner or agent, the officers authorized above are hereby authorized and empowered to order disposal of the litter by the city or private removal agencies designated by the city. 
(c)  Charge included in tax bill. When the city has effected the removal of such litter or has paid for its removal, the actual cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of six percent per annum from the date of the completion of the work shall be paid by the owner within 15 days of the completion of the work. If such is not paid by such owner prior to the next regular tax billing date then such charges shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the city, and such charges shall be due and payable by the owner at the time of payment of such bill. 
(d)  Recorded statement constitutes lien. Where the full amount due the city is not paid by such owner within 15 days after the disposal of such litter, as provided for in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the city clerk shall cause to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court, a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the location of the property on which such work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien and privilege on the property, and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has been made. Such costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes and further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of ten percent if the same is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which such charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the property designated or described in the statement and that the same is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 14-71) 
Sec. 70-114. - Dumping, depositing, etc., litter on public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit or throw, or leave or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters of this city, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by one of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on the property for the purpose of limited use by guests and members of the public; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of household trash or garbage in any container provided by the city, except as provided in section 70-49 of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not more than $500.00 nor more than 90 days in jail. 
(2)  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway, public right-of-way, public park, or with the permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(d)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-92-5, § 7(14-73), 4-6-92; Ord. No. O-97-39, § 1, 5-19-97) 
Sec. 70-115. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 70-114, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated section 70-114. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of section 70-114 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated section 70-114. 
(Ord. No. O-92-5, § 8(14-74), 4-6-92) 
Secs. 70-116—70-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESTAURANTS AND SHOPS ON THE DOWNTOWN PLAZA[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-08-015, adopted Apr. 7, 2008, amended art. V in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-98-69, adopted Sept. 21, 1998. 

Sec. 70-130. - Intent. 
It is the intent of this article to create and maintain a clean, safe, healthy and pleasant environment for the public within the Downtown Plaza, including public places at the rear, front and sides of all buildings within this area, while encouraging and supporting restaurants and other businesses within the Downtown Plaza area. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 70-131. - Applicability. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to restaurants, eating establishments and other businesses (for purposes of this article, hereinafter called "restaurants") generating grease, vegetable waste, food waste, garbage, other waste with an obnoxious smell, or containers having a residue of such material (for purposes of this article, hereinafter collectively called "food waste") located in the Downtown Plaza as defined herein. The provisions of this article shall also apply to all other business establishments (for purposes of this article, hereinafter called "shops") in the Downtown Plaza area from the southern boundary of the Norfolk Southern Railroad right-of-way southward to the northern boundary of the Church Street right-of-way; from the eastern boundary of the Courthouse Square East right-of-way westward to the western boundary of the Campbellton Street right-of-way. Where any provision of this article is in conflict with any other provision of this chapter, the more restrictive provision of the two shall apply. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 70-132. - Responsible party. 
It shall be the duty of every person owning, controlling, managing, operating, policing, renting or occupying any restaurant on the Downtown Plaza to assure compliance of such restaurant with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 70-133. - Accumulation of waste prohibited. 
(a)  Outdoor disposal of food waste prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any restaurant or shop within the Downtown Plaza to deposit or to allow any food waste to accumulate or remain outdoors on the premises of such restaurant or shop, whether or not such food waste or other solid waste is enclosed within any bag, cart or container. 
(b)  Outdoor disposal of non-food waste prohibited for restaurants. It shall be unlawful for any restaurant within the Downtown Plaza to deposit or allow any non-food waste to accumulate or remain outdoors on the premises of such restaurant, whether or not such non-food waste or other solid waste is enclosed within any bag, cart or container, except for non-food recyclables as provided in section 70-134. 
(c)  Outdoor disposal of non-food waste for shops. It shall be unlawful for any shop within the Downtown Plaza to deposit or to allow any non-food waste to accumulate or remain outdoors on the premises of such shop, except in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 70-134. - Proper disposal of solid waste. 
(a)  Shops. Shops shall dispose of bagged non-food waste by placing such bags at the rear entrance to the building, not sooner than one and one-half hours prior to any normal scheduled time for collection by the city or its collection franchisee. Exceptionally, non-food recyclables may be disposed of in approved containers, rather than in bags, but the times for collection shall be the same as for other non-food waste. 
(b)  Restaurants. Restaurants shall dispose of food waste and non-food waste by bagging the same and keeping it indoors and accessible for regular backdoor collection by the city or its collection franchisee. Exceptionally, non-food recyclables may be disposed of in approved containers, rather than in bags, but the times for collection shall be the same as for other non-food waste, and recyclable grease may be disposed of through the use of private recycling establishments, but grease shall not be left outdoors for collection nor discharged or leaked onto the ground or pavement incident to recycling. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 70-135. - Fees for disposal. 
The fees for disposal of solid waste by restaurants and shops shall be as determined by the mayor and council from time to time and on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 70-136. - Outdoor transporting of food waste prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any restaurant or shop to transport or allow to be transported any food waste, except in accordance with section 70-134. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Sec. 70-137. - Outdoor cleaning prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any restaurant or shop to clean or wash any food waste cart, solid waste container, grease container, utensil, mat or equipment used in the course of its business at any outdoor location within the Downtown Plaza. 
(Ord. No. O-08-015, 4-7-08) 
Chapter 74 - STREETS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-81, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2000, amended the title of this chapter from streets, sidewalks and other public places to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; advertising, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; excavating and trenching, § 22-456 et seq.; community development, ch. 34; floods, ch. 46; parks and recreation, ch. 62; signs, ch. 66; merchant's duty to keep sidewalks free of litter, § 70-108; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; permit required for parade, § 82-5; utilities, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; subdivision regulations, app. B; design standards for subdivisions, app. B, § 80 et seq.; required improvements in subdivisions, app. B, § 110 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Obstruction generally. 
Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner or by any material whatsoever any street or sidewalk, curb or gutter or public alley within the city. 
(Code 1977, § 22-1) 
Sec. 74-2. - Display of merchandise. 
It shall be unlawful for merchants or others doing business in the city to expose their goods or property for sale, display, advertisement or other purposes except as allowed by section 3.43.01 of Appendix A—Zoning. 
(Code 1977, § 22-2; Ord. No. O-06-51, § 3, 12-4-06) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 26. 
Sec. 74-3. - Obstruction permits. 
When and where it shall be necessary in the construction or repair of buildings, sheds, sidewalks, etc., and any other proper cases, the mayor may issue written permits for definite lengths of time, not exceeding one year, permitting the applicant therefor to obstruct the free and unimpeded use of the streets or sidewalks of the city by depositing on such streets or sidewalks or fixing or suspending over such streets or sidewalks any object or body. The provisions of any conditions which may be stated in such permit shall be strictly adhered to. The mayor and city council, and the police chief, are each likewise empowered to issue written permission for the temporary obstruction of streets in proper cases. 
(Code 1977, § 22-3; Ord. No. O-2012-37, § 2, 8-6-12) 
Sec. 74-4. - Height of wires or lines. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place along or over any sidewalk or pathway in the city any wire or line if the same shall be less than 15 feet from the surface of the sidewalk or pathway. This section does not prevent the erection of any fence along the side of any sidewalk or pathway. 
(Code 1977, § 22-4) 
Sec. 74-5. - Specifications generally. 
The plans and specifications for the construction, alteration or repair of all streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public ways in the city, as well as driveways and other appurtenances thereto, shall be as determined by the mayor and council from time to time. Copies of such plans and specifications shall be on file in the office of the development official. 
(Code 1977, § 22-5; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 12, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 74-6. - Charitable solicitation permits. 
No person shall stand on any street, highway or right-of-way for the purpose of transacting business or soliciting contributions directly from the occupant of any vehicle, except in accordance with a charitable solicitation permit issued pursuant to this section. Charitable solicitation permits may be issued by the police chief to charitable organizations registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, and to charitable organizations exempt from registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. No permit shall be issued where the police chief deems the same to be a substantial threat or impediment to public safety or to traffic efficiency. Every permit shall be for a specified location, and for one continuous time period. The police chief may impose reasonable safety restrictions upon any permit, including a minimum age limit for all solicitors. 
(Ord. No. O-02-09, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 74-7. - Structures over city property. 
Structures other than signs shall not be allowed to overhang or protrude over city sidewalks or pedestrian walkways except as provided in this section. For lots adjacent to O'Neal Plaza, Plaza East or Plaza West, a balcony may cantilever over plaza property, without payment to the city of any fee for the same, provided that: 
(a)  the entire cantilevered area is less than 50 square feet; 
(b)  the protrusion into the plaza is no more than six linear feet at any point; and 
(c)  there is a minimum vertical clearance of ten feet above the paved finish of the plaza. 
Structures which protrude over plaza property and have ground support may be approved by the mayor and council on an individual basis, for appropriate compensation to be paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-37 , § 1, 10-1-18) 
Secs. 74-8—74-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALK CAFES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-81, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2000, repealed §§ 74-36—74-38, 74-61—71-64 and 74-86—74-88 in their entirety. Formerly, said sections pertained to new streets and sidewalks and sidewalk repair regulations. See the Code Comparative Table. Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, adopted May 2, 2005, added new provisions to the Code as art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 74-36. - Purpose. 
This article shall apply to the establishment, operation, and maintenance of all outdoor cafes within Plaza West and O'Neal Plaza in the City of Douglasville. The purpose of this article is to promote the general economic development and atmosphere of the City of Douglasville for the benefit of businesses and citizens located there, and no right of individuals or individual businesses are created therein, and to create an aesthetic ambiance which will attract tourists to the area. Further, this article is designed to maintain the efficiency of the pedestrian path and public space. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-37. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Common area sidewalk cafe means the location and use of tables and chairs in the paved brick areas of Plaza West and/or O'Neal Plaza which are behind any restaurant. 
O'Neal Plaza means that paved pedestrian public space lying north of the intersection of Price Street and Church Street, and north of 8434 O'Neal Plaza; south of Broad Street, and south of 6682, 6680 and 6678 Broad Street; east of 6695 Church Street and 6694 Broad Street; and west of 6682 Broad Street, 8434 and 8436 O'Neal Plaza, and 6671 Church Street. 
Permittee means the recipient of a sidewalk cafe permit under the terms and provisions of this article. 
Plaza West means that paved pedestrian alleyway lying north of the rear building line for structures fronting on Church Street, south of the rear building line for structures fronting on Broad Street, east of Courthouse Square East, and west of O'Neal Plaza. 
Sidewalk cafe means the location and use of tables and chairs on the public sidewalk and operated as an extension of a licensed restaurant immediately to the rear of Plaza West or O'Neal Plaza, and which sidewalk cafe shall be an incidental activity of the restaurant establishment. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-38. - Sidewalk cafe permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sidewalk cafe in Douglasville without a permit issued by the city or to fail to comply with all sections of this article. Permits for sidewalk cafes in Plaza West and O'Neal Plaza may be issued by the finance department and shall be renewed annually. The issuance of such a permit shall not be construed or interpreted to convey any property rights or any leaseholder rights to any person or business. The provisions of this article are subject to change and amendment by the mayor and commission from time to time. Sidewalk cafe permits are non-transferable. Permits will expire upon transfer of ownership, change in use of facility, and December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-39. - Application. 
Any person desiring to operate a sidewalk cafe shall submit an application, on a form prescribed by the city. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of restaurant; 
(3)  A copy of a valid City of Douglasville occupational license to operate a restaurant in front of which the sidewalk cafe will be located; 
(4)  A copy of a current certificate of insurance in the amounts and categories required by section 74-42 of this article; 
(5)  A sketch identifying the perimeter area, the dimensions of area, the dimensions from perimeter to curb or nearest obstacle, and the design and materials of the required cafe railing system. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-40. - Permit fee. 
The annual permit fee to operate a sidewalk cafe shall be $100.00 plus $1.00 per square foot for the approved/permitted area. Prior to the issuance or renewal of a sidewalk cafe permit, the applicant shall provide proof to the city that there are no outstanding occupational tax or alcohol license fees owed to the city by the entity requesting a sidewalk cafe permit. A sidewalk cafe permit will not be issued until all outstanding debts to the city are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-41. - Regulations generally. 
Except as otherwise provided, a sidewalk cafe shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Limitations on area. The area in which a sidewalk cafe is operated shall abut the rear wall of the restaurant of which it is an extension and shall not extend parallel in either direction more than three feet beyond the outdoor side of the restaurant. The rear boundary of the area permitted for a sidewalk cafe shall not extend more than ten feet perpendicular from the rear wall of the restaurant; however, a rear minimum of five feet shall be provided at all times for continuous unobstructed pedestrian traffic on the space between the sidewalk cafe area and the nearest obstacle to pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  Divider required. The area permitted for a sidewalk cafe shall be separated from the remaining public area. This divider must be shown in the application and must be approved prior to the issuance of the permit. Such divider shall not be less than three feet in height. All tables and chairs must be located totally within the limits of the divider. It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to maintain the divider within its approved location. 
(3)  Sanitation. It shall be the responsibility and duty of the restaurant to which the sidewalk cafe permit is issued to maintain the area covered by the permit in a clean, neat, and orderly manner at all times. The area shall be clear of all debris at all times. It shall also be the responsibility of the permit holder to pressure wash the surface on which the sidewalk cafe is located no less often than once every three months. Permittee shall sweep the sidewalk and collect the debris prior to pressure washing and shall maintain records of dates the space was pressure washed and by whom, and such records shall be open to inspection by the City of Douglasville. Pressure washing by permittee shall be conducted using water only. The use of cleaning agents is prohibited. All tables and chairs are to be kept clean, sanitary, safe and in structurally sound condition at all times. 
(4)  Removal of furnishings. All tables, chairs and dividers of a sidewalk cafe shall be removed from the public space as notified by the City of Douglasville for city cleaning, for city functions, for other private functions scheduled by the city, or other purposes. 
(5)  Suspension or modification of operation. The city shall have the authority to require any sidewalk cafe operating in an area created by this section to suspend operation and clear such area, or to move or modify the location or operation of the sidewalk cafe, for things which include but are not limited to: 
a.  Any special event, private or public, approved by the city; 
b.  Any street, sidewalk, or utility construction; 
c.  Any event held by the City of Douglasville; 
d.  Any emergency situation; or 
e.  The protection of the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(6)  Sale of alcoholic beverages. Pouring of alcoholic beverages may be allowed in compliance with section 10-2(3)b. of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-42. - Liability and insurance. 
(a)  The permittee shall indemnify, defend, save, and hold harmless the City of Douglasville, its officers and employees, from any and all claims, liability, damages and causes of action which may arise out of the permit or permittee's activity on the premises. 
(b)  The permittee shall meet and maintain for the entire permit period, at its own expense, the following requirements: 
(1)  Commercial general liability in the amount of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. The City of Douglasville must be named as an additional insured on this policy, and an endorsement must be issued as part of the policy reflecting compliance with this requirement. 
(2)  The City of Douglasville must receive 30 days' written notice prior to any cancellation, non-renewal, or material change in the coverage provided. 
(3)  The permittee shall provide an original certificate of insurance as evidence that the above requirements have been met prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-43. - Revocation or suspension of permit. 
The approval of a sidewalk cafe permit is conditional at all times. A sidewalk cafe permit may be revoked or suspended by the mayor and city council if it is found that: 
(1)  Any necessary business or health permit has been suspended, revoked or cancelled; or 
(2)  The permittee does not have insurance which is correct and effective in the minimum amounts described in section 74-42; or 
(3)  The permittee has failed to confine the business operations to those normally associated with the particular registered activity; or 
(4)  The permittee has violated any city code, rule, regulation or ordinance pertaining directly or indirectly to the registered activity; or 
(5)  The permittee has violated any state or federal code, rule, regulation, ordinance or statute pertaining directly or indirectly to the registered activity. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-44. - Fines for violators. 
The following minimum fines shall be imposed for violations of this article. 
(1)  First citation: $100.00 fine. 
(2)  Second citation within a one-year period: $250.00 fine. 
(3)  Third or subsequent citation within a one-year period: $500.00 fine. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Sec. 74-45. - Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Any person or entity receiving a permit hereunder shall comply with all requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act as currently existing or as may be hereafter amended. 
(Ord. No. O-05-20, § 1, 5-2-05; Ord. No. O-07-57, § 1, 10-1-07) 
Secs. 74-46—74-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— See editor's note at art. II. 

Secs. 74-86—74-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Excavating and trenching, § 22-456 et seq. 

Sec. 74-111. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig into, open or otherwise cause any excavation to be made into or under any street or sidewalk within this city without first obtaining a permit so to do from the development official. 
(Code 1977, § 22-45; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 13, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 74-112. - Excavation standards. 
Any excavations into or under any street or sidewalk within the city shall be made in accordance with standards as set forth in the Utility Accommodations Policy and Standards, 1988 edition, published by the state department of transportation, office of utilities, which is adopted by reference and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this section, and as may be amended from time to time. At least one copy of the utility accommodations policy and standards is on file in the office of the building official. 
(Code 1977, § 22-46) 
Sec. 74-113. - Protection of public. 
It shall be the duty of any person making an excavation in the streets or alleys of the city to adequately and sufficiently protect all such excavations in the streets or alleys of the city by guardrails or other obstructions, including not less than one amber light on each side of such fill during the nighttime so as to prevent accidents and injury to persons or property. 
(Code 1977, § 22-47; Ord. No. O-92-49, § 1, 12-21-92) 
Sec. 74-114. - Liability generally. 
Liability for paying the cost of making refills and repairing and restoring streets and alleys to their former condition shall be a joint liability upon the property owner, lessee of property, or other persons for whose benefit such work is done or attempted to be done, and the plumber, contractor, or other person actually doing or attempting to do such work. 
(Code 1977, § 22-48) 
Secs. 74-115—74-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOUSE NUMBERING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 

Sec. 74-136. - Duty of owner or occupant. 
The owner, or if he fails to do so, then the occupant of each house, place of business or part of house in the city, where such part of house is separately occupied, shall erect or post thereon, or upon the lot or premises on which such house, place of business or part of house is situated, in a conspicuous place near the entrance, not more than 40 feet from the street line, the official number of such house, place of business or part of house, such official number being designated by the development official. 
(Code 1977, § 22-61; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 14, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 74-137. - Permanent or standard numbers. 
The permanent number or standard number to be placed as required by this article shall be not less than 2½ inches in height. 
(Code 1977, § 22-62) 
Sec. 74-138. - System of numbering. 
For the purpose of house numbering, the county grid numbering system is hereby adopted and made the system of numbering in the city. All numbers assigned shall be assigned in accordance with the procedure of such system as it exists on May 1, 1970. 
(Code 1977, § 22-63) 
Sec. 74-139. - Assignment of numbers. 
The city engineer shall assign all existing and new numbers under this article. 
(Code 1977, § 22-64; Ord. No. O-01-82, § 1, 12-3-01) 
Secs. 74-140—74-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITIES IN CITY STREETS OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 86. 

Sec. 74-166. - Notification of intent to utilize easement. 
Any public utility seeking to condemn or utilize an easement over or through the paved portion of the public right-of-way which is under the supervision and control of the city, in order to run wires, pipes or cables, maintain dams, flow backwater, or for any other uses necessary to their purpose, shall first notify the city engineering department or their designated agent of the utility intention to so condemn or utilize. Utilization shall mean any manner or use of the above-described right-of-way, including, but not limited to, cutting of the pavement or boring under the pavement. Such notification shall include the location and description of the right-of-way to be condemned or utilized and the purpose of the condemnation or utilization. Upon emergency repair service involving utilization of the paved portion of the right-of-way during hours other than normal office hours, the utilities shall notify the engineering department by the next business day. 
(Code 1977, § 22-75) 
Sec. 74-167. - Specifications. 
The city engineering department is hereby authorized to prepare standard specifications regulating the installation of pipes, wires, cables, poles, lines, etc., over a public right-of-way. These specifications shall be in conformance with the requirements of this article and shall be designed to protect and safeguard the welfare of the city and its citizens. A copy of the specifications shall be available for public view during normal business hours at the city public service department. 
(Code 1977, § 22-76) 
Sec. 74-168. - Permits for new installations. 
As to new installations, no public utility shall install any lines, wires, pipes or poles, or otherwise utilize a public right-of-way until after obtaining a permit from the city engineering department respecting the proposed location of lines, wires, pipes, etc., in accordance with this article. The engineering department shall determine if the installed location and placement of any utility along a public right-of-way meets the requirements of this article and the specifications of the city engineering department. The engineering department shall then issue a written approval or disapproval to the public utility, regarding the installation. Any installation made by any utility in a location other than that specified in this regulation or the city engineering department standard designated Underground Utilities-Typical Locations, shall be removed and reinstalled in the proper location, entirely at the expense of the utility. Failure to reinstall at the proper location will result in the withholding of any further installation permits. Failure to conform to this article, or to the permit, will result in the withholding of any further permits. 
(Code 1977, § 22-77) 
Sec. 74-169. - Location of utility lines. 
(a)  Gas, electrical, telephone and cable television lines shall be located on the north or east side of any road, highway or street; water, and if necessary, electrical, telephone and cable television lines, shall be located on the south and west side of any road, highway or street. 
(b)  The determination of which side is north and which side is south shall be made at the point where such street, road or highway begins. If there is any question regarding which side of the highway, road, or street any particular utility should use, then such utility shall contact the city engineering department. The city engineering department shall then instruct the public utility regarding which side of a specific road, street or highway the particular utility should use. 
(Code 1977, § 22-78) 
Sec. 74-170. - Minimum depth of utility lines. 
(a)  All gas service lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of 18 inches. All gas lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of 30 inches. 
(b)  All water lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of 48 inches. 
(c)  All underground telephone wires shall be installed at a minimum depth of 24 inches. 
(d)  All underground power lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of 42 inches. 
(e)  All underground cable television lines shall be installed at a minimum depth of 18 inches. 
(f)  All gas lines shall be installed at a minimum of 36 inches from the curb and 17 feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed at a minimum of 18 inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(g)  All telephone lines shall be installed a minimum of 18 inches from the curb or 15½ feet from the centerline of a county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(h)  All electrical lines shall be installed a minimum of 96 inches from the curb or 22 feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of 24 inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(i)  All cable television lines shall be installed a minimum of six inches from the curb or 14½ feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc., and shall be installed a minimum of 12 inches from any other public utility line, pipe, etc. 
(j)  All poles for overhead utilities shall be installed with pole centerline a minimum of 20 feet from the centerline of any county road, highway, street, etc. 
(k)  All electrical transformer pads shall be installed with the rear edge of the pad at the right-of-way line. 
(l)  All sanitary sewer main lines shall be installed a minimum of six feet deep in any city right-of-way. All sanitary sewer service lines must be a minimum of five feet deep on any city right-of-way. 
(Code 1977, § 22-79) 
Sec. 74-171. - Variances. 
The city engineering department is authorized to approve a variance from the requirements of sections 104 through 117 of the location standard incorporated in section 74-168 of this Code, if, in its opinion, such variance is absolutely necessary under the conditions then and there existing; and, such variance will not create a public hazard or otherwise be detrimental to the best interests of the city and its citizens. The city engineering department shall keep a record of any and all variances granted under this section. This record shall include the name of the utility to which such variance is granted, the description and location of the variance, and the reasons for granting such variance. 
(Code 1977, § 22-80) 
Sec. 74-172. - Restoration of property; street cuts; costs and expenses. 
(a)  Any utility shall condemn or utilize only that portion of a public right-of-way necessary for the purpose intended. They shall leave undisturbed the area surrounding the condemned or utilized right-of-way and shall replace or repair, in kind, any structures, shrubbery, driveways, embankments, ground cover, etc., which are altered or disturbed while installing pipes, wires, ditches, or otherwise using the public right-of-way and shall regrade the disturbed area to its original contours. 
(b)  No street cuts for crossings will be made unless specifically approved by the city engineering department after at least three attempts to bore at different locations. Patches shall be made in accordance with the city engineering standard designated Backfilling and Repaving Utility Cuts. 
(c)  Any costs or expenses incurred by the city in repairing or replacing any structures, etc., as described in subsection (a) of this section, which are not left in their original condition by the public utilities shall be chargeable to the public utility, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of such costs or expenses. 
(Code 1977, § 22-81) 
Chapter 78 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; rate of tax on malt beverages, § 10-50; taxation of wine, § 10-82; taxation of liquor, § 10-122; taxation of purchases of alcoholic beverages by the drink, § 10-156; businesses, ch. 26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Local sales and use tax. 
A combination city-county local sales and use tax at the rate of one percent is hereby levied by the city council. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Refunds of collected taxes and license fees. 
(a)  The city shall refund to taxpayers any and all taxes and license fees: 
(1)  Which are determined to have been erroneously or illegally assessed and collected from the taxpayers under the laws of this state or under the resolutions or ordinances of the city; or 
(2)  Which are determined to have been voluntarily or involuntarily overpaid by the taxpayers. 
(b)  In any case in which it is determined that an erroneous or illegal collection of any tax or license fee has been made by the city or that a taxpayer has voluntarily or involuntarily overpaid any tax or license fee, the taxpayer from whom the tax or license fee was collected may file a claim for a refund with the city finance department at any time within one year or, in the case of taxes, three years after the date of the payment of the tax or license fee to the city. The claim for refund shall be in writing and shall be in the form and shall contain the information required by the city finance director. The claim shall include a summary statement of the grounds upon which the taxpayer relies. In the event the taxpayer desires a conference or hearing before the mayor and city council in connection with any claim for a refund, the taxpayer shall so specify in writing in the claim. If the claim conforms to the requirements of this section, the mayor and city council shall grant a conference at a time specified. The mayor and city council shall consider information contained in the taxpayer's claim for a refund and such other information as is available. The mayor and city council shall approve or disapprove the taxpayer's claim and shall notify the taxpayer of its action. 
(c)  In the event any claim for refund is approved, the city shall proceed to pay the refund. No refund provided for in this section shall be assignable. Any refunds approved or allowed under this section shall be paid within 60 days of the approval of the taxpayer's claim or within 60 days of the entry of a final decision in any action for a refund. 
(d)  For any claim less than $2,000.00 where the reason for the claim is based on an obvious clerical error, the city finance director may approve or deny the claim, or decline to decide the matter and refer it to the mayor and city council for hearing and resolution. Any claim denied by the finance director may be appealed to the mayor and city council by written request to the city clerk filed not later than 30 days after the date of the finance director's denial. All claims not eligible for decision by the finance director shall be heard and decided exclusively by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. O-2011-46, § 1, 11-7-11) 
Secs. 78-3—78-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 78-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this ordinance and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
City means the City of Douglasville and, variously, the incorporated territory of Douglasville, Georgia, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by OCGA 48-13-50, et seq. 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Finance director means the duly employed finance director of the city, or his designee. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
Guest room means accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truck stop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
State means the government of the State of Georgia. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this ordinance, as provided for by OCGA 48-13-50, et seq., specifically 48-13-51(b). 
(Code 1977, § 22½-20; Ord. No. O-95-38, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14; Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 6 , 9-21-15) 
Sec. 78-37. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid, for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city, a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 78-39. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-21; Ord. No. O-95-38, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-97-38, § 1, 5-19-97; Ord. No. O-97-57, §§ 1, 3, 8-18-97; Ord. No. O-97-75, §§ 1, 3, 11-17-97; Ord. No. O-98-23, §§ 1, 3, 2-16-98; Ord. No. O-06-47, § 1, 11-6-06; Ord. No. O-2011-16, § 1, 6-6-11, eff. 7-1-11; Ord. No. O-2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-38. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
(a)  Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 4. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately, and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(b)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(c)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association shall not affect a responsible individual's liability under this article. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this article shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-23; Ord. No. O-95-38, § 1, 12-18-85; Ord. No. O-2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-39. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant who: 
(1)  Has become a permanent resident, or 
(2)  Certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or 
(3)  Only meeting rooms and other such facilities or any other rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge in money or otherwise; or 
(4)  Is an official, employee or representative of the United States or any of its instrumentalities; or 
(5)  Is from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State; or 
(6)  An official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-23; Ord. No. O-95-38, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-40. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the finance director on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this ordinance becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the finance director. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-24; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 9, 12-3-01; Ord. No. O-2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-41. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes . All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the finance director monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date . A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements . If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority . OCGA section 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and section 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the city's mayor and council shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud . In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents . On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the finance director. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the finance director. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest . The mayor and council of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers . Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-25; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 15, 12-16-13; Ord. No. O-2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-42. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation . If the finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax . Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 6. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of . The finance director shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed . Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination . The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by OCGA section 48-5-380. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-26; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 9, 12-3-01; Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-43. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts . If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 78-42(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax . Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 78-41. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-27; Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-44. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for . At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business . If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this ordinance sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money . If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this ordinance sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the finance director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold . If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected . Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the city as provided in section 78-2. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the finance director, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-28; Ord. No. O-95-38, § 1, 12-18-95; Ord. No. O-01-81, § 9, 12-3-01; Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-45. - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of finance director . The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form . Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the finance director may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits . The finance director or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the finance director shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents . In administration of the provisions of this ordinance, the finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance director when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the finance director may prescribe. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-29; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 15, 12-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Sec. 78-46. - Violations; criminal penalties. 
(a)  Failure to collect . Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 78-28 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. 
(b)  Unlawful returns . Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not less than 30 days nor more than three months, or both. 
(c)  Failure to make return or pay tax . Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make returns as required by section 78-41 and pay the taxes due under this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the tax liability is equal to or less than $10,000.00, or guilty of a felony pursuant to OCGA section 48-13-58.1 if the tax liability is more than $10,000.00. 
(d)  Other violations . Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Each day a separate offense . Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly as provided in section 1-3. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-30; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 3, 4-19-04; Ord. No. 2014-23, § 1, 3-17-14) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 78-47. - Action for collection of tax. 
The city may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect any unpaid taxes due, together with interest and costs of court. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-31; Ord. No. O-95-38, § 1, 12-18-95) 
Sec. 78-48. - Successors or assignees of operator. 
If any hotel operator becomes liable for any amount required to be paid by this article and subsequent thereto sells out his business or quits the business, the successors or assignees of such operator shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such amount due. If such purchaser of the business fails to withhold the required amount, he shall become personally liable therefor to the extent of the purchase price. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-32) 
Sec. 78-49. - Penalties. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punished as for other violations of the Code of the City of Douglasville as provided by the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-33) 
Secs. 78-50—78-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE FEES AND PREMIUM TAXATION OF INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, adopted Oct. 17, 1994, amended Art. III, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 78-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. section 33-3-5. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 78-77. - Insurers license fees. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city, in the amount of $100.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 78-78, which is operated on behalf of such insurers within the city there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. O-2011-18, § 1, 6-6-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 78-78. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transaction sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $35.00 per location for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. O-2011-18, § 1, 6-6-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 78-79. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. 
There is hereby levied for the year 2012 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 78-77 hereof in the amount of $100.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94; Ord. No. O-2011-18, § 1, 6-6-11, eff. 1-1-12) 
Sec. 78-80. - Gross premiums tax imposed upon life insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance with the State of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 33-8-3.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 78-77 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 78-81. - Gross premiums tax; all other insurers. 
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. section 33-3-5, doing business with the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 78-77 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 78-82. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in sections 78-77 and 78-78 of this article shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94) 
Sec. 78-83. - Severability. 
In the event that any portion of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intent of the city council that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-94-24, § 1, 10-17-94) 
Secs. 78-84—78-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TAXATION OF FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 78-101. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93, there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations, a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions, as defined in O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-51) 
Sec. 78-102. - Due date; filing of return. 
(a)  Each depository financial institution within the City of Douglasville shall file a return of its gross receipts with the City of Douglasville, by March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the state revenue commissioner and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. section 48-6-93(b). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)  The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Code 1977, § 22½-52) 
Secs. 78-103—78-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 78-121. - Levy. 
The City of Douglasville does exercise its authority as granted by Georgia law (O.C.G.A. section 45-13-90 et seq.) to levy an excise tax on rental motor vehicles to be used for the purposes provided by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-122. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Month or monthly period shall mean the calendar months of any year. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the State of Georgia. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease of 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes shall mean the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-123. - Authority and records. 
(a)  The city finance department shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax. 
(b)  Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the department of financial services may require. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-124. - Excise tax levied. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon each rental charge collected by any rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for the purposes of the sales and use tax as provided for under O.C.G.A. Title 8, Chapter 1, as amended on any motor vehicle rental charge made in Douglasville after November 1, 2008. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be in the amount of three percent of the rental charge as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when and the place where a customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. The customer who pays a rental charge that is subject to the tax levy as provided in this article shall be liable for the tax. The tax shall be paid by the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern. The tax shall be a debt of the customer to the rental motor vehicle concern until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts. 
(b)  The rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax shall remit the tax to the city finance department, and the tax thus remitted shall be a credit against the tax imposed by this article on the rental motor vehicle concern. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to the tax levied by this article shall be liable for the tax at the rate of three percent upon the rental charges actually collected or the amount of taxes collected from the customers, whichever is greater. 
(c)  The proceeds received from the excise tax levied by this article shall be expended for use in capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects within the territorial limits. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-125. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be imposed pursuant to this article on the rental charge associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the State of Georgia and returns it within the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the State of Georgia and returns it outside the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-126. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-127. - Statement required showing gross rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the twentieth day of each month following the effective date of this article, the motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the city finance department a statement showing the gross rental charges and gross taxes collected [under] authority of this article for each preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the motor vehicle concern shall submit the net taxes due for each particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax then due and in addition to such penalty, interest thereon the unpaid principal amount due, computed at the rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-128. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying during business hours. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-129. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the financial department is not satisfied with the return or returns provided for herein or the amount of the excise tax required to be paid to the city by any rental vehicle concern, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid based upon any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination made by the city finance department shall bear interest rate of one percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found due by the department. 
(c)  The city finance department shall give to the rental vehicle concern a written notice of any such determination. The notice may be made personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or to the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the records of the city finance department as provided to them by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service shall be complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return was filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-130. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any return made pursuant to this article, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of the tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-131. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover the amount required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city finance department showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price as required herein such purchaser shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Sec. 78-132. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 4.13 of the City Charter. Such persons shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(b)  The tax levied by this article shall be effective on the first day of November, 2008 and shall continue until its permissible existence shall expire as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-08-057, § 1(Exh. A), 9-15-08) 
Chapter 82 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Placing handbills on vehicles, § 6-33; animal-drawn vehicles, § 18-176 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; criminal trespass by motor vehicle, § 58-12; traffic regulations in parks, § 62-42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 90; vehicle parking and storage generally, app. A, § 720. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, the Uniform Rules of the Road (O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395) and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, with the effect as if recited in this chapter. 
(b)  Reserved. 
(Code 1977, § 24-1; Ord. No. O-05-50, § 5, 9-19-05) 
Sec. 82-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 24-2) 
Sec. 82-3. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
The chief of police, by and with the approval of the mayor, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary and/or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than 15 days. 
(Code 1977, § 24-3) 
Sec. 82-4. - Direction of traffic by police, firemen. 
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformity with the traffic laws; provided, that upon a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1977, § 24-4) 
Sec. 82-5. - Parades—Permit. 
Except for funeral processions, no parade or procession containing five or more persons or two or more vehicles, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street or sidewalk so as to obstruct or slow the normal flow of traffic, except in accordance with a parade permit issued by the city council or the chief of police. The city council and the chief of police may impose reasonable conditions upon such permit regarding scope, date, time, location, and security requirements. 
(Code 1977, § 24-5; Ord. No. O-01-83, § 1, 12-3-01) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74. 
Sec. 82-6. - Same—Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of section 82-5 may be revoked by the chief of police for the violation by the permittee of any applicable provision of this Code, state law or city ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 24-6) 
Sec. 82-7. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street or on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, such person shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. There shall be no such skating or riding on the sidewalks of and within the business district, but any person may so skate or ride upon the sidewalks outside the business district. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds, or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to take hold of or hang on to any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of automobiles or other vehicles along and in the streets of the city, or for two or more persons to join hands while skating on the sidewalks. 
(c)  Persons so skating or riding shall give the right-of-way to, and in no way interfere with, persons walking on the sidewalks. 
(d)  The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 24-7) 
Sec. 82-8. - Riding on portion of vehicles not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designated or designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1977, § 24-8) 
Sec. 82-9. - Towing. 
No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 12 feet in length. 
(Code 1977, § 24-9) 
Sec. 82-10. - Dropping loads along roadway prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle so loaded or constructed that any part of its load is dropped along or upon the roadway in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-00-32, § 1, 3-20-00) 
Sec. 82-11. - Speed limit, driving past persons working on streets. 
The maximum rate of speed shall be 15 miles per hour when approaching or driving past persons working in the street who are city employees, public utility employees, or those granted permission of the city, provided such workers have erected a sign reading: "Men Working," or such sign as may be prescribed by the chief of police, and such sign is in accordance with the specifications of the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 24-11) 
Sec. 82-12. - Unlawful spinning of vehicle tires. 
No person shall start a vehicle intentionally where the power of acceleration would cause the tires to spin on the surface of the roadway, driveway or parking lot. 
(Code 1977, § 24-12) 
Sec. 82-13. - Right-of-way of funeral procession. 
(a)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided each shall identify itself by burning regular headlights, shall keep in close formation, and shall display a windshield sticker carrying the word "funeral." 
(b)  Vehicles of a funeral procession complying with the above provisions may proceed through intersections with traffic control signals without observing such traffic control signals. 
(Code 1977, § 24-13) 
Sec. 82-14. - Driving through processions prohibited. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 24-14) 
Sec. 82-15. - Driving in a procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as practicable and safe. 
(Code 1977, § 24-15) 
Sec. 82-16. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-32, § 2, adopted March 20, 2000, repealed section 82-16 in its entirety. Former section 82-16 pertained to U-turns prohibited and derived from the Code of 1977, § 24-16. 
Sec. 82-17. - Stop before entering intersection when traffic obstructed. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1977, § 24-17) 
Sec. 82-18. - Unattended vehicles. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of such vehicle and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or the side of the street or highway. 
(Code 1977, § 24-18) 
Sec. 82-19. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park, stop, or stand a vehicle upon any street or roadway for the purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, storing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by a sudden emergency, and in such emergency such vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(4)  Selling or peddling of any goods, wares, or merchandise contained therein or thereon, with the exception of residential districts. 
(Code 1977, § 24-19) 
Sec. 82-20. - Parking in excess of 72 hours. 
Any vehicle standing or parking in the same location in excess of 72 hours may be presumed to be abandoned and may be cited, impounded or immobilized at the owner's expense. 
(Code 1977, § 24-20; Ord. No. O-91-2, § 1, 2-18-91) 
Sec. 82-21. - Illegally parked vehicles—Presumption of ownership. 
(a)  Ownership. In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(b)  Applicability. The foregoing presumption shall be applicable only when the procedure set forth in sections 82-22 and 82-23 have been followed. 
(Code 1977, § 24-21) 
Sec. 82-22. - Same—Notice. 
Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or other ordinances of this city, or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and such other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user. The officer shall then conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing for the driver thereof to answer to the charge against him at the time and place specified in the notice. The form of such written notice shall be as from time to time prescribed by the city or the chief of police. 
(Code 1977, § 24-22) 
Sec. 82-23. - Same—Failure to comply with notices attached to parked vehicle. 
(a)  If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking provisions under this chapter or other traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to the notice affixed to such vehicle at the place specified on the notice within seven days to pay such fine as may be imposed or to request a hearing in the city recorder's court then the police department is hereby authorized to place wheel locks on such motor vehicle and/or impound such vehicle at owner's expense under the following conditions: 
(1)  Such vehicle has accumulated three or more citations for violations of this chapter or other laws or ordinances relating to the stopping, standing or parking of such vehicle and for which payment has not been made nor a hearing requested. 
(2)  Such citations shall state that failure to pay citations or request a hearing to contest the citation may result in the immobilization or towing of such vehicle that is in violation. 
(3)  Such vehicle was parked upon the public way, street, road or in any public place within the city at the time of impoundment or immobilization. 
(4)  Prior to the immobilization and/or impoundment of such vehicle written notice shall be mailed to the owner of any vehicle which has accumulated three or more outstanding violations for which payment has not been made nor a hearing requested. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail to whoever the registered owner of such vehicle was at the time the citations were issued. Such notice shall inform the registered owner of the date, nature and number of outstanding violations, that such vehicle may be immobilized in place and/or impounded, and that such owner will be provided a hearing to contest the validity of the proposed immobilization or impoundment upon written request to the police department within ten days of the date such notice is received. Any owner who requests a hearing to contest the validity of the proposed immobilization or impoundment of such vehicle shall be provided a hearing in the recorder's court. The hearing shall be scheduled as soon as practicable, and enforcement of this section shall be stayed pending the decision of the recorder's court. For the purposes of such hearing, the registered owner of the vehicle shall be presumed to be in possession and control of such vehicle at all times. 
(5)  As soon as the vehicle has been impounded and stored or has been immobilized, the city police officer shall so notify the chief of police or his duly authorized representative, who shall notify, by registered or certified mail, the registered owner of such vehicle at the address listed on the registration within three business days of the impoundment or immobilization. Such notice shall state the location of the vehicle and the requirements for release as set forth in this section. 
(6)  No vehicle shall be released until all citations issued to that vehicle have been paid. When impoundment and immobilization is used an additional charge of $35.00 shall be charged and paid before the vehicle may be released. If the owner of the vehicle wishes to contest the impoundment or immobilization he/she must post a cash bond equal to the outstanding amounts due on all citations issued to such vehicle as well as the $35.00 charged pursuant to this chapter. Such cash bond shall be refunded upon payment of the fine or upon a finding by the recorder's court that the registered owner is not in violation of this section. The bond shall be forfeited unless the person posting it appears in recorder's court in accordance with the summons issued to him at the time of posting such bond. Any person having custody of a motor vehicle impounded pursuant to this chapter or having a means to release any immobilized vehicle shall not release such vehicle until the person requesting the vehicle's release presents evidence of his right to possession of the vehicle and signs a receipt for such vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to tamper with or attempt to tamper with or remove any immobilization device attached to a vehicle, attempt to prevent the removal of any vehicle, or attempt to extract said vehicle from its place of impoundment. The penalty for any such violation shall be not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00. 
(Code 1977, § 24-23) 
Sec. 82-24. - Parking restrictions. 
The city council shall designate all regulations or prohibitions concerning stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles with respect to streets, roads and highways under its jurisdiction as allowed under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-60-370 et seq., as may be amended. The city council shall cause such regulations and prohibitions to be posted in clear view on the applicable street. Any vehicle found to be in violation of such regulations and prohibitions may be cited, impounded or immobilized. 
(Ord. No. O-91-2, § 2(24-25), 2-18-91) 
Sec. 82-25. - Driving without proper equipment. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads, streets or highways within the city without the proper equipment thereon which is required by any city ordinance or any statute of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-24, § 1, 6-4-12) 
Sec. 82-26. - Driving too fast for conditions. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads, streets or highways within the city in a manner that is too fast for the conditions of that road, street or highway, as related to traffic, road conditions, weather, darkness or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-24, § 2, 6-4-12) 
Secs. 82-27—82-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, ch. 66. 

Sec. 82-51. - Authority to install generally. 
The chief of police shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and such ordinances; and may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as they shall deem necessary to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 24-32) 
Sec. 82-52. - Manual and specifications or traffic control devices. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform as nearly as practicable to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices developed jointly by the American Association of State Highway Officials, the Institute of Traffic Engineers and the National Conference on Street and Highway Safety. All signals and signs required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic control devices. 
(Code 1977, § 24-33) 
Sec. 82-53. - When required for enforcement. 
No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not so located and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place. 
(Code 1977, § 24-34) 
Sec. 82-54. - Display of unauthorized signs, signals, or markings. 
(a)  No person shall paint, place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street or highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any street or highway any traffic sign or signal bearing on the face thereof any commercial advertising. This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to the highway of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(b)  Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and the chief of police is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without any notice whatsoever. 
(Code 1977, § 24-35) 
Sec. 82-55. - Crosswalks, establish safety zones and mark traffic lanes. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections and at such other places where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and shall abolish those he deems to be unnecessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 24-37) 
Sec. 82-56. - School crossings. 
The chief of police is authorized to mark with paint or other devices any crosswalks in the vicinity of any school, where the crossing of such roadway by schoolchildren is deemed dangerous. "School Zone" signs may be placed 100 feet from such crosswalks, on the right-hand side of the street. 
(Code 1977, § 24-38) 
Sec. 82-57. - Restricted turn signs. 
The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(Code 1977, § 24-39) 
Sec. 82-58. - Stop signs. 
(a)  Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes a boulevard street it shall be the duty of the chief of police to place and maintain a stop sign of each and every street intersecting such boulevard street or intersecting that portion thereof described and designated as such by any ordinance of the city. 
(b)  The chief of police is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than boulevard streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required. 
(c)  Every sign erected pursuant to this section shall bear the word "STOP" in letters not less than six inches in height. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in conformity with the recommendations of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(Code 1977, § 24-40) 
Sec. 82-59. - Signs. 
The chief of police shall place and maintain suitable signs giving notice of all one-way streets, and no regulation as to one-way streets shall be maintained until such signs are so erected and in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1977, § 24-41) 
Sec. 82-60. - Parking control signs. 
(a)  Whenever it is necessary under this chapter or any other ordinance of the city to erect signs or other devices regulating, limiting, or prohibiting parking, standing or stopping of a vehicle in any area, the chief of police shall have the authority to erect such signs or devices as he deems necessary, or that are required under this Code. 
(b)  The chief of police shall further have the authority to erect a no parking sign and to prohibit the parking, standing or stopping of a vehicle in any area where a hazard exists. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey any limitation, prohibition or instruction contained in any sign erected under provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 24-42) 
Sec. 82-61. - Taxi stands. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to establish and create or to abolish any taxi stands that he deems to be necessary and proper. Such stands shall be marked by appropriate signs, and it shall be unlawful for any other vehicle, other than a duly licensed taxi, to park therein. 
(Code 1977, § 24-43) 
Secs. 82-62—82-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRUCK ROUTES; SIZE, WEIGHT AND LOAD LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 82-86. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Douglasville. 
Deviating truck means a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Truck means any car, bus or motor vehicle designed or operated for the transportation over the public streets or highways of persons or property, and whose body weight or whose combined body and load weight exceeds five tons. 
Truck route means a way over certain streets as designated in this article, over and along which trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. 
(Code 1977, § 24-85; Ord. No. O-97-42, § 1, 6-23-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-87. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and shall be punished as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 24-93) 
Sec. 82-88. - Truck route map established. 
A truck route map is hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Truck Route Map of Douglasville, Georgia." The original of such map shall be on file in the office of the city clerk for review and inspection and is by this reference made a part of this section. 
(Code 1977, § 24-86) 
Sec. 82-89. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  All trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along the truck routes established in this article. 
(b)  Exceptions. This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  Operation on street of destination. The operation of trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of business at a destination point, provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  Emergency vehicles. The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(3)  Public utilities. The operation of trucks owned or operated by the city, county, state or public utilities, any contractor of material man, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  Detoured trucks. The operation of trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. A detour may be established by the city manager, the police chief, or the director of maintenance and sanitation. 
(Code 1977, § 24-87; Ord. No. O-2014-58, § 1, 11-17-14) 
Sec. 82-90. - Truck route established. 
There is hereby established within the city the following truck route. 
(1)  Outside origin; outside destination. All trucks entering the city for destination points outside the city shall operate only over the following designated routes: 
a.  East or west bound truck traffic shall use U.S. Highway 78. 
b.  Northbound traffic shall use State Route 92. 
c.  Southeast bound traffic shall use State Route 92. 
d.  Southwest bound traffic shall use State Route 5. 
e.  As an option, low slung vehicles may use East Strickland Street from Mozley Street West to State Route 92 or West Strickland Street from Rose Avenue East to State Route 92. 
f.  As an option to use of portions of State Route 92 east of Hospital Drive, northbound vehicles and southeast bound vehicles may use Hospital Drive from its intersection with State Route 92 southwest to its intersection with Campbellton Street, and Campbellton Street from its intersection with Hospital Drive south to its intersection with Interstate Highway 20. 
(Code 1977, § 24-88; Ord. No. O-98-77, § 1, 10-19-98) 
Sec. 82-91. - Truck traffic in the city. 
(a)  One inside destination point. All trucks entering the city for a destination point in the city shall proceed only over an established truck route and shall deviate only at the intersection nearest to the destination point. Upon leaving the destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(b)  Multiple inside destination points. All trucks entering the city for multiple destination points shall proceed only over established truck routes and shall deviate only at the intersection nearest to the first destination point. Upon leaving the first destination point, a deviating truck shall proceed to other destination points by the shortest direction. Upon leaving the last destination point, a deviating truck shall return to the truck route by the shortest permissible route. 
(c)  Inside origin trips. 
(1)  Outside destination point. All trucks on a trip originating in the city shall proceed by the shortest direction to a truck route as established in this article. 
(2)  Inside destination points. All trucks on a trip originating in the city and traveling in the city for destination points in the city shall proceed to a truck route as established in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 24-89) 
Sec. 82-92. - Maximum width, height and length limitations. 
No vehicle operated upon any public street within the city exclusive of those public streets which are also a part of the state or federal highway system, except vehicles designed to carry passengers shall exceed a total outside width, including load thereon, of 96 inches, not including mirrors and accessories attached thereto. No vehicle unloaded or with a load shall exceed a height of 13 feet, six inches. No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall exceed a total length of 55 feet. 
(Code 1977, § 24-90) 
Sec. 82-93. - Maximum weight of vehicles using city streets. 
No vehicle operating upon any public street within the city limits of Douglasville, exclusive of those streets which are a part of the state or federal highway system, shall exceed five tons and be equipped with three or more axles, except vehicles that are required to deviate from the established truck route as covered in section 82-91. 
(Code 1977, § 24-91) 
Sec. 82-94. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The chief of police of the city shall cause all truck routes to be clearly sign-posted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(b)  The chief of police shall have the authority to require any person driving or in control of any commercial vehicle not proceeding over a truck route and not in the process of making or picking up a delivery to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether this article has been complied with. 
(Code 1977, § 24-92) 
Secs. 82-95—82-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 82-121. - Authority. 
The chief of police shall have the authority to impound or remove from the streets any vehicle found in violation of the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police shall have the authority to impound or remove from the streets any vehicle involved in any collision or accident whenever the owner thereof cannot be found after reasonable effort or whenever the owner thereof refuses to move the same from the streets. 
(Code 1977, § 24-55) 
Sec. 82-122. - Removal of vehicle; storage. 
Whenever the chief of police has impounded a vehicle under the terms and provisions of this article he shall remove the vehicle to any place of storage designated by the mayor and council and there store the vehicle until the same is called for by the owner thereof or disposed of as provided in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 24-56) 
Sec. 82-123. - Charges. 
The owner of any vehicle impounded under the provisions of this article shall be liable for all costs incurred as a result of such impoundment as the same shall be determined by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1977, § 24-57) 
Sec. 82-124. - Refusal of owner to claim vehicle or pay towing fees. 
Whenever the owner of any vehicle shall fail or refuse to claim any vehicle impounded under the terms and conditions contained in this article or whenever the owner of any vehicle shall fail or refuse to pay the towing fees in connection with such impounding, the city is hereby authorized to advertise such vehicle for sale at public sale, such advertising to appear once a week for four weeks in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear, and to then sell the same to the highest bidder for cash at such public sale. The proceeds of such sale shall be applied first to the payment of the charges due the city as a result of such impounding and the expenses of the sale, and the balance, if any, delivered to the owner of the vehicle. If the owner of the vehicle cannot be found or discovered, the finance director shall hold the proceeds of the sale for a period of six months, and, at the end of that period, if the owner has not appeared to claim the balance, pay the balance over to the city. 
(Code 1977, § 24-58; Ord. No. O-2013-53, § 16, 12-16-13) 
Secs. 82-125—82-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED OR DISMANTLED MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 38. 

Sec. 82-151. - Short title. 
This article shall be known, and may be cited, as the Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Motor Vehicle Ordinance. 
(Code 1977, § 14-31) 
Sec. 82-152. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
City means the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
Director of public safety means the director of public safety of the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle which: (a) does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates and proper proof of paid taxes, or (b) the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground and shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motorscooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers. 
Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property. 
Public property means any street or highway, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained for the purposes of vehicular travel, and also means any other publicly owned property or facility. 
Vehicle immobilization device, device, or boot means any mechanical device that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(Code 1977, § 14-32; Ord. No. O-05-46, § 1, 8-1-05; Ord. No. O-2015-9, § 1, 2-16-15) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-153. - Penalties. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-3. 
(Code 1977, § 14-40) 
Sec. 82-154. - Separate offenses. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article after such violator shall have been notified and cited as provided in this article, shall each day constitute a separate and distinct offense, and continuing violations shall be cited and prosecuted from time to time as may be required under the circumstances, until full compliance with all provisions of this article is had. 
(Code 1977, § 14-41) 
Sec. 82-155. - Storing, parking or leaving dismantled or other such motor vehicles prohibited, declared nuisance; exceptions. 
No person shall park, store or leave, or permit the parking, storing or leaving of, any motor vehicle of any kind which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled condition, whether attended or not, upon any public or private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. The presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative, rusted, junked or partially dismantled vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article. This section shall apply to any vehicle held inside an open carport and to any vehicle notwithstanding its being maintained beneath a cover other than an enclosed building. This section shall not apply to any vehicle enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise properly operated in the appropriate business zone and lawfully licensed by the city as an automobile service station, an automotive repair shop, an automobile storage lot, or a junkyard. 
(Code 1977, § 14-33; Ord. No. O-00-44, § 1, 4-3-00) 
Sec. 82-156. - Notice to remove. 
Whenever it comes to the attention of the director of public safety that any nuisance, as defined in section 82-155 exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the nuisance exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and requesting its removal in the time specified in this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-34) 
Sec. 82-157. - Responsibility for removal. 
Upon proper notice and opportunity to be heard, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the same is located, either or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. Upon removal and disposition by the city, the owner or occupant of the private property where same is located shall be liable for the expenses incurred. 
(Code 1977, § 14-35) 
Sec. 82-158. - Notice of removal. 
The director of public safety of the city, or his designated subordinate, shall give notice of removal to the owner or occupant of the private property where the vehicle is located, at least ten days before the time of compliance. It shall constitute sufficient notice when a copy of same is either: (a) posted in a conspicuous place upon the private property on which the vehicle is located and duplicate copies are sent by registered mail to the owner or occupant of the private property at his last known address, or (b) delivered personally to the owner or occupant of the private property. 
(Code 1977, § 14-36; Ord. No. O-00-44, § 2, 4-3-00) 
Sec. 82-159. - Content of notice. 
The notice shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this article, and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice to remove, the occupant and/or owner of the premises shall be subject to citation in the recorder's court of the city, for the violation of this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-37) 
Sec. 82-160. - Failure to remove. 
(a)  If the violation described in the notice has not been remedied within the ten day period specified in the notice of compliance, the city may, in addition to bringing criminal charges against the occupant and/or owner of the property in recorder's court, bring an action for injunctive relief against such offenders in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Police officers of the city may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this article, to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the ownership of vehicles and property, and such other purposes as may be reasonably necessary. The recorder's court of the city shall have the authority to issue all orders and warrants necessary to enforce this article. 
(Code 1977, § 14-38) 
Sec. 82-161. - [Vehicle immobilization by boot or similar device.] 
Immobilization of the vehicle of another by use of a boot or other similar device is prohibited, except on private property having a current business license for wrecker service, junk yard or automobile repair. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-9, § 1 , 2-16-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-9, § 2 , adopted Feb. 16, 2015, added a new § 82-161 to read as set out herein and renumbered the former § 82-161 as a new § 82-162. The former § 82-161 pertained to application of state law. 
Sec. 82-162. - Application of state law. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit or restrict such right to remove and dispose of abandoned vehicles from public property as is presently, or in the future may be, granted to the city pursuant to the laws of the state. 
(Code 1977, § 14-39; Ord. No. O-2015-9, § 2 , 2-16-15) 
Note— See note at § 82-161. 
Secs. 82-163—82-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 82-181. - Rules of road apply to bicycles. 
All rules of the road that apply to motor vehicles in the city shall also apply to the operation and riding of bicycles unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1977, § 24-71) 
Sec. 82-182. - Manner of riding. 
Riders of bicycles shall not ride with both hands off the handlebars or coast, when about to meet or pass any other person or vehicle, and they shall at all times have full control of their mounts. 
(Code 1977, § 24-72) 
Sec. 82-183. - Riding on sidewalks. 
No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk within any business district in the city, and no person more than 14 years of age shall ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in any district. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(Code 1977, § 24-76) 
Sec. 82-184. - Acrobatic, fancy riding, racing prohibited. 
No rider of any bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars, or both feet from the pedal, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any sidewalk or any street; nor shall any person operating a bicycle upon a street or sidewalk participate in any race of speed or endurance in a contest with any other bicycle or vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 24-77) 
Sec. 82-185. - Riding more than two abreast prohibited. 
No more than two bicycles or other similar vehicle shall be ridden abreast on any street or sidewalk in the city. 
(Code 1977, § 24-78) 
Sec. 82-186. - Lights. 
Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a light on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by the state department of public safety which shall be visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlights on a motor vehicle. A light emitting a red light visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector. 
(Code 1977, § 24-79) 
Secs. 82-187—82-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RAILROADS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-211. - Speed. 
(a)  Any agent, employee, or servant of any railroad company operating a railroad car, engine, locomotive, or train in the city shall operate the same at a careful and prudent rate of speed not greater than is reasonable and proper and safe, having due regard to the traffic on the street intersecting such railroad, and of any other condition then existing, and such agent, employee, or servant shall be at all times able to bring such railroad car, engine, locomotive or train to a complete stop short of any motor vehicle, person, or other object or obstruction that may be upon any crossing. 
(b)  No agent, employee, or servant of any railroad company operating a railroad car, engine, locomotive, or train in the city shall operate the same at any place in the city designated as a business district at a speed greater than 30 miles per hour. 
(c)  No agent, employee, or servant of any railroad company operating a railroad car, engine, locomotive, or train in the city shall back the same at any place in the city at a speed greater than ten miles per hour. 
(d)  No agent, employee, or servant of any railroad company operating a railroad car, engine, locomotive, or train in the city shall operate the same at any place in the city designated as a residential district at a speed greater than 35 miles per hour. 
(Code 1977, § 21-1) 
Sec. 82-212. - Blocking street crossings. 
No street crossing shall be blocked or obstructed by any railroad train, car or engine that is not in motion for longer at any one time than five minutes, and then only to allow the coupling and uncoupling of cars; provided, that this section shall not apply in cases of accident and absolute necessity. 
(Code 1977, § 21-2) 
Sec. 82-213. - Flying switch. 
It shall be unlawful for any car, or string of cars, when put in motion by an engine, to be detached from the engine or train until the same shall have been fully stopped. 
(Code 1977, § 21-3) 
Sec. 82-214. - Jumping on or off trains while in motion. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, except a railroad employee, to jump on or off an engine or car while it is in motion. 
(Code 1977, § 21-4) 
Sec. 82-215. - Riding on trains within city. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not a member of the train crew or otherwise connected with the running of such train, to ride upon any railroad engine, passenger coach, freight or other car within the city when the same is not actually engaged in the transportation of passengers; provided, that this section shall not apply to persons authorized to ride thereon by the proper officials of the railroad company controlling the same. 
(Code 1977, § 21-5) 
Sec. 82-216. - Maintenance of right-of-way. 
Any railroad company operating a line of track within the city shall keep the right-of-way free and clear of any garbage, refuse, junk, or other matter that might be a danger to the health, welfare, morals, and safety of the citizens of the city. Any railroad company operating a line of track within the city shall keep the grass and the weeds thereon cut and properly trimmed so as not to constitute a fire hazard due to tall and uncut and unkept grass and weeds. 
(Code 1977, § 21-6) 
Sec. 82-217. - Standing of cars regulated. 
It shall be unlawful for any railroad company to permit any freight or other railroad car to be stopped or parked within 50 feet of any railroad crossing, and such car shall never be parked or stopped so as to block the vision of any approaching train by any person desiring the use of the crossing. 
(Code 1977, § 21-7) 
Sec. 82-218. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who shall violate any provision of this division shall be guilty of an offense and may be punished as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 24-102) 
Secs. 82-219—82-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICULAR TRAFFIC AT CERTAIN CROSSINGS 

Sec. 82-236. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
City means the City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
Person means any business, firm, partnership, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Truck means any vehicle equipped with three or more axles. "Truck" shall also include any vehicle combined with or towing a trailer, flatbed or other vehicle. 
(Code 1977, § 24-100) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-237. - Certain railroad crossings prohibited to truck traffic. 
The railroad crossings located within the City of Douglasville, Georgia, at the intersection of Campbellton Street, U.S. Highway 78 and Georgia State Highway 92, and at the intersection of U.S. Highway 78, Price Street, and Strickland Street are hereby prohibited to truck traffic. 
(Code 1977, § 24-101) 
Chapter 86 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 22; plumbing code, § 22-166 et seq.; energy code for buildings, § 22-286 et seq.; housing code, § 22-311 et seq.; community development, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; tampering with fire hydrant, § 42-4; floods, ch. 46; manufactured homes and trailers, ch. 54; entry on city reservoir property, § 58-8; discharge of phosphates, § 58-13; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; utilities in city streets or rights-of-way, § 74-166 et seq.; subdivision regulations, app. B; required improvements in subdivisions, app. B, § 110 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Consumer means any person, establishment, unit or space served on or through any water meter other than the customer in whose name the meter is listed or from whom payment may be required. 
Customer means the owner of the property served by a water connection, or the tenant, lessee, renter, establishment or occupant of such property, or the person in or against whose name the water connection for such property is listed on the books and records of the city, and who is responsible to the city for payment of bills incurred for water furnished to such property and for use by such property of the public sewer system of the city, either or both. 
Minimum monthly bill means the fixed minimum monthly payment required for a water meter or connection calculated under the provisions of this chapter. Single customers or meter services serving more than one family or dwelling unit per meter shall be charged a minimum monthly bill equal to the minimum monthly billing rate multiplied by the number of family or dwelling units served by such meter. Charges for all amounts exceeding the minimum monthly usage amount per unit shall be charged as all other customers or consumers. This shall apply to all water, sewer and garbage services provided by the city. 
User means a water customer whose property also discharges sewage, wastes or water into the public sanitary sewer system of the city in any quantity. 
Utility means water, sewer and/or any other utility service furnished by the city to consumers thereof. 
(Code 1977, § 25-1) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 86-2. - Scope of provisions. 
All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms and conditions whereby the city shall furnish any utility service to any person, or whereby the city shall make any utility connections or perform any work of any kind in connection with the furnishing of any utility service pursuant to the rules and regulations of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 25-2) 
Sec. 86-3. - Service to comply with technical provisions. 
Any utility service furnished under the provisions of this chapter shall be in accordance with and in compliance with all applicable technical provisions of this Code, state law and city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Code 1977, § 25-3) 
Sec. 86-4. - Rules, regulations. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to establish by rule or regulation such standards and specifications as may be deemed necessary for the installation, construction and maintenance of any utility service system owned and operated by the city within or without the city and under the management of the city. Such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Violation of such rules, regulations, standards and specifications shall be deemed an offense punishable as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 25-4) 
Sec. 86-5. - Area of service. 
The area of service for all utilities owned and/or operated by the city shall be the area that is contained within the corporate limits. To be served by a city utility the building, establishment, unit, space or other improvement must be wholly, and in its entirety, located within the corporate limits of the city; however, the mayor and council upon application, may, in its discretion, permit utility service to be extended to a building, establishment, unit, space or other improvement which, by a reason of its location, cannot be served under this section. 
(Code 1977, § 25-5) 
Sec. 86-6. - Compliance with building code and other codes. 
No building, establishment, unit, space or other improvement shall be served by a utility owned and/or operated by the city unless such building, establishment, unit, space or other improvement was constructed under a building permit, plumbing permit or other required permit issued by the city and was inspected during the construction thereof as required by the codes, rules, and regulations of the city which are applicable. If the building, establishment, unit, space or other improvement was built or constructed before April, 1972, then such building, establishment, unit, space or other improvement may be served by a utility owned and/or operated by the city after inspection by the building official and certification that such building, establishment, unit, space or other improvement complies with all applicable codes, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 25-5.1) 
Sec. 86-7. - Right of entry. 
Any authorized inspector of the city shall have free access at any time to all premises supplied with any utility service by the city for the purpose of examination in order to protect the utility service from abusive use. 
(Code 1977, § 25-6) 
Sec. 86-8. - Termination of service authorized. 
The city shall have the right to disconnect or refuse to connect or reconnect any utility service for the following reasons pertaining to that utility service, such as water and sewer: 
(1)  Failure to meet the applicable provisions of law. 
(2)  Violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to utility service. 
(3)  Nonpayment of bills. 
(4)  Willful or negligent waste of service due to improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures, appliances or otherwise. 
(5)  Molesting any meter, seal or other equipment controlling or regulating the supply of utility service. 
(6)  Theft or diversion and/or use of service without payment therefor. 
(7)  Vacancy of premises. 
(Code 1977, § 25-7) 
Sec. 86-9. - Liability of city for damage. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage to any customer of any utility service furnished by the city due to backflow of the sewerage system, failure of supply, interruption of service or any other cause outside the direct control of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 25-8) 
Sec. 86-10. - Utility service—Application required. 
Any person desiring any utility service furnished by the city shall make application for the same to the water department. 
(Code 1977, § 25-9) 
Sec. 86-11. - Same—Use assumed. 
All premises connected to any utility service of the city shall be assumed to be using such utility service and the owner or occupant shall be charged therefor so long as such premises remain connected with the utility service. 
(Code 1977, § 25-10) 
Sec. 86-12. - Damage, trespass of equipment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, not having authority to do so, to open any water hydrant or tamper with any utility service furnished by the city to consumers, or to in any other way molest, damage or trespass upon any equipment or premises belonging to the city connected with any utility service. 
(Code 1977, § 25-12) 
Sec. 86-13. - Restricting use. 
The city hereby reserves the right to at any time restrict or prevent the use of any utility service furnished by the city during periods of emergency or circumstances demanding such restriction or prevention of use. 
(Code 1977, § 25-14) 
Sec. 86-14. - Sale of service by customer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to resell any utility service obtained from the city to others except by special arrangement with the mayor and council. 
(Code 1977, § 25-15) 
Sec. 86-15. - Unlawful connections. 
Any person who shall make any connection in any manner to any utility system, whether owned by the city or not, without the prior knowledge and consent of the owner of such utility system shall be deemed guilty of an offense punishable as provided in section 1-3 of this Code. 
(Code 1977, § 25-18) 
Secs. 86-16—86-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 86-46. - Penalty for nonpayment; discontinuance of service; charge for resumption of service. 
(a)  If any consumer, customer or user of any water, sewer, garbage or similar utility service provided by the City of Douglasville fails to make payment for such service within 15 days from the date a bill is rendered for such service, there shall be added to the total charges on the bill or statement for said services, a penalty of ten percent of the gross amount of the entire statement. If the entire amount together with the penalty is not paid by such consumer, customer or user on or before five days from the date such penalty is assessed, then the service or services received by such consumer, customer or user shall be discontinued and stopped immediately; provided that payments owed for one service such as garbage collection shall not be grounds for discontinuance of another service such as water and sewer. 
(b)  After service has been discontinued for nonpayment, the consumer, customer or user will be required to pay all outstanding charges for the service or services plus all penalties, and a fee of $5.00 before service will be resumed. In cases where the discontinuance of service results in the removal of any metering devices or receptacles, then the city, in its discretion, may require as a condition to resumption of service the payment of fees and charges for the reinstallation of metering devices and receptacles. 
(Code 1977, § 25-38) 
Cross reference— Fees for refuse collection, § 70-41. 
Secs. 86-47—86-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to construct, build, maintain, sewers, sewage treatment, § 1.03(h). 
Cross reference— Plumbing code, § 22-166 et seq.; discharge of phosphates, § 58-13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-71. - Unlawful discharge of sewage. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or allow to be discharged any sewage into or upon any highway, stream, open drain or watercourse, or onto any drain, cesspool, or private sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 25-57) 
Sec. 86-72. - Discharge from kitchens, etc., to be through sink to sanitary sewer. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any sewerage or waste from kitchens, washings of clothing or of meats, fish or other foods, otherwise than through a sink, which shall be properly connected with the sanitary sewerage system of the city by proper piping. 
(Code 1977, § 25-58) 
Sec. 86-73. - Discharge from water closets or toilets and bathrooms. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any sewerage or waste from water closets or toilets and bathrooms otherwise than through a system of proper piping which shall be connected with the sanitary sewerage system of the city. 
(Code 1977, § 25-59) 
Sec. 86-74. - Drainage of surface water or stormwater into sewerage system prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drain or allow to be drained any surface water or stormwater into the sewerage system of the city, unless the sewer drained into shall be a regular storm sewer. 
(Code 1977, § 25-60) 
Sec. 86-75. - Washwater, garbage, etc., prohibited in surface closet. 
No washwater, garbage, kitchen slops or other liquid wastes shall be emptied into a surface closet. 
(Code 1977, § 25-61) 
Sec. 86-76. - Oxidation pond, ditch prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate or maintain a sewage treatment facility commonly known as an oxidation pond or oxidation ditch within the corporate limits of the city. All persons who contribute or assist in any manner to the construction, operation or maintenance of such a prohibited facility shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(Code 1977, § 25-62) 
Secs. 86-77—86-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 86-91. - Repair of streets to be made by owner. 
The owner of any property or building to be connected with the sewerage system shall repair any and all breaks in the street paving or ballast made necessary by his connection with the sewerage system. The expense of this repair shall be borne by the owner of the property or building to be connected, and such repair must be approved by the superintendent of streets or by the city engineer. 
(Code 1977, § 25-75) 
Sec. 86-92. - Repair of settlement over drains. 
Any settlement over a drain connected with the sewerage system on any street or public way occurring within 60 days after the laying of a drain shall be repaired at the expense of the owner of the property or building connected and by the owner of the property or building connected. 
(Code 1977, § 25-76) 
Sec. 86-93. - Method of opening trenches in streets. 
In opening trenches in any street or public way, the paving or ballast must be removed with care, the sides of the trench must be sheeted or braced when directed and in the manner directed by the city engineer or superintendent of streets. The earth thrown from the trench must be placed so as not to obstruct the gutter and so as to cause the least obstruction to public travel. Gas and water pipes must be protected from injury, the trench enclosed and lighted at night and every precaution taken to prevent injury to persons or property during the progress of the work. 
(Code 1977, § 25-77) 
Chapter 90 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to regulate vehicles operated for hire, § 1.03(p). 
Cross reference— Advertising, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1—90-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 

Secs. 90-26—90-135. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-44, § 2 , adopted Sept. 21, 2015, repealed Art. II, §§ 90-26—90-30, 90-51—90-58, 90-76—90-83, 90-91—90-94, 90-101—90-110, which pertained to taxi services and derived from Ord. No. O-2011-5, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 7, 2011; Ord. No. O-2013-49, §§ 1—11, adopted Nov. 18, 2013. 
ARTICLE III. - WRECKER SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, adopted Oct. 2, 2017, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 90-136—90-156, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-02-31, § 1, adopted Aug. 5, 2002; Ord. No. O-03-37, §§ 1, 2, 5, adopted Nov. 3, 2003; Ord. No. O-2012-11, § 1, adopted March 5, 2012; Ord. No. O-2016-51, § 1, adopted Nov. 7, 2016; and Ord. No. O-2016-59, § 1, adopted Dec. 19, 2016. 

Sec. 90-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved heavy wrecker service means an approved wrecker service whose equipment list includes a wrecker rated to tow tractor trailers. 
Approved wrecker service means any wrecker service which submits a successful application under this article and which otherwise complies with the provisions hereof to qualify for the privilege of engagement by the police department for the removal or storage of vehicles. 
Basic tow job includes furnishings of wrecker and up to 30 minutes of work necessary to properly hook up an undamaged vehicle and tow it to a storage area. 
Damaged vehicle means any vehicle suffering such mechanical or structural damage to the extent that it cannot properly or safely be operated. 
Passenger vehicle means any vehicle weighing up to 10,000 pounds of gross vehicle weight. 
Police department means the police department, its officers, agents or employees. 
Property owner means the owner of property, or his authorized representative, upon which a vehicle to be removed is located. 
Response time means that the time the wrecker service arrives at the scene of the traffic infringement after a call is received from the police department to respond. This time should not exceed 30 minutes. 
Undamaged vehicle means any vehicle which has no or only minor structural or mechanical damage and is capable of being safely and properly operated. 
Vehicle owner means the owner of a vehicle or his authorized representative. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked, disabled or abandoned automobiles or other vehicles. 
Wrecker service means any corporation, partnership or individual person, either as principal, agent or employee in the business of removing, towing and/or storing vehicles abandoned in the roadway or on other public lands, or wrecked or disabled vehicles by the use of a wrecker and properly licensed by the state. For corporations and partnerships, the term shall include any individual owning a 20 percent or greater interest in the entity. Wrecker service does not include towing of trespassing vehicles or personal property from private land. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-137. - Private towing of trespassing vehicles excluded. 
Removal of vehicles and trespassing private property from privately owned real property shall be regulated by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-138. - Application for approved wrecker permit, heavy wrecker permit. 
Each wrecker service desiring to be added to the city approved wrecker service list or the approved heavy wrecker list to respond to calls for wrecker services from the city shall make application to the police chief annually for an approved wrecker permit. The police chief shall accept applications for approved wrecker permits annually from August 1 through October 31 for permits to be valid for the subsequent calendar year. The application shall be submitted on a form provided by the police department and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee of $50.00. No application shall be processed unless all required documents have been submitted. Such application shall include but not be limited to the following information: 
(1)  Listing of name and address of the owner of the wrecker service. If held by a corporation, the names and address of its officers and any stockholders holding 20 percent or more of the corporate stock; if held by a partnership listing names of all partners. 
(2)  Complete list of towing equipment, including the VIN number for motor vehicles, noting any wreckers which are rated to tow tractor trailers. 
(3)  List of all personnel employed by wrecker service, including job description and training received. 
(4)  Certificate of insurance showing compliance with requirements contained in this article. 
(5)  A copy of the fee schedule to be in effect for 12 months following application approval. 
(6)  A copy of a current valid business license from the city and a permit from the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety, as well as evidence of legally operating a wrecker service in Douglas County for 12 months preceding application. 
(7)  Complete list of all addresses of impound/vehicle storage sites to be utilized by the wrecker service. 
(8)  A complete list of the names of all individuals and employees who will drive a wrecker for the applicant, which shall include the name of the applicant if the applicant is an individual and will be a driver. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-139. - Processing of application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely and complete application for an approved wrecker permit or an approved heavy wrecker permit, the police department shall examine the application for completeness, perform any necessary investigation, and inspect the equipment, storage lot(s) and business location for the applicant. Thereafter the police chief shall approve or deny the application. 
(b)  Denial. The police chief shall have due cause to deny any application for an approved wrecker permit or approved heavy wrecker permit for the following reasons: 
(1)  The application has remained incomplete for 30 days due to the failure of applicant to provide any paper or document required in the application or requested additional information. 
(2)  The applicant has provided false information in the application. 
(3)  The applicant, during the preceding 12 months from the application date, had a wrecker service business license held by such owner revoked for cause by the state or by any political subdivision thereof, or the business or owner of the business has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of engaging in unfair business practices with respect to the operation of any wrecker service. 
(4)  The applicant does not employ at least two proposed drivers who can obtain approved wrecker employee identification cards, or the applicant does not have the equipment required by this article to provide service. 
(5)  The applicant does not have an impound facility as required in this article. 
(6)  The applicant, if the applicant is an individual, has a conviction of any violent felony, or any serious driving offense as defined in O.C.G.A. Title 40, Chapter 6, Article 15, or currently has a suspended or revoked driver's license. 
If the police chief denies any application for an approved wrecker permit or approved heavy wrecker permit, he shall do so in writing and shall notify the applicant of his decision and reasons for his decision. 
(c)  Approval. If the police chief does not deny any timely and complete application for one or more reasons stated in paragraph (a) of this section, then he shall approve the application and issue the requested approved wrecker permit or approved heavy wrecker permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-140. - Approved wrecker services, approved heavy wrecker services, rotating on-call list. 
At the conclusion of the annual application and permitting process, the police department shall compile an annual list of approved wrecker services and approved heavy wrecker services. Every approved heavy wrecker service shall be shown on both lists. The police department shall make use of the wrecker services on each list on a rotating on-call basis for accidents where the owner of any vehicle does not have a preference for a wrecker service to be utilized. Each permit holder on the approved wrecker service list shall be utilized as the on-call service for one continuous week, on an equal rotating basis. Each permit holder on the approved heavy wrecker service list shall be utilized as the on-call service for towing tractor trailers for two continuous weeks, on an equal rotating basis, for towing of tractor trailers whenever the on-call approved wrecker service is not also an approved heavy wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-141. - Approved wrecker employee identification. 
(a)  No person shall drive a wrecker for an approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service without first obtaining an approved wrecker employee identification card from the police department. 
(b)  All such persons shall apply to the police department for an approved wrecker employee identification card, which card shall expire at the end of the calendar year of issuance and shall be renewable on or before that time. An approved wrecker employee identification card shall be valid for such work at any location within the city having a valid approved wrecker permit or approved heavy wrecker permit. 
(c)  Such persons shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other investigating as may be required by the police department. 
(d)  Each driver applicant shall submit a copy of his valid state driver's license, with the appropriate classification to operate wrecker service equipment, shall consent to a criminal background check. For any application made other than in conjunction with an application for an approved wrecker permit or approved heavy wrecker permit, the applicant shall pay a fee of $25.00 for the criminal background records check and identification card. 
(e)  The police department shall investigate the employee application and report any detrimental information to the chief of police. The chief of police may refuse to issue an approved wrecker employee identification card to any proposed employee who has been convicted of a violent felony. 
(f)  Any identification card holder shall, within 48 hours, report to the police department the suspension or revocation such employee's driver's license. 
(g)  No approved wrecker permit holder or approved heavy wrecker permit holder shall allow or require any person to drive a wrecker without an approved wrecker employee identification card; permit holders shall require all such drivers to wear or otherwise properly display their identification cards at all times during working hours. 
(h)  The chief of police may revoke an identification card should the driver violate any provisions of this article, furnish false or misleading information in the employee's application or commit conduct adversely affecting the public health, safety or welfare. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for a driver whose identification card has been revoked, when demand for surrender of a card has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy such card. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-142. - Unapproved wrecker services to comply with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service, whether an approved wrecker service, or not, to respond to police department calls for wrecker assistance on the streets of the city without complying with the provisions of this article. In unusual or emergency situations if the on call wrecker service determines that it is in need of additional assistance from another wrecker service, the on-call wrecker service may seek assistance from any wrecker service that has been approved by the city under the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-143. - Identification of all wreckers. 
All wreckers which operate upon any of the streets of the city shall be clearly identified as such, with the name and domicile of the wrecker service operating the wrecker. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-144. - Limitations upon proceeding to accident scene. 
No wrecker shall go to any accident scene unless: 
(1)  Called by the police department; 
(2)  Called by the vehicle owner; 
(3)  There exists an extreme emergency immediately endangering life or property; or 
(4)  Called by the property owner where vehicle located. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-145. - Prohibition against monitor running. 
No wrecker service shall proceed to an accident scene by reason of any information received by monitoring police radio calls. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-146. - Use of due care. 
(a)  Wrecker services shall determine the method and manner of removing vehicles; provided, however, that they shall exercise due care in removal operations and shall follow the direction of the traffic officer directing the removal so as not to impede traffic or endanger the general public and property. 
(b)  The driver of each wrecker truck towing away any vehicle from the scene of a wreck shall also take away all parts belonging to the vehicle which is being towed away, or, if they consist of small parts or broken glass, driver shall clear the streets of said small parts and glass, unless the driver is ordered not to do so by the investigating police officer due to circumstances at the scene of the accident. No additional fee may be charged for this clean up. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-147. - Information supplied to police department; notification to owner. 
(a)  Whenever any wrecked or abandoned vehicle is removed without the request, direction or participation of the police department, the wrecker service performing the removal shall, if the owner is unknown, within 72 hours of such removal, furnish to the police department the following information with respect to such vehicle: Tag number and description, including year, model, make, color, and vehicle identification number. 
(b)  The wrecker service shall notify the vehicle owner of the time and place of removal and of the present whereabouts of the vehicle, as required by O.C.G.A. section 40-11-1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-148. - Vehicle inventory; procedures. 
Whenever any vehicle is removed by a wrecker service at the direction of a police officer, the police officer shall make a thorough inventory of all equipment, accessories, personal articles and other items either attached to or located within the vehicle. Such inventory shall be completed on a form supplied by the police department and signed by the officer in charge of the removal. Upon acceptance of the vehicle and prior to its removal, the agent or employee of the wrecker service performing the removal shall sign the inventory form. The officer shall retain the original and the wrecker service shall retain a copy. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-149. - Wrecker services to hold vehicles upon direction of police. 
When specifically directed to do so by the police department, the wrecker service shall hold vehicles for evidence, confiscation or any other purposes permitted by law. Upon the written and signed authorization of the police department on a form prescribed by the police department, the wrecker services shall release any vehicle so held to the owner, his authorized representative or other person entitled by law to possession of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-150. - Police department calls to wrecker services; owner's choices of wrecker service. 
(a)  A vehicle owner in ordinary, non-emergency situations, may engage a private wrecker service of his choice to remove his vehicle. The responding officer shall advise the vehicle owner of his option to call the wrecker service of the owner's choice that is capable of responding in a reasonable amount of time. 
(b)  If the owner states no preference, the police officer shall request Douglas County 911 to call whichever approved wrecker service is on duty for that particular week in the rotation. Each approved wrecker service shall be on call for one week beginning at 7:00 a.m. Monday morning until the following Monday morning. 
(c)  If the owner states no preference, and if a tractor trailer must be towed, and if the approved wrecker service on duty for that week is not an approved heavy wrecker service, then the police officer shall request Douglas County 911 to call both the approved wrecker service on duty for that week and the approved heavy wrecker service on duty for that two-week period. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prohibit the police department from providing its own impoundment facility upon city property for the purpose of storing or holding vehicles for evidence, confiscation, or any other purpose permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-151. - Requirements for approved wrecker service impound facilities. 
(a)  Each impound facility of the applying or approved wrecker service and those of the applying or approved heavy wrecker service must be located within Douglas County and within one mile of the city limits of Douglasville, Georgia, and shall be owned or leased by the applicant. 
(b)  The gate to the impound lot shall be locked and remain locked during the hours of darkness except to provide reasonable ingress and egress in connection with wrecker service operations. 
(c)  Each approved wrecker service and each approved heavy wrecker service shall submit to the police department an inventory of all vehicles remaining in its possession whose owner has not been identified and notified. The inventory shall be submitted within seven days of any request by the police department but not less frequently than every six months, and shall be completed on a form supplied or approved by the city. 
(d)  The requirements for the impound facility of any approved wrecker permit holder and any approved heavy wrecker permit holder are as follows: 
(1)  Impoundment must be located on any properly zoned location within Douglas County and one mile of the city limits of Douglasville, Georgia, and complying with all the respective city ordinances. 
(2)  Must have entire lot adequately illuminated during the hours of darkness to discourage and detect attempts at theft or vandalism. 
(3)  All fences must be of eight feet tall, opaque, and made of chain link or wood, screened, barbed wire running at the top, with gates that can be securely locked. 
(4)  An attendant for every approved wrecker service impound facility shall be available to provide service at the storage lot seven days per week between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. within one hour of any request, whether or not the permit holder is on call for that week. Such service shall include ingress and egress for release of stored vehicles from the storage lot, and allowing the registered owner of the vehicle to retrieve personal items from the vehicle while it is impounded. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-152. - Insurance required. 
Approved wrecker services and approved heavy wrecker services shall carry liability insurance policies in compliance with the requirements of the state department of motor vehicle safety for loss or damage occasioned by negligence or misfeasance on the part of the wrecker service, and name the city as an additional insured. Such policies shall be provided to the city upon request and yearly along with the occupation tax return for the wrecker service. Such policies shall also provide for full loss, theft or damage benefits payable to any vehicle or property owner suffering loss, theft or damage with respect to any vehicle or to equipment, accessories, personal articles or other items either attached to or located within a vehicle removed and/or stored while such vehicle is in the custody, control and possession of the wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-153. - Response of approved wrecker service. 
(a)  When any approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service arrives on the scene of an accident, the investigating officer of the police department will make a notation to be included on the impound sheet as to its time of arrival, and will make a second notation of the time the wrecker service leaves the scene with the tow in charge. This time will be considered the official time for the time charged, if any, by the wrecker service. If the wrecker service should arrive before the police unit, the officer will ascertain its time of arrival by ascertaining the time from the wrecker service driver. The officer will then be responsible for noting the time the wrecker service departs from the scene. 
(b)  Should a mistake be made in good faith by the police department or Douglas County 911 in dispatching the wrong wrecker service, no charge can be made by the wrong wrecker service for such response or the return to place of business. 
(c)  Where the investigating officer of the police department at any accident scene determines that the on-call wrecker service has failed to appear at the accident scene within 30 minutes of the request for service, the police officer shall have the option to cancel the request for service to the on-call wrecker service, and to place a request for service with the approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service which will be on-call for the subsequent week. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-154. - Daily storage charge for approved wrecker service and approved heavy wrecker service; fee for wrecker service. 
The provisions of this section apply to all work performed for any customer of an approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service when service is requested by the police department. No fees other than those authorized by this section may be charged for towing a passenger car when called upon to do so by the police department. Subsections a. through i. do not apply to towing of tractor trailers. 
(a)  No approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall charge in excess of $20.00 per day for storage of a passenger car in an uncovered lot; this subsection does not apply to the towing of tractor trailers. 
(b)  No approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall charge in excess of $25.00 per day for storage of a passenger car in a covered lot or building. 
(c)  No approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall charge for the first 24 hours that the vehicle was stored in any lot. 
(d)  No approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall charge for any day the wrecker service impound lot is closed or the owner of the vehicle is unable to claim his vehicle. 
(e)  No approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall store vehicles at a location other than the secure impound lot submitted for city approval without written prior approval of the police department. 
(f)  No approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall charge in excess of $125.00 for towing a vehicle that is undamaged from one location to another when called upon to do so by the police department. 
(g)  No approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall charge in excess of $175.00 for towing a damaged vehicle from one location to another when called upon to do so by the police department. 
(h)  An approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service may charge a $45.00 administrative fee whenever that service must seek the identity of and address of all known owners of the vehicle from the law enforcement or from the State of Georgia and give notice to the owners as required by O.C.G.A. section 4-11-2(a), provided however that an approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall not be charged this administrative fee if the owner retrieves the vehicle within twenty-four hours of the tow. 
(i)  As an exception, if the vehicle to be towed is in a rolled-over state, the approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service may charge an additional $50.00, and if specialized equipment is needed to get the vehicle on the tow truck, then the approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service may charge an additional $50.00, but this specialized equipment will be listed on the billing statement. 
(j)  Whenever any city-owned or city-leased vehicle needs to be towed, the on-call approved wrecker service or approved heavy wrecker service shall tow it without charge as long as the tow is within Douglas County, Georgia, or shall be towed for a charge of not more than $175.00 if the tow trip is wholly or partly outside Douglas County, but originates or ends at a location within 40 miles of Douglas County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-155. - Minimum equipment. 
(a)  Each approved wrecker service under the provisions of this article shall have the following minimum equipment in operating condition: 
(1)  A roll back wrecker rated at one ton or greater; and 
(2)  Two of the following: 
a.  Roll back wrecker(s); or 
b.  Wrecker(s) rated at one ton or greater with a wheel lift and a winch rated at four tons or greater. 
(b)  Each approved heavy wrecker service shall additionally have a wrecker rated for the towing of tractor trailers. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-156. - Revocation, suspension of wrecker service operation. 
With 24 hours' notice the police chief may temporarily suspend the permit right of any approved wrecker service to respond to calls from the city for the foregoing reasons, for repeated lesser violations of this article, or for any conduct by the approved wrecker service that threatens the public safety, property or interferes with the efficient operation of the police department. The permit holder shall be entitled to hearing before the mayor and city council upon written request for a hearing by the permit holder. The permit holder shall request such a hearing within ten calendar days of notification by chief of police. The mayor and council may revoke or suspend the permit holder's right to respond to calls from the city. The permit holder shall be provided five days advance written notice of the hearing date by hand delivery or certified mail return receipt requested. The hearing before the mayor and council shall be held within 14 days of such written request by the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
Sec. 90-157. - Penalty for violation. 
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable in the municipal court as provided in article IV of the City Charter. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-75 , § 1, 10-2-17) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-106, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 2000, repealed appendix A in its entirety. Further, § 2 of said ordinance set out similar provisions included as §§ 1.01—1.06.04, 2.01—2.05.04, 3.01—3.03.05, 3.21—3.22.04, 3.31—3.53.01, 3.61—3.76, 4.01—4.08.04, 5.01—5.10.02, 6.01—6.04.06, 7.01—7.05.02, 8.01—8.218.01 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
 Amendments to Ord. No. O-00-106, § 1 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 1.01. - Title and authority. 
1.01.01.  Title. This zoning ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Douglasville, Georgia" or, for brevity, "The Zoning Ordinance." 
1.01.02.  Authority. This zoning ordinance is adopted under authority of article 9, section 2, paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and pursuant to the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.) and other applicable laws enacted by the General Assembly. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 1.02. - Adoption. 
1.02.01.  Repeal of conflicting laws. All conflicting city laws or parts of laws are hereby repealed to the extent of their conflict. Where this zoning ordinance overlaps with other requirements adopted by the city council, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
1.02.02.  Severability. If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this zoning ordinance or any amendment to it is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed as a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this zoning ordinance or an amendment to it. 
1.02.03.  Effective date. This zoning ordinance shall take effect upon its adoption [December 4, 2000]. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 1.03. - Purpose and intent. 
This ordinance regulates the use of land and the location and use of buildings and other site improvements. 
1.03.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this zoning ordinance is to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public, and is intended: 
a.  To promote the orderly and beneficial development and expansion of the city; 
b.  To provide adequate access to natural light and air; 
c.  To prevent undesirable overcrowding of population or congestion in the streets; 
d.  To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
e.  To facilitate the orderly and desirable provision of streets and other transportation facilities; 
f.  To insure the adequate provision of water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; 
g.  To improve the aesthetic appearance of the city; and, 
h.  To encourage the most appropriate use of land and buildings in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan. 
1.03.02.  Intent in interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this zoning ordinance all provisions shall be: 
a.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
b.  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and, 
c.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
1.03.03.  Intent relative to private property agreements. This zoning ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any valid easement, covenant or deed restriction duly recorded with the clerk of the superior court, to the extent that such easement, covenant or deed restriction is enforceable under law and more restrictive than the requirements imposed by this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 1.04. - General applicability. 
1.04.01.  Lands to which this ordinance applies. This zoning ordinance applies to all lands within the city. 
1.04.02.  Use of land or structures. 
a.  No structure, building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, located, extended, moved, converted or structurally altered except in full compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
No building or land may be occupied for any use or any change in use prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the city. 
b.  No part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required in connection with any use or structure for the purpose of complying with this zoning ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, buffer or off-street parking spaces required for any other use or structure, unless specifically allowed under the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
c.  No portion of any street or highway right-of-way shall be considered a part of a lot or front yard setback for the purpose of meeting the minimum requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
1.04.03.  Street frontage required. No building permit shall be issued on any lot unless a street with a minimum of 50 feet of right-of-way provides access to the lot, except that: 
a.  Lots in a commercial subdivision may front on a perpetual easement that is connected to a publicly dedicated street. The easement must be at least 30 feet wide and contain a paved roadway at least 28 feet wide (including curbs and gutters). 
b.  Lots in a private subdivision may front on a private street, provided that the development has been approved by the city council to be served by private streets and that the private streets must meet the same design and construction requirements as public streets. 
1.04.04.  One principal house on a lot. With respect to single-family detached dwellings, only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings and structures may be erected on any one lot. 
1.04.05.  Lot reduction prohibited. No yard or lot existing prior to the effective date of this zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment to it shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this zoning ordinance. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this zoning ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this zoning ordinance. This prohibition shall not apply where any residential lot sought to be reduced has two or more existing legal nonconforming dwellings, and where the reduction will enable one or more of such dwellings to be the only dwelling on a lot. 
1.04.06.  Exemptions. 
a.  Previously issued permits. The provisions of this zoning ordinance and any subsequent amendments shall not affect the validity of any permit lawfully issued by the city if: 
(1)  The development activity or building construction authorized by the permit has been commenced prior to the effective date of this zoning ordinance or the amendment, or will be commenced after such effective date but within six months of issuance of the permit; and, 
(2)  The development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. If the permit expires, any further development or construction on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this zoning ordinance in effect on the date of the permit expiration. 
b.  Governmental bodies exempt. All governmental bodies and authorities legally exempt from regulation under the police power of the City of Douglasville are exempt from the regulations contained in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-03-26, § 1, 7-21-03) 
Section 1.05. - Grandfathered (nonconforming) development. 
1.05.01.  Purpose and intent of provisions. 
a.  Treatment of nonconformity. This section sets out the provisions that protect uses, structures and lots that lawfully existed prior to the adoption of this zoning ordinance or a subsequent amendment, but no longer conform to the new regulations. The primary intent of the treatment of nonconformity is to allow continuation of these uses, structures, lots and signs until the end of their useful life, while encouraging conformance to the new regulations when it becomes reasonable. 
b.  Nonconforming development declared incompatible. Lawful nonconforming uses, structures and lots are declared by this zoning ordinance to be incompatible with land uses, structures, lots and signs that conform to the requirements of the zoning districts in which the nonconformity exists. However, such nonconforming development may be "grandfathered" and may continue under the circumstances presented in this article for each type of development. 
1.05.02.  Nonconforming uses. 
a.  Nonconforming uses; defined. A nonconforming use is a use or activity that was lawfully established prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this zoning ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, is no longer a use or activity permitted by right or no longer meets or conforms to the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
b.  Grandfathered nonconforming uses. 
(1)  To avoid undue hardship, the lawful but nonconforming use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment of this zoning ordinance or any subsequent amendment may be continued even though the use does not conform to the provisions of this zoning ordinance, except that the nonconforming use: 
(a)  Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(b)  Shall not be re-established after its removal from the property or its discontinuance for six consecutive months or more. 
(c)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  If an existing use was lawfully established as a permitted use in a zoning district that is subsequently amended to require special use approval for such use, the existing use shall not require a special use permit solely as a result of the change in the law. 
(3)  The strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety or health shall be allowed upon order of such official. 
1.05.03.  Nonconforming structures. 
a.  Nonconforming structures; defined. A nonconforming structure is a structure or building whose size, dimensions or location on a property were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this zoning ordinance, but which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or conforms to one or more such requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
b.  Grandfathered nonconforming structures. A nonconforming structure may continue to be occupied and used, except that the nonconforming structure: 
(1)  Shall not be remodeled, repaired, rebuilt or altered to restore or maintain any nonconformity if the total gross square footage of new construction exceeds 50 percent of the gross square footage of the structure prior to destruction or alteration, unless the structure is a single-family residence. 
(2)  Shall not be enlarged or altered in a way that increases its nonconformity. 
c.  Exceptions. 
(1)  If the public acquisition of a portion of a lot reduces any yard dimension to less than that required by this ordinance, the structure shall not be considered nonconforming. 
(2)  Any structure within the historic district may have its façade or roof repaired or maintained if a certificate of appropriateness is not required. 
(3)  For residential lots, where any structure has encroached into a required setback and such encroachment was lawful at the time of construction, then further construction within the setback area vertical to the encroachment or parallel to the property line shall be allowed, so long as new construction does not encroach closer to the property line than the existing nonconformity. For residential lots, the remaining foundation of any partially demolished encroachment is sufficient as a "structure" to vest the nonconformity under this provision. 
1.05.04.  Nonconforming lots. 
a.  Nonconforming lots; defined. A nonconforming lot is a lot of record whose area, frontage, width or other dimensions were lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this zoning ordinance, and which, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, no longer meets or exceeds one or more such requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
b.  Grandfathered nonconforming lots. Where the owner of a legal lot of record at the time of the adoption of this zoning ordinance does not own sufficient land to conform to the minimum lot size or lot width requirement of this zoning ordinance, such lot may nonetheless be used as a building site. 
c.  Combination of nonconforming lots; where required. If the owner of two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage, at least one of which is a nonconforming lot, decides to build on one or more of such lots, he must first combine said lots to comply with the dimensional requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
d.  Exception. If the public acquisition of a portion of a lot reduces the lot area, frontage, width or other dimension to less than that required by this ordinance, such lot shall not be considered nonconforming. 
e.  Previously approved non-residential lots. Lots in subdivisions for property zoned non-residential and other than DCD, for which a final plat has been approved prior to July 6, 1999, shall be developed in accordance with the dimensional standards of the zoning ordinance and other applicable development ordinances effective on July 5, 1999, provided that all necessary permits and development approvals are secured prior to July 6, 2001 and that development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete; however, such property shall be developed in accordance with the procedure and approval requirements of ordinances effective at the time of development. 
1.05.05.  Nonconforming stream buffer matters. The provisions of Division 5 of this ordinance, Stream Buffer Protection, shall not apply to the following activities: 
(a)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before April 1, 2008. 
(b)  Existing development and on-going land disturbance activities including but not limited to existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, as of April 1, 2008, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(c)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of April 1, 2008. 
(d)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that was previously approved within two years prior to April 1, 2008. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 1—3, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-06-04, § 1, 2-20-06; Ord. No. O-08-013, § 1, 3-17-08; Ord. No. O-2019-5 , § 1, 1-22-19) 
Section 1.06. - Interpretation. 
1.06.01.  Responsibility for interpretation. 
a.  The zoning official shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions or any other provision of this zoning ordinance or the zoning map. Upon written request for an interpretation, the zoning official shall respond in writing within five days. 
b.  Interpretations of the zoning official may be appealed to the city council under the provisions of this zoning ordinance relating to appeals. Upon any request for an interpretation, the zoning official may decline to provide an interpretation and request a ruling by the city council within 30 days of the request, and such proceeding shall be considered an appeal. 
1.06.02.  Use of figures for illustration. Figures associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this zoning ordinance are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written. 
1.06.03.  Use of words and phrases. For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
a.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number, and words used in the plural number include the singular number. The masculine person "he" or "his" also means "her" or "hers." 
b.  References to the "city" and to the city council and any public officials or appointed bodies of the city not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this zoning ordinance shall always mean the City of Douglasville, Georgia, and its governing body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. These include: 
(1)  The city manager, appointed as such by the city council, or the city manager's designee. 
(2)  The zoning official, appointed as such by the city manager, or the zoning official's designee. 
(3)  The building official, appointed as such under the building code, or the building official's designee. 
(4)  The board of adjustments and appeals, created as such and appointed by the city council. 
(5)  The zoning board, as designated by the city council to consider and make recommendations on zoning changes. 
c.  References to an administrative department of the city shall always mean the department created by the city council as such. These include: 
(1)  Zoning department: References to action by the "zoning department" shall mean action by that administrative official to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the zoning official. 
(2)  Fire department: A reference to action by the "fire department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Douglas County Fire Department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the fire chief. 
(3)  Zoning official refers to the community development director or his designee, including but not limited [to] any acting zoning official. 
d.  References to public officials, departments or appointed bodies of jurisdictions other than Douglasville shall always mean such persons or bodies having jurisdiction over or relative to Douglasville, Georgia. These include: 
(1)  The Clerk of the Superior Court of Douglas County, Georgia. 
(2)  The Douglas County Health Department. 
(3)  The West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(4)  The Atlanta Regional Commission. 
(5)  The Georgia Departments of Natural Resources (DNR) and Transportation (DOT). 
(6)  The Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA). 
(7)  The United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
e.  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
f.  The words "shall," "will," "is to" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
g.  The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements or factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
h.  The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following." 
i.  The verbs "zone" and "rezone" have the same meaning and refer to the act of amending the Official Zoning Map through the process established by this zoning ordinance. 
j.  The nouns "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning and refer to the zoning districts established under this zoning ordinance. 
k.  The word "day" means a calendar day unless otherwise specified as a work day, which means Monday through Friday. 
l.  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
m.  The word "map" or "zoning map" means the official Zoning Map of Douglasville, Georgia, and may include a series of maps in sections. 
1.06.04.  Meaning of words and phrases. 
a.  All words and phrases are to be interpreted within the context of the sentence, subparagraph, paragraph, subsection, section and article in which they occur. 
b.  Words and phrases defined. 
(1)  Words and phrases defined in this zoning ordinance shall be interpreted as defined without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. 
(2)  Words and phrases not defined in this zoning ordinance but defined in appendix B: Development Code or in any other ordinance of the city are to be used in the interpretation of this zoning ordinance if the context is appropriate. 
(3)  Words and phrases not defined in this zoning ordinance or in appendix B: Development Code or in any other ordinance of the city shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by Webster's Third New International Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-37, § 1(Exh. A), 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, § 1, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, §§ 1, 2, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-67, § 4, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-2018-20 , § 1, 5-21-18) 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF LAND AND STRUCTURES 

Section 2.01. - Purpose of article II. 
This article defines the zoning districts in the city and identifies the specific uses to which land and structures may be put in the various zoning districts, including certain uses or structures for which special approval is needed. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 2.02. - Zoning districts; established. 
2.02.01.  Zoning districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Douglasville is divided into zoning districts as follows: 

 
2.02.02.  Overlay districts. For the purpose of this ordinance, the following overlay districts are established: 

 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-5, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, § 2, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-48, §§ 1, 2, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-2019-5 , § 2, 1-22-19) 
Section 2.03. - Zoning map. 
2.03.01.  Official zoning map. 
a.  The boundaries of the various zoning districts are shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of the City of Douglasville, Georgia" adopted on the date of adoption of this zoning ordinance, and as amended thereafter from time to time. 
b.  The "Official Zoning Map of the City of Douglasville, Georgia" is adopted as the Official Zoning Map and is hereby made a part of this zoning ordinance, and all notations, references and other information shown on it shall be a part of this zoning ordinance. 
c.  The Official Zoning Map, as adopted by the city council and subsequently amended from time to time by its action, shall be maintained and available for inspection in the planning and zoning department. A certified copy shall be kept permanently in the office of the city clerk. 
2.03.02.  Flood hazard boundary map. The Official Zoning Map is supplemented by an official flood hazard boundary map for the incorporated area of Douglasville. The flood hazard boundary map as hereby adopted consists of a map depicting the 100-year floodplains and identified as the Flood Insurance Ratings Map of the Corps of Engineers, Douglasville, Georgia, as set forth on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk, and data extracted from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers reports. 
a.  Purpose of flood hazard map. The flood hazard boundary map is intended to give the general location of flood hazard areas. Hydrological studies, engineering computations, flood records, and field surveys compiled and certified by a registered professional engineer may be required. 
b.  Correction and amendment of map. As additional engineering and hydrological data including U.S. Army Corps of Engineers reports become available for specific properties or for entire streams which demonstrate to the satisfaction of the department of engineering that a more exact delineation of the flood hazard boundary lines may be established, the city engineer shall propose such corrections to amend the official flood hazard boundary map for adoption by the mayor and council. 
2.03.03.  Changes to the official zoning map. No changes of any nature shall be made to the Official Zoning Map except in conformity with amendments to the map approved by the city council or by adoption of a new Official Zoning Map. 
2.03.04.  Interpretation of boundaries. 
a.  The boundaries of the districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map shall be determined on the basis of the legal descriptions associated with approved zoning petitions, or, lacking such legal descriptions, on the basis of the location of the boundary as depicted on the Official Zoning Map along with any dimensions shown. 
b.  Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary lines are construed to follow the center lines of streets or highways, property lines, a line lying in the center of a stream or drainage way, or the city limits of Douglasville. 
(2)  Where a district boundary line parallels a street, highway or railroad right-of-way but no dimension is given, the distance shall be scaled from the Official Zoning Map. 
(3)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot that is of single ownership at the time of the effective date of this zoning ordinance, the zoning classification of the least restricted portion may be interpreted to extend into the remainder of the lot, except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(4)  In the event the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the city council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
2.03.05.  Special conditions of previous rezonings retained. All special conditions and special stipulations imposed as conditions of rezoning of property prior to adoption of the Official Zoning Map are hereby retained. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, §§ 2—4, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-5, § 10, 1-16-01) 
Section 2.04. - Zoning districts; purposes. 
2.04.01.  R-2, Single-family detached residential district. The R-2 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to discourage any use which would generate other than normal residential area traffic on minor streets, and to protect the orderly future development of land in accordance with the land use plan for the city, at a density of not more than two units per acre. 
2.04.02.  R-3, Single-family detached residential district. The R-3 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to discourage any use which would generate other than residential traffic on minor streets, to meet the needs and demands of single-family residences and to protect the orderly future development of land, all in accordance with the land use plan for the city, at a density of not more than three units per acre. A minimum development site size of two acres is intended to assure compatibility with surrounding residential uses. 
2.04.03.  R-4, Single-family detached and attached townhouse and apartment residential district. The R-4 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to discourage any use which would generate other than residential traffic on minor streets, to meet the needs and demands of attached and detached single-, two-, three-and four-family residences and to protect the orderly future development of land, all in accordance with the land use plan for the city, at a density of not more than four units per acre. A minimum development site size of two acres and a minimum requirement that 50 percent of the units in the development be in single-family detached dwellings is intended to assure compatibility with surrounding residential uses. No land shall be zoned to R-4, as a primary zoning district, after November 1, 2018, but may be zoned to R-4 as a base zone within a DCD. 
2.04.04.  Single-family attached residential districts. 
a.  R-6, Single-family attached apartment residential district. The R-6 zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life and to encourage flexibility in meeting the needs of families, by attached high-density apartment dwellings in accordance with the land use plan for the city at a density of no more than six units per acre and development sites of at least two acres. 
b.  R-6-T, Single-family family attached townhouse residential district. The R-6-T zone is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life and to encourage flexibility in meeting the needs of families, by permitting townhouse dwellings in accordance with the land use plan for the city at a density of no more than six units per acre and development sites of at least two acres. 
2.04.05.  DCD, Design concept development district. The purpose of a design concept development is to encourage the best possible site plans and building arrangements under a unified plan of development, rather than under lot-by-lot regulation. The developer benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities and flexibility in design. Approval of an overall concept plan by the city council provides an opportunity to assure that the development will be in accordance with the land use plan and the character of the neighborhood in which the development is located. 
The design concept development district is intended to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning, to assure the provision of park and recreation land and facilities for the use of the occupants of the development in order to obtain a more desirable environment, and to encourage a mix of uses for creation of communities where individuals can live, work and play. A design concept development district is required to include at least two types of land use that are not otherwise allowed together in another zoning district, or at least two types of residential density, in order to promote unique solutions to land development issues. A design concept development district is intended to be a relatively large-scale project on a site of ten acres or more, except that a design concept development district contained entirely within a historic site or historic district may be located on a site of not less than five acres. 
2.04.06.  O-I, Office-institutional district. The O-I office-institutional district is established to provide a district for offices, institutions, and limited commercial activities not involving the sale, storage, or processing of merchandise unless otherwise permitted herein, along with appropriate accessory uses, in accordance with the land use plan for the city. 
2.04.07.  CN, Neighborhood commercial district. The CN neighborhood commercial district is intended to provide suitable areas for the retailing of goods and services to surrounding residential neighborhoods and at the same time protect the residential neighborhoods from intrusive traffic and parking congestion in accordance with the land use plan for the city. 
2.04.08.  CBD, Central business district. The CBD, central business district is intended to protect and promote a suitable area for office, institutional, and commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other, to encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to a central business area, and to encourage the intensive development of a central business district for the City of Douglasville, in accordance with the land use plan for the city. Residential uses are appropriate in the central business district when combined with nonresidential uses in mixed-use buildings, as long as the nonresidential uses occupy at least 50 percent of the gross floor area. 
2.04.09.  CSC, Shopping center district. The CSC shopping center district is a district for planned shopping centers designed to accommodate general retail and personal service activities conducted in a unified development and designed to serve a wide area. 
2.04.10.  CG, General commercial district. The CG general commercial district is intended to provide areas for those business and commercial uses that are a higher intensity than neighborhood commercial districts or for the central business district, in accordance with the land use plan for the city. 
2.04.11.  O-D, Office distribution district. The O-D office distribution district is established to encourage a suitable environment for uses that require both office and distribution facilities at the same site, as well as related and compatible commercial uses and appropriate accessory uses, in accordance with the land use plan for the city. 
2.04.12.  IL, Light industrial district. The IL light industrial district is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for light industrial purposes, including accessibility to major transportation facilities, availability of adequate utilities and other public services, and availability of large quantities of suitable land. Uses compatible with light industrial development are to be encouraged insofar as they are in accordance with the land use plan for the city. 
2.04.13.  IH, Heavy industrial district. The IH heavy industrial district is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for heavy industrial purposes, including accessibility to major transportation facilities, availability of adequate utilities and other public services and availability of large quantities of open land. Uses compatible with light and heavy industrial development are to be encouraged insofar as they are in accordance with the land use plan for the city. 
2.04.14.  FH, Flood hazard overlay district. The flood hazard district is comprised of lands that are subject to periodic flooding. The intent of the regulations within this zoning district is to limit the use of such floodplain lands to prevent flood damage to persons and properties and minimize expenditures for flood relief programs, flood control projects and flood damage repair; preserve drainage courses that will be adequate to carry storm water runoff from existing and future land developments; prohibit landfills or other obstructions to the flow of floodwaters; permit uses that are appropriate on floodplains and utilize effectively this valuable resource. 
2.04.15.  E, Environmental overlay districts. Environmental districts are established for the following purposes: 
a.  To promote health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution. 
b.  To create vegetation buffer areas adjacent to rivers, creeks and streams, and to protect wetlands and groundwater recharge areas. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-5, § 3, 1-16-01; Ord. No. O-01-58, § 1, 8-20-01; Ord. No. O-01-59, § 1, 8-20-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 3, 4, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-48, §§ 3—5, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-2018-50 , § 1, 11-19-18) 
Section 2.05. - Uses permitted in each zoning district. 
2.05.01.  Permitted uses. Principal uses that are permitted by right and permitted only by special use approval in each zoning district are shown on the following table 2-1. Accessory uses that are allowed in conjunction with a principal use are shown on table 2-2. 
2.05.02.  Restrictions on particular uses. Requirements that apply to specific uses are listed in the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance. For convenience, those uses are cross-referenced on the following table. 
2.05.03.  Restrictions imposed by overlay districts. The uses otherwise permitted by the applicable zoning district on a specific property or portion of a property are restricted if the land lies within an overlay district. See provisions for the FH flood hazard overlay district and the environmental overlay districts in the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance. 
2.05.04.  Uses permitted in a design concept development. In a DCD design concept development district, uses that are permitted are specified as part of the zoning approval for each development. (Refer also to the special provisions for DCDs in the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance.) 
2.05.05.  Prohibited uses. Any use not shown on the following tables as permitted in a zoning district is specifically prohibited. In addition, uses that are specifically prohibited in all zoning districts are listed in the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance. 
Table 2-1. Permitted principal uses by zoning district. 
The following uses are allowed by right or by special use approval in the zoning districts noted. See also the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance for restrictions that may apply to specific uses in general or in specific zoning districts, as well as restrictions imposed by the FH or environmental overlay districts. 

 

 
Table 2-2. Permitted Accessory Uses by Zoning District. 
The following are allowed as an accessory use that is normally incidental to an existing principal use on a property in the zoning districts noted. See also the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance for restrictions that may apply to specific uses in general or in specific zoning districts, as well as restrictions imposed by the FH or environmental overlay districts. 

 

 
2.05.06.  Special uses and temporary uses. Principal uses that are permitted as special uses may be granted by the city council as temporary uses and limited in duration to 12 months, after which time any temporary use permit shall expire unless sooner renewed by the city council. Requests for temporary use permits shall be processed and heard in the same manner as requests for special use permits. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-5, §§ 4—6, 1-16-01; Ord. No. O-02-33, § 1, 9-5-02; Ord. No. O-02-54, § 1, 12-16-02; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 5, 6, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-03-20, § 1, 6-16-03; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 6, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 1, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-07-05, § 1, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-22, § 1, 3-19-07; Ord. No. O-07-37, § 1, 6-18-07; Ord. No. O-08-041, § 1, 7-21-08; Ord. No. O-08-051, §§ 1, 2, 9-15-08; Ord. No. O-09-003, § 1(Exh. A), 2-16-09; Ord. No. O-09-019, § 1, 4-20-09; Ord. No. O-09-048, § 1(Exh. A), 9-21-09; Ord. No. O-2010-15, § 1(Exh. A.), 4-19-10; Ord. No. O-2013-4, § 2, 1-22-13; Ord. No. O-2013-55, §§ 1, 2, 12-31-13; Ord. No. O-2017-8, § 2 , 2-20-17; Ord. No. O-2017-61 , § 1, 8-21-17) 
ARTICLE III. - RESTRICTIONS ON PARTICULAR USES 

Section 3.01. - Purpose of article III. 
The following specific requirements apply to each of the following principal and accessory uses in all zoning districts where each principal or accessory use is otherwise permitted by right or as a special use. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.02. - Standards for dwellings. 
3.02.01.  Foundations. All site built and class A single-family detached and all two-family dwellings shall meet or exceed the following requirements for foundations: 
a.  The structure shall be attached to a permanent foundation constructed in accordance with the building code or state regulations, as applicable. 
b.  Upon placement, all means of transportation, such as towing devices, wheels, axles, and hitches, shall have been removed. 
c.  The area beneath the ground floor of the structure shall be enclosed around the exterior of the structure with a foundation wall or a curtain wall constructed of masonry at least four inches thick, penetrated by openings only for installed vents and access doors. 
3.02.02.  Reserved. 
3.02.03.  Roofs. All site built and class A single-family detached and all two-family dwellings shall meet or exceed the following requirements for roofs: 
a.  All roof surfaces shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12 (four inches of rise for every 12 inches of run), except that mansard and gambrel roofs must meet this requirement only for those surfaces that rise from the eaves. 
b.  All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, standing seam (noncorrugated) tin, clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
c.  Minimum roof overhang shall be 12 inches, including gutters. 
3.02.04.  Minimum width. The minimum width of every dwelling shall be greater than 16 feet. 
3.02.05.  Compliance with codes. Every dwelling shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable requirements of the building code as adopted by the city, or in accordance with standards established by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act for manufactured homes, or in accordance with state law and regulations for industrialized buildings, whichever apply. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-48, §§ 7, 8, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 9, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-2011-50, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-11; Ord. No. O-2014-48, § 1, 10-20-14; Ord. No. O-2017-91 , §§ 1, 2, 11-20-17) 
Section 3.03. - Special provisions for design concept development projects. 
In furtherance of the purposes for which the DCD district is established, the following shall apply: 
3.03.01.  Character of land use. A DCD must contain at least two types of land use that are not otherwise allowed together in another zoning district or two types of residential density. 
3.03.02.  Concept plan required, development standards. 
a.  Development of the DCD shall be guided by a graphic concept plan that designates the land uses of the DCD. The concept plan may be accompanied by a development standards text, which may be approved as a condition of zoning or special use, providing development standards and uses for the project which vary, augment or limit the requirements of this zoning ordinance and the development code. 
b.  To the extent that the approved concept plan and development standards for a DCD contradict the development code and the zoning ordinance, the contradictory provisions of the development code and the zoning ordinance are inapplicable to that DCD. For properties zoned to DCD before November 21, 2000, to the extent that development standards are not stated with regard to a particular land use or area, then the standards in the development code or zoning ordinance applicable to the zoning district most consistent with the DCD approval for that land use or area shall apply, provided such standards do not contradict the concept plan for the DCD. For properties zoned to DCD on or after November 21, 2000, to the extent that development standards are not stated with regard to a particular area, then the standards and land uses required and permitted in the area shall be those allowed for the zoning district designated on the concept plan. 
3.03.03.  Concept plan as a condition of zoning. No changes in land use or density shall be allowed in any approved and incorporated concept plan or development standards text, except as subsequently approved pursuant to a rezoning of the property. For properties zoned to DCD concurrent with adoption of the Official Zoning Map on July 6, 1999, and for which development has commenced but is not complete on July 6, 1999, the individual land use plan for any such property shall serve as a concept plan, and such property shall continue to be developed in accordance with development standards applicable at the time of adoption of the land use plan, unless and until new individualized development standards are approved for such property by the mayor and council. For all properties zoned to DCD subsequent to July 6, 1999, the land uses permitted within a DCD and the development standards applicable to each, by location, shall be established as a condition of approval by the city council at the time that the property is rezoned to DCD. 
3.03.04.  Open space required. 
a.  Within the DCD, 20 percent of the gross land area must be set aside as common open space, half of which must be usable for active or passive recreation. 
b.  The open space areas and facilities shall be held in common by a legally constituted association of property owners with the financial capability to maintain the open space. 
c.  For the purposes of calculation, common open space does not include any streets or public rights-of-way, or yard areas or landscape areas located on private property. Common open space does include land and water areas that are available to all occupants of the DCD on a continuing and permanent basis, such as walking trails, community centers or clubhouses, golf courses and other recreation areas, protected flood plains or wetlands. 
d.  Lands dedicated to public use, such as a school or fire station, shall be credited as part of the 20 percent common open space requirement. 
3.03.05.  Compatibility. Land uses developed at the perimeter of the site shall be developed in a manner that is compatible with adjacent off-site land uses or zoning, or a 100-foot wide buffer shall be provided between the uses in the DCD and the perimeter of the site. Compatibility shall be judged on the basis of similar land uses, average lot sizes, setbacks, and other development standards. 
3.03.06.  Maximum area and density for residential uses. 
a.  Except as provided in paragraph b. of this subsection, no concept plan shall be approved for any DCD development of 500 acres or less which exceeds the following limits for residential use: 
(1)  Maximum acreage area for residential use: 75 percent of total land area. 
(2)  Maximum acreage area for high-density (attached residential units at six-per-acre density or greater) residential use: Ten percent of total land area. 
(3)  Maximum overall residential density (calculated based on property designated for residential base zones): Five and three-tenths units per acre. 
(4)  Maximum residential density within the high-density (attached units at six-per-acre density or greater) land use area: 14 units per acre. 
b.  Exception: The Council may waive the requirements of this subsection upon an express finding of special circumstances where any DCD adjoins property of equal or greater acreage which is developed as commercial, office, industrial or any combination thereof. 
c.  Detached residential dwellings shall be permitted in the DCD district at densities greater than three units per acre only: 
(a)  Pursuant to a DCD concept plan approved prior to November 1, 2004; or 
(b)  Pursuant to a DCD concept plan approved on or after January 1, 2012, incorporating a development text in compliance with paragraph c. of subsection 3.03.07. 
d.  For DCD developments approved on or after January 1, 2012, in no case shall more than 50 percent of the detached residential dwellings in any DCD district be less than 1,800 square feet, and the average for all homes constructed within any DCD district shall be greater than 1,800 square feet. 
3.03.07. Traffic study required. The applicant shall submit a traffic study along with the zoning application for any property which: 
a.  has an existing zoning classification other than DCD, and for which the applicant seeks DCD zoning; or 
b.  is already zoned as DCD, and for which the applicant seeks a change or addition to the concept plan, development text or special stipulations, or an initial adoption of any such elements, or a special land use permit. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-58, § 2, 8-20-01; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 9, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-2011-50, §§ 3—5, 12-19-11; Ord. No. O-2017-91 , § 2, 11-20-17; Ord. No. O-2018-50 , § 2, 11-19-18) 
DIVISION 1. - RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED AND ADDITIONAL USES ALLOWED BY OVERLAY DISTRICTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2019-5 , § 3, adopted Jan. 22, 2019, amended the title of Div. 1 to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1 was titled, "Restrictions imposed by overlay districts." 

Section 3.21. - Restrictions on use within the FH flood hazard overlay district. 
3.21.01.  Flood hazard overlay district takes precedence over zoning districts. Notwithstanding the uses permitted for the zoning district applying to the property, no building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied as herein provided and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, removed or altered except in conformity with the requirements of this section when such lands fall within the flood hazard overlay district. Where this overlay district coincides with any other overlay district, the most restrictive requirements shall apply. 
3.21.02.  Uses permitted in flood hazard areas. Within the FH flood hazard overlay district the following uses are permitted if otherwise permitted within the zoning district: 
a.  Agriculture, including forestry and livestock raising, requiring no structure within the flood hazard area except structures for temporary shelter, and including agriculture and forestry access roads. 
b.  Dams, provided they are constructed in accordance with specification of the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service, or the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
c.  Public parks and recreation areas and facilities including, but not limited to, boat ramps, docks, parking areas, and recreation facilities: private and commercial recreation developments, and campgrounds. 
d.  Fences having sufficient open area to permit the free flow of water and debris. 
e.  Roads and parking areas constructed in such a manner as to permit the free flow of floodwaters. 
f.  Public utility poles, towers, pipelines, sewers, streets, and similar facilities, provided they are constructed in such a manner as to permit the free flow of floodwaters. 
g.  Signs, provided they permit the free flow of water. 
h.  Other uses may be permitted by special use permit provided they are in accordance with all provisions of this ordinance. Such uses include, but are not limited to the following: landing field or heliport; extraction or removal of sand, gravel, earth, clay or other natural resources; greenhouse; plant nursery or truck garden; radio, television or similar towers; accessory parking areas; temporary sawmill or similar; outdoor recreation or amusement; fairs, expositions, and the like. 
i.  Any use otherwise permitted by the applicable zoning district regulations provided development complies with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.22. - Restrictions on use within the environmental overlay districts. 
3.22.01.  Authority. The Official State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria (Chapter 391-3-16), established pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 12-2-8, the Metropolitan River Protection Act (O.C.G.A. sections 12-5-440 through 12-5-457), and other relevant rules and statutes. 
3.22.02. Repealed. 
3.22.03.  Characteristics of environmental overlay districts. These districts shall overlay the base zoning of properties so that all land within the various environmental overlay districts shall also have a base zoning classification. Each parcel within these overlay districts shall be subject to the regulations of both the base zoning district and the overlay district(s) within which it lies. If there is a conflict or redundancy between the regulations and standards of the base zone and the overlay zone, the more restrictive regulation shall govern. 
3.22.04.  Districts : 
a.  Groundwater recharge area protection district (GW). The GW district is established to protect the quality of groundwater by regulating land uses within significant groundwater recharge areas. This is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, particularly those persons and communities who rely on groundwater as their source of potable water supply. 
The GW district is mapped on the Official Zoning Map of Douglasville corresponding to the areas mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1999 edition. 
(1)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Douglas County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management (DHR Manual), and Sections 3.22.04 a.(2) and 3.22.04 a.(3). 
(2)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having at least 110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of Table MT-1 in the DHR Manual. The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A—F) of the DHR Manual. However, any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of these regulations is exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  New mobile home parks shall be served by sanitary sewer. 
(4)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than five × 10-7cm/sec. or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(5)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(6)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of a type and amounts requiring a permit from the Department of Natural Resources or that require disposal at a hazardous materials facility by a hazardous materials handler permitted or licensed by the Department of Natural Resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems. Such spill and leak collection systems shall be shown on the development plan in detail, and must be approved as part of the development plan. 
b.  Wetlands protection district (WP). The WP district is established to promote the protection of wetlands in Douglasville, which are indispensable, fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. Furthermore, they provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; opportunities for study and education; and open space and recreational opportunities. 
Wetlands are commonly lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution, and other acts. Piecemeal and cumulative losses will have the effect of destroying additional wetlands over time. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
The WP district shall comprise the following two categories: all lands mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps (Generalized Wetlands Map); and all lands that, in the course of development review, are determined by Douglasville to have significant evidence of wetlands. 
The generalized wetlands map is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. The generalized wetlands map cannot serve (and therefore should not be used) as a substitute for a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any action by Douglasville under this ordinance does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(1)  No activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material in waters of the U.S. (excepting those activities exempted in section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act) will be permitted within the WP district without written permission or a permit from Douglasville. A wetlands delineation by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers shall be required in the following circumstances: 
(a)  If the area proposed for development is located within 100 feet of an area delineated as wetlands by the generalized wetlands map as determined by city staff. 
(b)  If an area within a development site is determined by city staff to have significant evidence of wetlands. 
(2)  If the corps determines that wetlands are present on a proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 Permit or Letter of Permission is issued. 
(3)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein, and provided they have no impact on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of a Section 404 permit or a permit under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act. 
(a)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
(b)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(c)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(d)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(e)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and the approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(f)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(4)  Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited within the wetlands protection district. 
(a)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(b)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills; 
(c)  Any other use not specifically exempted as noted above or properly approved by Douglasville and relevant state and federal agencies. 
c.  Watershed protection districts. In order to provide for the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of the public within Douglasville and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. Land disturbance and development can increase erosion and sedimentation that decreases the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering water resources unusable for recreation. 
The purpose of these districts is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of Douglasville, as well as the City of East Point and jurisdictions downstream from Douglas County; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of water supply watersheds. 
These district regulations are designed for compliance with O.C.G.A. [section] 12-2-8 and the Official Georgia Department of Natural Resources Rules for Environmental Planning, as well as for consistency with goals 2—5 of chapter 5 of the 1994 Douglasville Comprehensive Plan. 
All land within incorporated Douglasville is regulated by one of the watershed protection districts. The districts are established and designated on the Official Zoning Map of Douglasville corresponding to the topographical features that delimit the drainage basins of the respective creeks, rivers and reservoirs. 
(1)  General regulations for all watershed protection districts. 
(a)  Required stream buffers (but not regulated streams or wetlands) may be included in the gross land area for purposes of calculation of the percentage of a site's impervious surface area. 
(b)  All property within watershed protection districts may be developed or re-developed as permitted by its base zoning, provided the development is also in compliance with these watershed protection regulations. 
(c)  The following uses are exempt from watershed protection district regulations (with some limitations and conditions as noted): 
(i)  Development and land use legally established prior to the adoption of these regulations. 
(ii)  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act (outside of stream buffer areas). 
(iii)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities (outside of stream buffer areas) that are consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission / Department of Agriculture and do not impair the quality of streams. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Watershed Protection Regulations Table: 

 
Table footnotes: 
1  See definition of "stream, perennial" at subsection 8.187.03. 
2  Regulated activities include all impervious surfaces, septic tanks, drain fields, and animal/livestock pasturing, keeping, or grazing. 
3  Measured from edge of wetlands where present. 
4  See definition of "impervious surface". For most development, impervious surface calculations shall be required on a lot-by-lot basis. However, in master planned communities, the maximum percentage can be met on a project-wide basis provided that the project is planned in detail and adequate controls are established (through deed restrictions, zoning plans and conditions, or other mechanisms) to ensure compliance. 
5  Watersheds not classified as large or small water supply watersheds (i.e. Hurricane Creek; Chattahoochee River Direct Drainage Basin [in areas not regulated by MRPA]). 
(f)  Regulatory requirements for stream buffers. All stream buffer areas shall be maintained with appropriate indigenous plant species for the maintenance of groundcover and limitation of erosion. Undisturbed natural vegetation is the preferred, optimum state of a stream buffer. In the alternate, careful re-establishment of indigenous vegetation and ground cover is encouraged. 
No construction, grading, clearing, grubbing, excavating, filling, or other land disturbing activity shall be permitted within the stream buffer. As an exception to this rule, the following limited uses may be established within the buffer provided that: land disturbance and impact in the stream buffer is minimized to the greatest extent possible; proper soil erosion and sedimentation control is established and maintained; and the disturbed area is stabilized and appropriately revegetated as soon as possible following the completion of approved work within the buffer. 
(i)  Sanitary sewer lines may be located along and across stream buffers, if it is determined by WSA that no reasonable design alternative exists. 
(ii)  Other utility lines may cross stream buffers, when it is determined by the utility provider that no reasonable design alternative exists. 
(iii)  Private driveways and public roads may cross stream buffers as near as possible to 90 degrees when necessary and as approved by Douglasville in the subdivision or development review process. 
(iv)  Recreational amenities (such as trails, wildlife observation stands, and other low impact uses) when approved by Douglasville as an element of a development plan. 
(v)  Cutting and clearing (with handheld tools) of live trees less than two inches in caliper measure at a point four and one-half feet above grade, and dead trees, provided the stumps and root structure of trees are left in place to ensure minimal soil erosion potential. 
(g)  Regulatory requirements for reservoir buffers. 
(i)  Buffers around public water supply reservoirs shall be maintained as required in the watershed management plans for the respective reservoirs. In no case shall the required buffer be less than 150 feet in width. 
(ii)  Buffers around private reservoirs shall meet the same criteria as for stream buffers in subsection 3.22.04 c.(1)(f). However, all improved areas within the required buffers of existing private reservoirs (such as lawns, docks, patios, etc.) may continue to be maintained as they exist at the time of the adoption of these regulations. 
(2)  Dog River watershed. This is a small water supply watershed that contains a reservoir. An intake for the Douglasville Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority (WSA) is located on this reservoir. The watershed management plan for the Dog River Reservoir drainage basin has been established by WSA to protect this water system. The following regulations are established to further protect the watershed. 
(a)  Stream buffer widths, setbacks from streams, impervious surface limits, and maximum residential density shall be regulated as specified in the table located in subsection 3.22.04 c.(1)(e). 
(b)  Applications to rezone property to industrial classifications within the Dog River watershed shall not be accepted for consideration by the staff nor be approved by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Bear Creek watershed. This is a small water supply watershed that contains a reservoir. An intake for WSA is located on this reservoir. The watershed management plan for the Bear Creek Reservoir drainage basin has been established by WSA to protect this water system. The following regulations are established to further protect the watershed. 
(a)  Stream buffer widths, setbacks from streams, impervious surface limits, and maximum residential density shall be regulated as specified in the table located in subsection 3.22.04 c.(1)(e). 
(b)  Applications to rezone property to industrial classifications within the Bear Creek watershed shall not be accepted for consideration by the staff nor be approved by the mayor and council. 
(4)  Anneewakee Creek watershed (including subwatersheds A and B). This is a small water supply watershed that does not contain a reservoir. An intake for WSA is located on this creek. The following regulations are established to protect the watershed. 
(a)  Stream buffer widths, setbacks from streams, impervious surface limits, and maximum residential density shall be regulated as specified in the table located in subsection 3.22.04 c.(1)(e). 
(b)  Within subwatershed A, new facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the standard fire prevention code. 
(5)  Sweetwater Creek watershed (including Beaver Run and Gothards Creek subwatersheds). This is a large water supply watershed. An intake for the City of East Point is located on this creek. This watershed also contains the Sparks Reservoir, an embayment of Beaver Run Creek, which is owned and managed by the City of East Point. A watershed management plan has been established to protect the reservoir. The following regulations are established to further protect the watershed. 
(a)  Stream buffer widths and setbacks from streams shall be regulated as specified in the table located in subsection 3.22.04 c.(1)(e). 
(b)  New facilities located within seven miles of a water supply intake or reservoir, which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the standard fire prevention code. 
(6)  Other watersheds. Streams within areas of the city that are not classified as small or large water supply watersheds (such as the Chattahoochee River direct drainage basin and the Hurricane Creek watershed) are also worthy of protection for the welfare and safety of the public. The following regulations are established to protect these watersheds. 
(a)  Stream buffer widths shall be regulated as specified in the table located in subsection 3.22.04 c.(1)(e). 
d.  Chattahoochee River protection district (CRP). All lands within 2,000 feet of the Chattahoochee River are protected by the Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) as established in O.C.G.A. sections 12-5-440 through 12-5-457. MRPA requires a 50-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer and 150-foot impervious surface setback on the Chattahoochee and its impoundments and a 35-foot undisturbed vegetative buffer (all measured from the edge of the water) on perennial tributary streams in a Corridor extending 2,000 feet from either bank of the river and its impoundments. The Corridor extends from Buford Dam to the downstream limits of the Atlanta region (Douglas and Fulton Counties). Streams in the basin of the Corridor are required to be protected by buffers. The CRP district is depicted on the Douglasville Zoning Map coincident with the corridor of protection established by MRPA. 
All land disturbance, land use, and development within the CRP must be reviewed by the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) as required by MRPA. No land use or development permit shall be approved by the city prior to the necessary review and approval by ARC pursuant to the requirements of MRPA. 
(Ord. No. O-01-5, § 7, 1-16-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, § 7, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-05-67, § 5(Exh. A), 12-19-05; ; Ord. No. O-08-013, §§ 2—4, 3-17-08) 
Section 3.23. - Restrictions on use within the quality growth development overlay district. 
3.23.01. Purpose. The quality growth development overlay district is established to promote high quality development in areas of the city that are largely undeveloped but in the path of rapid, substantial residential, commercial, or industrial development that is anticipated will radically change the character of the lands within the district boundaries. This district is designed to encourage high quality development by establishing restrictions and standards to protect the natural environment, promote optimum development, and so that investment values will be maximized and will not be endangered by unsightly, undesirable, or incompatible developments springing up on adjacent properties in the foreseeable future. 
3.23.02. Scope of regulations. Any multi-family residential, commercial, office, office distribution, or industrial use within the quality growth development overlay district, in addition to meeting all requirements and standards of this ordinance and of the district within which it is located, shall also comply with the minimum standards and restrictions of section 3.23. 
3.23.03. Intent. 
a.  The quality growth development overlay district overlays other zoning districts so that all lands lying within the quality growth development overlay district also are included within other zoning districts. Each parcel of land within the quality growth development overlay district shall be subject to the provisions, regulations, standards, and restrictions of both the quality growth development overlay district and of the other zoning districts within which it lies. If there is a conflict between the provisions of the underlying zoning district and the provisions of the quality growth development overlay district, the more stringent provisions shall govern. 
b.  The primary goals of the quality growth development overlay district are to provide a positive climate for high quality investment and development, to provide a sense of place and orientation, to provide an attractive and functional environment, to ensure a harmony of uses and development, and to provide a comfortable, secure, and harmonious developed environment. 
3.23.04. Prohibited uses. The following uses are prohibited in the quality growth development overlay district: 
a.  Rooming/Boarding houses 
b.  Industrial launderers 
c.  Lumber yards 
d.  Automotive repair and maintenance to include buses and trucks 
e.  Automotive parking lots as principal uses to include buses and trucks 
f.  All automotive parts/accessory/tire stores 
g.  Outdoor storage as a principal use 
h.  Fueling for trucks and buses 
3.23.05. Site design requirements. 
a.  Landscaping requirements. 
(1)  Generally. Any multi-family residential, commercial, office, office distribution, or industrial use within the quality growth development overlay district, in addition to meeting all requirements and standards of divisions 1 and 5 of article III of the Development Code Ordinance, shall also comply with the landscaping requirements of this paragraph 3.23.04.a. 
(2)  Landscaping requirements. The location and detail of all required landscaping shall be depicted on the site landscaping plan (see the procedures and permits article of the Development Code Ordinance). 
(a)  Minimum required landscaped area. Each site shall have a minimum landscaped area of 25 percent. The calculated landscaped area may include tree islands within required parking areas. 
(b)  Frontage landscaping strip. A minimum 25-foot wide landscaped strip adjacent to the street right-of-way shall be provided. Every 100-foot linear of landscape strip must include a minimum of three canopy trees, three understory trees, two evergreen coniferous trees, and 18 shrubs. Planting standards may be reduced up to 50 percent with the provision of a five-foot tall earthen berm running the entire length of the landscape strip. 
(c)  Side and rear yard landscaping. Unless otherwise required by section 3.09 of the Development Code Ordinance, all required side and rear yards shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of this paragraph 3.23.04.a. 
(d)  Other landscaping areas. All land surfaces other than those covered by permitted buildings, structures, paving, or other required site elements shall be landscaped with well-maintained grass, flowers, shrubs, or other suitable plant materials. 
b.  Screening. 
(1)  Generally. Any multi-family residential, commercial, office, office distribution, or industrial use within the quality growth development overlay district, in addition to meeting all requirements and standards of sections 3.32, 3.44 and 3.50 of this ordinance, and sections 4.01 and 9.03 of the of the Development Code Ordinance, shall also comply with the screening requirements of this paragraph 3.23.04.b. 
(2)  Requirements for loading areas, service equipment, outdoor storage areas. All loading areas, outdoor service equipment, and outdoor storage areas, including those for trucks, buses, automobiles, or the storage of any other vehicles or equipment shall be screened from street or adjacent property view by an attractive solid masonry wall finished on the exterior side by the same material used for the façade of the building. Such wall shall be not less than five feet in height and no more than eight feet in height. Specific height, as dictated by all applicable ordinance provisions, shall be determined during the site plan review process. 
(3)  Exceptions for loading areas, service equipment and outdoor storage areas. 
(a)  Exceptionally, no screening shall be required to separate adjacent uses which are the same or similar. 
(b)  A portion of the required screening not to exceed 25 percent may be substituted in the form of a natural or structural buffer. 
(4)  Building landscaping screening. For any building structure which 
(a)  faces a public street or is directly adjacent to a residentially zoned property, and 
(b)  has less than 25 percent glazing or openings (doors, windows, and service entries) on the façade facing the public street or residentially zoned property, the lot for such building structure must include a landscaping screen between the building structure and the residentially zoned lot in addition to any buffers required by the Development Code Ordinance. Such screen must be a minimum of 15 feet in width and run the entire length of the subject building façade except where there are breaks for building access. Every 100 feet linear of building landscaping screen must include: six canopy trees (three of which must be evergreen), two understory trees, three evergreen coniferous trees, and 18 shrubs. Canopy trees shall be no less than three inches in caliper and no less than 15 feet in height at the time of planting with a mature height of no less than 25 feet. Understory trees shall be any deciduous or evergreen trees that have the potential to grow to a mature height of less than 40 feet. 
c.  Utilities and service equipment. 
(1)  All industry standard grade utilities shall be located underground. All manholes, utility boxes, entry fixtures and other service equipment shall be located in side or rear yards and away from walkways. These fixtures shall be adequately screened as provided in paragraph 3.23.04.b. 
(2)  All service equipment including but not limited to air conditioning units and other utility or mechanical equipment that will be located on a rooftop shall be screened from ground level view behind a parapet wall or other architectural extension, equal in height to the unit requiring screening. Such parapet or extension shall be compatible to, in design, and integrated architecturally to the building. A parapet or extension of up to eight feet in height will not be included when calculating building height. Ground level view shall be defined as any view of the structure from the property line in any front yard of the property. 
d.  Outdoor storage. 
(1)  Outdoor storage of merchandise or inventory (other than motor vehicles) may be permitted as outlined in section 3.44 of this ordinance regarding outdoor storage. Such outdoor storage shall be screened as per paragraph 3.23.04. b. 
(2)  Outside storage of motor vehicles may be permitted only in paved areas shown on the site plan. 
e.  Sign regulations. 
(1)  Number and size. Except for lots in the CSC shopping center district, only one principal freestanding sign of not more than 60 square feet per street frontage is permitted. Corner lots may use a total of 120 square feet with a maximum of two signs, one per frontage. 
(2)  Materials. All signs shall be composed of wood, stone or other similar materials. 
f.  Decorative fences and walls. 
(1)  Materials permitted. Any fences or walls not required for screening under paragraph 3.23.04. b. shall be composed of, stone, decorative iron, or decorative block. If located parallel to a street and within 30 feet of that street, these fences or walls shall comply with the requirements for street-side screening in paragraph 3.23.04.b. 
(2)  Prohibited materials; exception. Chain link, unfinished concrete or cinderblock, plastic or fiberglass, barbed or razor wire, and wood fences are prohibited. Paint shall not be used as a finish material. Exceptionally, the above prohibited materials may be utilized on a security fence if located inside an approved screening fence, wall, or other screening element as specified in paragraph 3.23.04.b. 
3.23.06. Building design requirements. 
a.  Bulk and setback requirements. 
(1)  Maximum building coverage. Except for one-story warehouse, storage, or distribution buildings which are limited to a maximum building coverage ratio of 45 percent, the ratio of building coverage to the total lot area shall in no case exceed a ratio of 55 percent. 
(2)  Floor area ratio. The ratio of total floor area of all buildings on a lot to the total lot area (floor area ratio) shall not exceed a ratio of 150 percent (or one and one-half times the total lot area). 
b.  Building finishes, wall planes and roof planes. 
(1)  Prohibited finish materials. All exterior finish materials such as aluminum, steel, vinyl, mirrored or reflective glass, cinderblock, unfinished concrete, fiberglass or plastic are prohibited, except that architectural detailing and decorative trim of not more than 15 percent of any one façade may be of a substitute material. 
(2)  Wall planes and roof planes. Any building facing a public street or directly adjacent to a residentially zoned lot shall not have wallplanes exceeding 30 feet in length without a change in plane by means such as a vertical recess, projection, change in material or color, or pilaster. Changes in roof plane shall occur at locations with changes in wall planes. 
(3)  Permitted finish materials for front façades. 
(a)  Principal materials. All exterior finish materials visible from any public street shall be any of the following: 
(i)  brick or brick face; 
(ii)  natural stone including granite, marble, sandstone, field stone, or any other natural stone 
(iii)  manufactured stone including imitation field stone, marble terrazzo, and any other manufactured architectural finish stone; 
(iv)  clay tile with baked-on enamel finish; or 
(v)  architecturally treated decorative concrete block 
(b)  Windows and glass doors. All front façades shall have a minimum of 25 percent glass windows and glass doors on each floor visible from a public street unless directly screened by an adjacent building landscaping screen. 
(4)  Side and rear façades. All exterior finish materials for side and rear façades shall be any of the following: 
(a)  brick or brick face; 
(b)  natural stone including granite, marble, sandstone, field stone, or any other natural stone; 
(c)  manufactured stone including imitation field stone, marble terrazzo, and any other manufactured architectural finish stone; 
(d)  clay tile with baked-on enamel finish; 
(e)  architecturally treated decorative concrete block; 
(f)  architecturally treated slabs or block either fluted or with exposed aggregate; or 
(g)  stucco on lathe or an imitation stucco material or an acceptable substitute. 
3.23.07. Other requirements. 
a.  Buildings and required screens, landscaping and walls shall be well maintained and repaired or replaced in a timely manner should damage or deterioration occur. Any damage or deterioration shall be corrected within 60 days. 
b.  There shall be no outdoor loudspeaker systems utilized. 
c.  For lots which include required landscaped yards, setbacks, buffers, or screens, the developer shall submit a maintenance plan as part of project approval, showing proper maintenance and irrigation of landscaped areas, and providing for dead and underperforming plant material to be removed and appropriately replaced. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-60 , § 1, 8-21-17) 
Section 3.24. - Additional use within the H historic overlay district. 
Regardless of the principal zoning, any lot within the H historic overlay district may be used for single-family detached residential if: 
a.  The lot has not more than one existing principal structure; and 
b.  The lot has a front set back of not less than ten feet, and the front yard is primarily grass or landscaping. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-5 , § 4, 1-22-19) 
DIVISION 2. - RESTRICTIONS ON PERMITTED USES 

Section 3.31. - Automobile service station. 
Vehicles under repair or maintenance at an automobile service station may not remain on the property for more than seven consecutive days. Automobile service stations are prohibited within the historic districts. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-07-22, § 2, 3-19-07) 
Section 3.32. - Automotive repair shop. 
3.32.01. Automotive repair shops shall be licensed as either enclosed or unenclosed as provided herein. 
a.  Enclosed automotive repair shop. Any automotive repair shop established after May 15, 2000, shall be enclosed and shall provide an on-site enclosed building or an on-site lot enclosed by an eight-foot high opaque fence, where all inoperable and dismantled vehicles for the establishment shall be stored. There shall be no outdoor storage of inoperable or dismantled vehicles, or of vehicle parts, other than inside the enclosure provided. Vehicles under repair or maintenance at an enclosed automotive repair shop may not remain in the property for more than 180 consecutive days. 
b.  Unenclosed automotive repair shop. Any automotive repair shop established before May 15, 2000, may be licensed either as unenclosed or, if it meets the enclosure requirements of subsection a., as enclosed. Once licensed as an enclosed automotive repair shop, an establishment may not return to unenclosed status. Vehicles under repair or maintenance at an unenclosed automotive repair shop may not remain in the property for more than 60 consecutive days. 
3.32.02. Automotive repair shops are prohibited within the historic districts. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-07-22, § 2, 3-19-07) 
Section 3.33. - Bed and breakfast inn. 
Bed and breakfast inns may not contain more than six bedrooms, and shall not allow a guest to stay more than seven days. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.34. - Customary accessory uses and structures. 
The following provisions apply to accessory uses or structures in all zoning districts where each use is otherwise permitted. 
3.34.01. Relationship to principal use. No accessory use or structure shall be allowed on any lot except in relation to an existing principal use on the lot. 
3.34.02. Fences and free-standing walls. All fences and free-standing walls shall present a finished and attractive surface to the exterior of the lot. 
3.34.03.  Customary accessory uses to a dwelling. Each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use to a dwelling and may be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory: 
a.  Private garage not to exceed the following storage capacities; one or two-family dwelling, four automobiles; multi-family dwelling, two automobiles per dwelling unit; membership dwelling, one and one-half automobiles per sleeping room. 
b.  Outdoor parking area for motor vehicles, provided that such space does not exceed the maximum respective storage capacities listed in a. above; and provided that such space shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle per family residing on the premises, subject further to the restrictions on vehicle parking in residential districts contained in appendix B: Development Code. 
c.  Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. 
d.  Television or radio antenna, or a satellite dish antenna no larger than one meter in diameter or diagonally and no more than 13 feet high (measured from its base mount, whether on the ground or a roof). 
e.  Ham radio or citizen's band radio antenna. 
f.  Children's playhouse and play equipment. 
g.  Quarters for the keeping of pets owned by the occupants of the dwelling for noncommercial purposes. 
h.  Private recreational facility, such as a swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana, tennis court, deck or patio. 
i.  Common laundry facilities located within a multi-family dwelling structure for the exclusive use of the occupants of the dwelling or development. 
j.  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of man-made or natural catastrophes. 
k.  Noncommercial greenhouse. 
3.34.04.  Customary accessory uses to a church or other place of worship. Each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use to a church or other place of worship and may be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory if allowed by section 2.05: 
a.  Religious education buildings. 
b.  Parish house, meeting or gathering facilities for members. 
c.  Parsonage, along with the customary accessory uses to a dwelling. 
d.  Cemetery. 
e.  Libraries. 
f.  Social service centers. 
3.34.05.  Customary accessory uses to a charter school (privately owned). Each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use to a privately owned charter school and may be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory use: 
a.  Pre-schools. 
b.  Day care centers. 
c.  Group day care homes. 
3.34.06.  Customary accessory uses to an automotive parts and supply store. Each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use to an automotive parts and supply store, and may be performed on the same lot, outdoors in an unenclosed area, on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory: 
a.  Removal and installation of batteries. 
b.  Removal and installation of wiper blades. 
c.  Removal and installation of light bulbs and headlight bulbs. 
d.  Diagnostic testing (hooking a computer to the vehicle to obtain repair code). 
e.  Battery testing. 
f.  Alternator testing. 
All other outdoor maintenance, installation or repair of vehicles in an unenclosed outdoor space in connection with an automotive parts and supply store is prohibited. 
3.34.07.  Accessory structures; siding, number, size. The siding requirements for any accessory structure shall be the same as the siding requirements for a new primary structure on the subject lot; exceptionally, where all of the existing primary structures on a lot are sided, in whole or in part, with legal nonconforming materials, then a new accessory structure may be sided with any of the same nonconforming materials. No lot may contain more than two accessory structures; no accessory structure may have a second story unless the primary structure has a second story. The total square footage for all accessory structures on any lot shall not exceed 1,000 square feet, except by special land use permit. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-07-05, § 2, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-22, § 3, 3-19-07; Ord. No. O-08-005, § 1, 1-22-08; Ord. No. O-2010-3, § 1, 2-15-10) 
Section 3.35. - Drug addiction rehabilitation center. 
Any halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of drug dependency must comply with the requirements for a special hearing under article V of this Code pertaining to such facilities prior to approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.36. - Guest house. 
Where otherwise permitted, a guest house must comply with the following: 
3.36.01.  Guest house; accessory use only. The guest house must be an accessory use to a single-family detached dwelling already existing on the lot. 
3.36.02.  Guest house; minimum standards. 
a.  The guest house must meet or exceed the standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under this article. 
b.  A guest house shall be permitted only on a lot having at least one acre in area. 
c.  The water supply and sanitary sewage disposal system for the lot must be certified by the water and sewerage authority or the health department (as appropriate) as adequate to support the guest house in combination with the main house. 
3.36.03.  Guest house; restrictions. 
a.  The guest house must be placed to the rear of the main house. 
b.  No more than one guest house may be located on any lot. 
c.  The building floor area of the guest house may not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the main house. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.37. - Home occupations. 
3.37.01.  Home office. 
a.  Permitted activities. A home office shall be limited to the personal conduct of a business within one's place of residence. There shall be no exterior indication that the business activity is taking place. 
b.  Limitations on size and location. 
(1)  The floor area devoted to the home office must not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit or 500 square feet (whichever is less). This limitation applies to the aggregate floor area of all areas devoted to the home office, whether located within the dwelling or in an accessory structure. 
(2)  There shall be no activity or display associated with the home office outside of any building or structure. Storage of inventory shall be limited to one contiguous interior area of not more than 100 square feet. 
c.  Activity controls. 
(1)  Sales. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises. 
(2)  Transfer of goods. There shall be no goods, products or commodities received on the premises intended for resale or delivery to customers except by U.S. Mail or parcel service. 
(3)  Personal services. There shall be no activities on the premises that are associated with personal service occupations such as a barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities. 
(4)  Manufacturing. There shall be no manufacturing, assembly or fabrication of products on the premises conducted as an occupation or commercial venture. 
(5)  Employees. There shall be no associates or employees on the premises other than other members of the family who reside on the premises. 
(6)  Outsiders and nonresidents on the premises. There shall be no nonresident persons on the premises in conjunction with the home office. 
(7)  Parking. There shall be no parking spaces provided or designated specifically for the home office. 
(8)  Signs. Wall signs on the property shall be limited to one sign no larger than one square foot in area. 
(9)  Lights. There shall be no exterior lighting of the building or property that is not in character with a residential neighborhood. 
3.37.02.  Residential business. 
a.  Permitted activities. If approved as a special use, any of the following group of activities may be engaged in by persons who reside on the premises of the residential business and who are appropriately qualified and licensed, including business licenses where required: 
(1)  Medical or professional. This shall include activities normally practiced by members of the medical and legal professions, designers and consultants in a variety of fields such as architecture, engineering and accounting. 
(2)  Artistic. This group shall include activities such as teaching, creation and production by professional artists, sculptors, craftspeople (craftmakers), musicians, writers and others who produce work on the premises for individual purchases, as differentiated from mass production or manufacturing. Other than these artistic endeavors, there shall be no manufacturing, assembly or fabrication of products on the premises conducted as an occupation or commercial venture. 
(3)  Business. This includes commercial trade activities such as those conducted by a manufacturer's representative or telephone salesperson, but not involving the delivery of goods or services directly to customers on the premises. 
(4)  Family day care home. For the purposes of this section, a family day care home is treated separately and is not considered a residential business. 
b.  Limitations on size and location. 
(1)  The floor area devoted to the residential business must not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit or 500 square feet (whichever is less). This limitation applies to the aggregate floor area of all areas devoted to the residential business, whether located within the dwelling or in an accessory structure. 
(2)  There shall be no activity or display associated with the residential business outside of any building or structure that is not normally associated with a residential environment. 
c.  Activity controls. 
(1)  Sales. There shall be no exchange of merchandise of any kind on the premises except for those products produced on the premises as a direct result of the residential business. 
(2)  Transfer of goods. There shall be no reshipment of any goods, products or commodities received on the premises. 
(3)  Personal services. There shall be no activities on the premises that are associated with personal service occupations such as a barber shop, beauty shop, hairdresser or similar activities unless specifically permitted as part of the special use approval. 
(4)  Employees. There shall be no associates or employees on the premises other than other members of the family who reside on the premises. 
(5)  Outsiders and nonresidents on the premises. There shall not be more than two nonresident persons on the premises at the same time in conjunction with the residential business whether they are students, clients, patients or customers. 
(6)  Parking. There shall be no parking spaces provided or designated specifically for the residential business. 
(7)  Signs. Wall signs on the property shall be limited to one sign no larger than one square foot in area. 
(8)  Lights. There shall be no exterior lighting of the building or property that is not in character with a residential neighborhood. 
(9)  Hours of Operation. The residential business shall not be open to the public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. each day except Sunday. On Sunday, the residential business shall not be open before 11:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 8, 9, 5-19-03) 
Section 3.38. - Hotel or motel. 
3.38.01.  Minimum lot size. Every lot containing a hotel or motel shall have an area of at least two acres. 
3.38.02.  Public safety access. Every hotel or motel building where guests are lodged must have a 25-foot wide corridor surrounding the building for nonexclusive access by public safety vehicles. The corridor must be separated from the exterior of the building by at least 20 feet, but not more than 50 feet. 
3.38.03.  Amenities for long-term stay. If any unit available for occupancy by a guest within the hotel or motel contains cooking facilities, the hotel or motel shall provide a swimming pool of adequate size to allow a diving area and meeting all requirements of the swimming pool code. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.39. - Manufactured home in R-2 district. 
3.39.01.  Types of manufactured homes allowed in the R-2 district. A manufactured home qualifying as a class A single-family dwelling is permitted by right, when meeting the following requirements, while a manufactured home that qualifies as a class B single-family dwelling must meet the following requirements and be approved as a special use on the property. 
3.39.02.  Minimum requirements for all manufactured homes in the R-2 district. A manufactured home must be placed on tract of land in R-2 consisting of five acres or more and where there is no other principal building of any kind or nature located on the premises. It shall be a distance of at least 50 feet from any public street right-of-way or property line, and shall be placed approximately parallel to an adjoining street. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.40. - Manufacturing and fabrication as accessory use. 
If undertaken as an accessory use to an office or commercial use permitted by right, the manufacturing or fabrication activity may occupy no more than 25 percent of the gross floor area or 1,000 square feet (whichever is less). All products manufactured or fabricated on the premises must be sold on the premises as a retail activity. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.41. - Mixed-use dwelling. 
Dwellings located in a building that also contains nonresidential uses, such as shops or offices, may not occupy 50 percent or more of the gross floor area of the building. The dwelling units may be located on any of the floors of the building, including the ground floor. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.42. - Night watchman residence. 
A residence for a night watchman, otherwise allowed as an accessory use to a business or industrial operation, may be either of the following: 
a.  A class A or class B single-family detached dwelling; or 
b.  Located within a commercial or industrial structure. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.43. - Outdoor display. 
3.43.01. Outdoor display of merchandise or goods. Merchandise or goods may be on display outdoors for the purpose of customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers only as follows: 
a.  The following merchandise or goods may be located in outdoor display areas on a permanent basis (where the use is otherwise permitted): 
(1)  Motorized vehicles and trailer-style campers that are in good running condition free from exterior damage or substantial wear. 
(2)  Power boats and sailboats. 
(3)  Manufactured homes and utility buildings. 
(4)  Plant nursery items. 
(5)  Light building materials such as lumber, patio pavers and decorative stone; yard furniture such as benches, swings and bird baths; and yard maintenance materials such as fertilizer, mulch, straw and seed. 
All lots used for permanent outdoor display shall have a permanent sales structure (having a certificate of occupancy) on the lot, except that the merchandise or goods listed in subparagraphs (1), (2) and (3) may be displayed on any vacant lot zoned CG and within the Fairburn Road Revitalization Area for lots fronting on Fairburn Road and lying north of Hospital Drive and south of Bankhead Highway. 
b.  If otherwise authorized for temporary or permanent display, merchandise and goods may be located in outdoor display areas, but only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. at any location which is: (i) within the CBD zoning district, or (ii) an outdoor flea market in any zone. 
c.  Except for the goods listed in paragraph a., all outdoor display of merchandise or goods shall be conducted on a temporary basis associated with special sales promotions. Such display shall be for a period not to exceed two weeks, and shall not occur more often than three times per year, and shall require a permit from the planning and zoning department. 
d.  Merchandise or goods on display outdoors must be located outside of any street right-of-way or at least 20 feet from the driving lane, whichever is greater. 
e.  Trailers and tractor-trailers may not be used to hold other displayed goods outdoors. 
3.43.02. Outdoor display area exempt from restrictions with screening. Any outdoor area where merchandise or goods are displayed for customer selection or direct sale, but which is permanently screened by a fence or freestanding wall at least six feet in height shall not be considered an outdoor display area. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-03-03, § 1, 2-3-03; Ord. No. O-2012-16, § 1(Exh. A), 4-16-12; Ord. No. O-2015-2, § 1 , 1-7-15) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2012-16, § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 16, 2012, amended App. A, § 3.43 title to read as herein set out. Former App. A, § 3.43 pertained to outdoor display areas. 
Section 3.44. - Outdoor storage. 
The storage of goods, material, merchandise, vehicles, portable on-demand storage units with more than 100 square feet of floor space, shipping containers and tractor trailers not otherwise on display for customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers, where the use is otherwise permitted, is limited as follows: 
3.44.01.  Outdoor storage in commercial zoning districts and commercial base zones. 
a.  Generally. In commercial zoning districts and commercial base zones, outside storage of materials is only permitted as a special use, and must be located in the rear yard. In addition, the outdoor storage area must be screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than eight feet in height. Trailers and tractor-trailers shall not be used for outdoor storage. 
b.  Exception for storage of plant materials and donated used goods. A maximum of four trailers per lot may be utilized exclusively for the purpose of storing plant materials such as mulch, straw and seed. Additionally, one trailer per lot may be utilized exclusively for the purpose of collection of donated used goods. Such trailers may be placed in any yard on the property. Trailers used exclusively for these purposes shall be exempt from the requirement imposed by this section to have a special land use permit. 
3.44.02.  Outdoor storage in the IL and IH zoning districts. In the IL light industrial and IH heavy industrial zoning districts, any storage use operated as a principal use or accessory use on a property shall be contained entirely within a building or shall be screened from view by an opaque fence or free-standing wall no less than eight feet in height. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 2, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-2012-16, § 1(Exh. A), 4-16-12) 
Section 3.45. - Personal care homes. 
A personal care home of any type (family, group or congregate) in a residential zoning district shall be at least 1,000 feet from any other personal care home (of any type) in the same or any other zoning district. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.46. - Private use heliport. 
If approved as a special use, a private use heliport shall meet the following minimum standards: 
3.46.01.  Compliance with FAA guidelines. The development of a private use heliport shall be in accordance with the guidelines specified by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
3.46.02.  Takeoff and landing area. 
a.  Private use heliports shall, as a minimum, have a takeoff and landing area 1 and one-half times the overall length of the largest helicopter expected to use the facility. The surface of the area shall be grassed, paved or treated as may be required to minimize dust or blowing debris. 
b.  The owner of a private use heliport shall erect a safety barrier around the peripheral area surrounding the takeoff and landing area. The safety barrier shall be a fence, wall or hedge no less than three feet in height and fully enclosed with a self-locking gate. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.47. - Solid waste transfer stations and junkyards in IH. 
No solid waste transfer station or junkyard can be approved as a special use in the IH heavy industrial district if the property lies within 1,000 feet of a residential zoning district, or within 500 feet of a commercial zoning district or O-I office-institutional district. All junkyards shall be enclosed by an eight-foot high opaque fence. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.48. - Special outdoor events. 
Every special outdoor event on a property shall require approval of a permit by the zoning official and shall comply with the following: 
3.48.01  Special outdoor events; frequency and duration. 
a.  A special outdoor event shall not last longer than 15 days, and may not occur more often than four times in any calendar year on the same property, except on any developed non-residential lot having more than 5,000 parking spaces. 
b.  Any two special outdoor events on the same property must be separated by at least 30 consecutive days, except on any developed non-residential lot having more than 5,000 parking spaces. 
3.48.02  Special outdoor events; requirements. 
a.  Adequate parking and traffic maneuvering space must be located on the same property as the special event. 
b.  Evidence of liability insurance in an amount acceptable to the zoning official shall be submitted as part of the application for permit approval. 
c.  Signage proposed for the special event must be specified and approved as a part of the permit approval. 
d.  The zoning official may impose special stipulations of approval, including but not limited to the requirement to hire adequate security personnel and personnel to direct traffic. 
3.48.03.  Additional regulations for mobile food vendors. Mobile food vendors shall operate only with approval of a special outdoor event permit. In addition to the other requirements of section 3.48, the requirements of this subsection shall apply. 
a.  Definitions. 
Hours of Operation: Hours of operation shall mean the time period from 7:00 a.m. to 11:59 p.m. each day. 
Mobile food vending unit: Mobile food vending unit shall mean any motorized vehicle designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is peddled, vended, sold for sale or given away. 
Permitted locations: Mobile food vending units are allowed to operate on improved property only within the following specific locations and zoning districts: 
1.  Private property in the following zoning districts and base zones: CG (general commercial); CN (neighborhood commercial), CBD (central business district), IL (light industrial), and IH (heavy industrial). 
2.  The following specific locations: 
(a)  Developed private property with a current certificate of occupancy. The project site must be in active status as verified by the city building official. 
(b)  On property owned or leased by the city, when the food is served during an event that is sanctioned and/or approved by the city. 
The city zoning official will verify that all proposed locations for vendor units meet the standards for the zoning district. All privately owned permitted locations approved for the placement and operation of any mobile food vending units must maintain a minimum distance of 100 feet from any building housing a stationary licensed eating and drinking establishment. 
b.  Business license requirement. 
1.  The person or business entity owning or operating a mobile vending unit shall not operate those mobile vending units within the city at any permitted location unless and until such person or business entity has obtained a business license from the city. 
2.  Prior to the issuance of a city business license, the person applying for a business license under this article must show compliance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Each mobile food vending unit which will be engaged in the selling of cooked or prepared food must be licensed by the State of Georgia Health Department. A copy of the license of each mobile vending unit to be operated within the city must be submitted with the business license application. 
(b)  Each mobile vending unit that will be operated in the city must have a current inspection by the health department which must be conspicuously posted on the mobile vending unit. A copy of the current inspection of each mobile vending unit to be operated within the city must be submitted with the business license application. 
3.  That a mobile vending unit is licensed by the health department does not guarantee that the city will issue it a business license or that the city will approve the mobile vending unit for any permitted locations. 
c.  Permitted location application. 
1.  Either after receipt of a business license from the city or contemporaneously with the application for a business license, each mobile vending unit must obtain approval for each permitted location at which it intends to operate. To obtain such approval, the owner or operator of each such mobile vending unit to be operated in the city must submit an application for permitted location which requires the following information: 
(a)  The applicant shall complete and submit all information required by the application form supplied by the city. 
(b)  A copy of either the business license issued by the city or a pending application for a business license with the city. If a copy of the application is submitted, copies of all attachments must also be submitted. 
(c)  A list of all locations at which the applicant wants to operate a mobile vending unit. 
(d)  A location plan of each permitted location at which the mobile vending unit wants to operate that has been prepared by a surveyor licensed by the State of Georgia. That location plan must identify where the mobile food vending unit will be located. Each such plan shall be no smaller than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches. Each such plan shall illustrate the distance measured from the mobile vendor unit to the building location of the nearest established eating and drinking establishments. 
(e)  A written approval from the property owner of record for such occupancy. 
(f)  A written statement that the location contains hardened treated surface and designated parking spaces for unit and patrons or customers. 
(g)  A signed affidavit from the applicant that the mobile vending unit will not transport alcoholic beverages to the permitted location and will not sell or give alcoholic beverages at the permitted location to any of its patrons or customers. 
d.  Requirements and restrictions. Failure of an owner or operator of a mobile vending unit to abide by the following requirements and restrictions shall constitute a violation of this section: 
1.  A mobile vending unit shall operate only during the hours of operation. Operation of a mobile vending unit outside of the hours of operation shall be a violation of this section. 
2.  A mobile vending unit shall not operate at any location that is considered to be a permitted location unless and until that mobile vending unit is approved to operate at that location by the city. To be approved for any permitted location, each mobile vending unit must submit an application on forms provided by the city. 
3.  Any mobile vending unit which begins operating at a permitted location without securing all permits shall be in violation of this section. 
4.  A mobile vending unit shall not arrive to operate at a permitted location more than 30 minutes prior to the time it intends to operate or prior to 6:30 a.m., whichever is later. 
5.  A mobile vending unit shall not stay at a permitted location more than 30 minutes after it is done operating or later than 12:30 a.m. on any day, whichever is earlier. 
6.  Any semi-permanent structure used and/or associated with the mobile vending operation shall also be removed from the site during hours of non-operation. 
7.  A vending unit shall use only permitted signage and shall not use any prohibited signage. 
8.  Mobile vending units shall not utilize any temporary connections to potable water. All water used by a mobile vending unit shall be provided an internal tank within that mobile vending unit. The mobile vending unit shall also not replenish that internal tank at the permitted location. 
9.  All electricity to the mobile vending unit shall be from a generator or a main power supply via a portable cord that is in conformance with the electrical code of the city. 
10.  A mobile vending unit shall not make use of any outdoor cooking facilities. To the extent that cooking is done at a permitted location, it shall be done within the confines of the mobile vending unit. 
11.  A mobile vending unit shall not, at any time, utilize outdoor storage or devices to warm or refrigerate food with the exception of storage for disposable tableware. 
12.  A drive through shall not be used at any mobile vending unit. 
13.  A person operating a mobile vending unit shall not conduct business with or accept orders from any patrons or customers while such patrons or customers are in their motor vehicles. 
14.  The area within which a mobile vending unit is operating shall, at all times, be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubble and debris. To that end, each mobile vending unit must provide a trash or garbage receptacle in which patrons or customers may place their litter or garbage. The receptacle shall be within ten feet of the mobile vending unit. The operator of the mobile vending unit must remove this litter or garbage from the permitted location when he or she leaves the permitted location. 
15.  A mobile vending unit shall not use amplified music of any type. This restriction shall not apply to the operation of a vehicle operated solely as an ice cream truck and which does not sell any other type of food. 
16.  A mobile vending unit shall not use temporary or portable lighting outside of that necessary to illuminate the inside of the unit and the serving area of the unit. 
17.  All of the following shall be posted on each mobile vending unit in a conspicuous place: 
(a)  The current business tax receipt; 
(b)  A list of the locations at which is the mobile vending unit is permitted by the city to operate; 
(c)  A copy of the business license issued by the City of Douglasville. 
18.  A mobile vending unit operating at or participating in any event sponsored, authorized, or approved by the city shall pay the registration fees set forth or required by the Code of Ordinances, City of Douglasville. Such fees shall be paid prior to the event. 
19.  A person who operates a mobile food establishment shall not go into a park owned or operated by the city, the county, or the United States of America to sell, offer for sale, or display a food item, unless the person's activity is authorized by a rental agreement or written permission of the director of the parks and recreation department of the city or the city manager. 
20.  Parking requirements and restrictions: 
(a)  Mobile food vendors shall secure a minimum of two dedicated parking spaces for customers utilizing their services. 
(b)  Parking spaces shall be marked as required by zoning regulations. 
(c)  Parking spaces shall meet the size requirements established by the city. 
(d)  Mobile food vendors shall not sell to customers parked in areas designated as public rights-of-way. 
e.  Enforcement. The provisions of this article may be enforced through the city's code enforcement procedures or as otherwise authorized in this Code and may be pursued by appropriate remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction. The remedies that the city may pursue for a violation of this article include: 
1.  Any violation of this article may be punished as provided for in section 2-17 of the Code of Ordinances, Douglasville, Georgia; 
2.  Revocation, suspension or probation of the business license or permit of the owner or operator of the mobile vending unit found in violation of this article; 
3.  Refusal of the city to renew the business license or permit of the owner or operator of the mobile vending unit found in violation of this section, or to grant a new a license or permit. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-36, § 1, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 3, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-67, § 6, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-2014-44, § 1, 8-18-14) 
Section 3.49. - Temporary sales office for a subdivision. 
A temporary sales office, where otherwise allowed, shall meet the following criteria: 
3.49.01.  Temporary sales office; location. The temporary sales office shall be located on a lot within an area that has received final plat approval and has been recorded with the clerk to the superior court. 
3.49.02.  Temporary sales office; restrictions. 
a.  Sales shall be limited to the lots and buildings within the subdivision where the temporary sales office is located, as defined by the recorded final plat. 
b.  The temporary sales office may be a manufactured home or industrialized building. 
3.49.03.  Temporary sales office; removal. The temporary sales office shall be removed within 30 days after certificates of occupancy or connections to permanent power have been approved on 90 percent of the lots in the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.50. - Transmission towers and antennae. 
3.50.01.  Purposes. The purposes of this section are to: 
a.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennae to serve the residents and businesses of the City of Douglasville; 
b.  Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and antennae through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
c.  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
d.  Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas; 
e.  Maximize use of any new and existing communication towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; 
f.  Maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
g.  Encourage and promote the location of new communication towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
3.50.02.  Permitted uses. 
a.  Self-supporting communication towers. Upon receipt of an appropriate building permit, self-supporting communication towers may be located in the following zoning districts of the city: 
(1)  Light industrial (IL) and heavy industrial (IH) zoning districts as a use by right; provided however, such towers satisfy all of the conditions under "general requirements" and "shared use" of this section and do not exceed 150 feet (45.72 meters) in height; 
(2)  General commercial (CG), neighborhood commercial (CN), shopping center district (CSC), office-distribution (O-D), office-institutional (O-I), as a use by right; provided however, such towers satisfy all of the conditions under "general requirements" and "shared use" of this section and do not exceed the following height limitations: 
(a)  For a single user, no more than 70 feet (21.34 meters) in height; 
(b)  For two users, no more than 100 feet (30.48 meters) in height; and 
(c)  For three or more users, no more than 150 feet (45.72 meters) in height. 
(3)  General commercial (CG), neighborhood commercial (CN), shopping center district (CSC), office-distribution (O-D), office-institutional (O-I), light industrial (IL), heavy industrial (IH), design concept development (DCD) zoning districts with a height variance when such towers do exceed the tower heights permitted as in subparagraphs (1) and (2) above; provided however, such towers also satisfy all of the requirements under "general requirements" and "shared use" of this section. 
(4)  Central business (CBD), single-family detached residential (R-2), single family, duplex, and triplex residential (R-3), single-family, duplex, triplex and quadraplex residential (R-4), single-family attached apartment residential (R-6), single-family detached townhouse residential (R-6-T), zoning districts as a special use: provided however, such towers shall not exceed 60 feet (18.29 meters) in height and shall also satisfy all the requirements under "general requirements" of this section. 
(5)  Guy towers shall not be permitted within the central business (CBD) zoning district. 
b.  Rooftop towers and antennae. Rooftop mounted communications towers and antennae may be located on any nonresidential buildings and alternative tower structures in the city so long as: 
(1)  The setback for such tower or antenna meets the setback requirements under the general requirements subsection below [3.50.03], and the setback requirements of the zoning district in which the tower or antenna is located; 
(2)  The existing freestanding nonresidential structure other than a tower on which such tower or antenna will be placed is 50 feet (15.24 meters) in height or greater and the tower and antenna will add no more than 20 feet total to the height of said existing structure; 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower; 
(4)  No signs or illumination are permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the zoning official may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views; and 
(5)  The number and location of antennae, communication towers or other receiving or transmitting devices located on a single structure is not excessive and does not adversely affect adjacent properties and views. 
c.  Prohibitions. No new cell may be established if there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the search area that the new cell is to serve. For the purpose of this section, the search area is defined as the grid for the placement of the antenna. 
d.  Unified tower arrays. For any unified tower array, the height of the tallest tower within the array shall be considered the height of the array. Spacing of towers within the same array is not required. Measurements for separation distances to other towers and for purposes of setbacks shall be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the array; for all purposes other than tower height and spacing of towers within an array, each tower within a unified tower array must comply with all requirements of this section. 
3.50.03.  General requirements. The requirements set forth in this subsection shall govern the location and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennae, governed by this section. 
a.  Building codes: safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of communication towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communication towers at least once every three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the zoning official. 
b.  Regulatory compliance. 
(1)  All towers and antennae must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennae. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the communications towers and antennae governed by this section shall bring such communications towers and antennae into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. 
(2)  Tower owners shall provide documentation showing that each communication tower is in compliance with all federal requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
c.  Security. Communication towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet (1.83 meters) in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, the zoning official or the governing body may waive such requirements for alternative tower structures. 
d.  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the zoning official may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
e.  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower. 
f.  Visual impact. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design. 
(5)  Towers shall be the minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower supported antenna, and shall be freestanding where the negative visual effect is less than would be created by use of a guyed tower. 
g.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property and shall be as follows: 
(1)  For towers 150 feet (45.72 meters) tall or less, a buffer area no less than six feet (1.83 meters) wide shall commence at the property line. 
(2)  For towers more than 150 feet (45.72 meters) tall, a buffer area not less than ten feet (3.05 meters) wide shall be provided at the property line, except that no vegetated buffer shall be required atop the ground system for any transmission tower. 
(3)  The buffer zone is to consist of materials of a variety which can be expected to grow to form a densely vegetated area at least five feet (1.52 meters) in height within two years of planting. 
(4)  Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be of a kind that would not exceed 20 feet (6.10 meters) in height or would not affect the stability of the guys, should they be uprooted, and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission building or security facilities and staff maintenance. 
(5)  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost, provided however, that no vegetation other than grass shall be required atop the ground system for any transmission tower. 
(6)  In lieu of these standards, the zoning official may allow use of an alternate detailed plan and specifications for landscape and screening, including plantings, fences, walls and other features designed to screen and buffer towers and accessory uses. The plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening achieved by the provisions above, except as lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes and/or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the zoning official. 
h.  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street. 
i.  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
(1)  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
(2)  Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area as long as all of the other siting, setback, separation and general requirements of this section are met. The minimum distance between a tower and another principal use located on the same lot for a monopole or lattice tower shall be the greater of 20 percent of the tower height or 25 feet (7.62 meters), and for a guy tower shall be equal to the height of the tower. This separation is required to assure compatibility of land uses and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
(3)  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
j.  Tower lot size, setbacks and separations. 
(1)  Towers may occupy a parcel as a principal use meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(2)  The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property, or public street. Such setback shall be sufficient to comply with all of the following: 
(a)  Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required in this subsection; 
(b)  Provide a setback of 50 feet (15.24 meters) between any safe-fall tower and all property lines other than those abutting residential property or property containing any existing or planned place of public assembly, or any public or private street; 
(c)  Provide a setback of 50 feet (15.24 meters) plus the height of the tower between any safe-fall or non-safe-fall tower and all property lines abutting residential property or property containing any existing or planned place of public assembly, or any public or private street; and 
(d)  Meet the minimum yard and setback requirements of the zoning district in which the tower is located. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
(5)  All structures and uses associated with the transmission use other than the transmission tower shall be located to meet the setbacks required in the zoning district where the tower is to be located. To encourage and accommodate shared use of a tower, the zoning official may waive or reduce setback requirements by up to 50 percent to accommodate the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment at a tower site. 
(6)  No self-supporting communication tower shall be allowed within a 1,000-foot (304.80-meter) radius of an existing tower within a residential area; exceptionally, individual towers within a unified tower array may be closer than 1,000 feet to other towers within the same array. 
(7)  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard of a residential district. 
(8)  All self-supporting towers constructed after June 2, 1997, shall conform to the following minimum tower separation requirements: 
Table 3-1. Minimum Tower Separation Requirements. (English) 

 
Table 3-1A. Minimum Tower Separation Requirements. (Metric) 

 
3.50.04.  Shared use. All new towers shall be designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically practicable. 
a.  Once a new tower is approved, additional antennae and accompanying accessory uses may be added to it in accordance with the approved share plan if the zoning official finds that the standards of this section are met. 
b.  If a new tower is approved, the owner shall be required as conditions of approval, to: 
(1)  Record the letter of intent required for an application for a building permit under Appendix B: Development Code of the City Code of Ordinances in the deed records of the clerk of superior court; 
(2)  Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential shared use applicant; 
(3)  Negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties; and 
(4)  Allow shared use where the third party seeking such use agrees in writing to pay reasonable, pro rata charges for sharing, including all charges necessary to modify the tower and transmitters to accommodate shared use, but not total tower reconstruction, and to observe whatever technical requirements are necessary to allow shared use without creating interference. 
c.  Willful, knowing failure of an owner whose tower was approved after the effective date of this section, to comply with the requirement of a. through d. above shall be grounds for withholding approval of any application by such owner for a building permit or special use permit for any tower or antenna. 
d.  Such conditions shall run with the land and be binding on subsequent purchasers of the tower site. 
3.50.05. Removal; intra-site relocation. 
a.  Removal of antennae and towers. All towers and antennae shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such towers. If upon inspection by the building official such tower is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance. In the event such tower or antenna is not brought into compliance within 30 days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the tower or antenna to be removed. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that communication towers and antenna not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the tower or antenna removed regardless of the owners' or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
b.  Intra-site relocation. Any approved or legal non-conforming transmission tower may be relocated within the same site, so long as all requirements of this section, including but not limited to those for required setbacks, are met or compliance is achieved by means of variance. If the height of any such relocated tower is not increased, the tower shall not require new approval for height. In addition to a building permit and an electrical permit, all intra-site relocations shall require approval of the zoning official for compliance with the terms of this section; the applicant shall submit a survey of the proposed relocation with any request for intra-site relocation. 
3.50.06.  Abandoned towers. 
a.  Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned antenna or tower and the owner of the property where the tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such a tower or antenna. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned communication towers and antenna are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the communication tower or antenna removed regardless of the owners' or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
b.  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this section as if such tower or antenna was a new tower or antenna. 
3.50.07.  Pre-existing towers/nonconforming uses. 
a.  All communications towers properly permitted and operative on June 2, 1997 shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with this zoning ordinance. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on an existing communication tower shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
b.  A communication tower that has received city approval in the form of either a building permit or special use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing tower so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
3.50.08.  Public property. Antennae or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the city shall be exempt from the requirements of this section, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-13, §§ 4, 5, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 10, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 7—10, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-2015-11, §§ 1—6 , 4-20-15) 
Section 3.51. - Veterinarian. 
A veterinarian clinic or office located in the O-I office-institutional district is not allowed to provide boarding of animals or outdoor kennels or runs. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.52. - Yard sales. 
3.52.01.  Yard sales; defined. A yard sale is a temporary event involving the sale of used household belongings by an individual at his principal residence or by a group of residents combining such items for a group yard sale at one of their principal residences. 
3.52.02.  Yard sales; frequency and duration. A yard sale may be held no more often than four times in a calendar year on the same property, with each individual sale lasting no more than three consecutive days. 
3.52.03.  Yard sales; restrictions. 
a.  All merchandise must be the property of those holding the sale and not be purchased for the purpose of resale. 
b.  See also the "sign regulations" division of this Code for restrictions on signs related to temporary events. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.53. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-91 , § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2017, repealed § 3.53, which pertained to building exterior finish and derived from Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, adopted Dec. 4, 2000; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 6, adopted April 19, 2004; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 11, adopted Nov. 1, 2004; Ord. No. O-08-014, § 1, adopted March 17, 2008; Ord. No. O-2010-3, § 2, adopted Feb. 15, 2010; and Ord. No. O-2013-55, § 3, adopted Dec. 31, 2013. 
Section 3.54. - Pawn shops. 
For pawn shops initially licensed after July 1, 2006, no pawn shop shall be located closer than 2,500 feet to another pawn shop provided that title pawn shops shall be exempt from this requirement, and shall not be considered in the proximity measurement for other pawn shops. After July 1, 2006, every applicant for a new pawn shop occupation tax registration shall submit with his application, a survey verifying that this distance requirement has been met. 
(Ord. No. O-06-14, § 3, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-2012-15, § 3, 4-16-12) 
Section 3.55. - Automotive uses—Other. 
All commercial and industrial automotive uses, including but not limited to commercial automobile parking lots, automobile service stations, automotive sales and service centers, automotive rental agencies, automotive repair shops, and automotive tune-up shops, are prohibited within the historic districts. 
(Ord. No. O-07-22, § 4, 3-19-07) 
Section 3.56. - Charter schools (privately owned). 
Charter school means a public school that is operating under the terms of a charter pursuant to O.C.G.A. 20-2-2060 et seq. Any charter school which is owned by any entity other than the State of Georgia or a political subdivision shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-07-22, § 4, 3-19-07) 
Section 3.57. - Multiple vendor businesses. 
All indoor flea markets, and all indoor commercial businesses with multiple vendors of used goods housed under one structure, shall have a central cashier area where payment for all goods sold shall be made through a single licensee; no sales shall be transacted with payments made directly from any buyer to an individual vendor. 
(Ord. No. O-07-22, § 4, 3-19-07) 
Section 3.58. - Tattoo studios and body piercing establishments. 
For tattoo studios and body piercing establishments initially licensed after February 16, 2009, no such establishment shall be located closer than 2,500 feet to another such establishment, as measured by a straight line connecting the closest edges of the parcels on which each such establishment would be located. After February 16, 2009, every applicant for a new occupation tax registration for such an establishment shall submit, with his application, a survey verifying that this distance requirement has been met. 
(Ord. No. O-09-003, § 2(3.55), 2-16-09) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. O-09-003, adopted Feb. 16, 2009, enacted provisions to be designated as § 3.55. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 3.55, said new provisions have been redesignated as § 3.58. 
Section 3.59. - Bail bondsmen. 
No bail bondsman office or location shall be located on a lot which is closer than 2,500 feet to the lot of another bail bondsman office or location, except that any bail bondsman office or location located on a lot fronting on Earl D. Lee Boulevard and lying at least 200 feet from Fairburn Road shall be exempted from this restriction. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-20, § 1, 6-21-10; Ord. No. O-2013-43, § 1, 10-21-13) 
Sec. 3.60. - Hunting. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot for sport or attempt to shoot for sport any animal anywhere within the city except within a permitted hunting area approved by the city by special land use permit. Special land use permits for hunting shall be valid for not more than 12 months in duration unless expressly granted for a longer period specified in the approval. Special land use permits for hunting may be granted for aggregate tracts of unoccupied property not smaller than 50 acres. Every application for a hunting permit shall be accompanied by a map of the property, showing the boundaries of the proposed hunting area. The firing of firearms for target practice and other related activities is likewise authorized by a special land use permit for hunting. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-4, § 1, 1-22-13) 
Sec. 3.61. - Donation bins. 
Any lot zoned CG, CN or CSC of at least four acres and having a principal building may also have not more than two donation bins as a permitted accessory use, so long as the presence of such donation bins does not reduce the available parking to less than that required by ordinance. Any lot zoned CG, CN or CSC and having less than four acres and having a principal building may have not more than one donation bin as a permitted accessory use, so long as the presence of such donation bin does not reduce the available parking to less than that required by ordinance. Any donation bins shall be located within the front or side yard, outside the right of way and any required buffer, and not less than ten feet from the closest edge of pavement. No donation bin may be taller than eight feet in height, nor wider or deeper than four feet. Every donation bin shall be emptied of donated goods at least monthly, and every donation bin shall be marked with the schedule for pick-up of goods. Every donation bin shall be maintained in good working order, without sharp edges or other hazards to the public, and with information printed on the exterior showing contact information for the owner and pick-up schedules for the bin. 
( Ord. No. O-2017-8, § 1 , 2-20-17; Ord. No. O-2019-5 , § 5, 1-22-19) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-8, § 1 , adopted Feb. 20, 2017, amended § 3.61 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 3.61 pertained to mobile home not allowed and derived from Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, adopted Dec. 4, 2000. 
DIVISION 3. - PROHIBITED USES 

Section 3.62. - Noxious manufacturing or industrial activities not allowed. 
3.62.01.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous products. A manufacturing or industrial activity that produces any of the following as products or byproducts of the manufacturing process is prohibited: 
a.  Caustic or corrosive acids. 
b.  Chlorine or other noxious gasses. 
c.  Explosives. 
d.  Fertilizer or glue. 
e.  Products involving hair or fur. 
3.62.02.  Prohibited noxious or hazardous processes. A manufacturing or industrial use that involves any of the following processes is prohibited: 
a.  Tanning or finishing of leather or other hides, except taxidermy. 
b.  The disposal of hazardous waste. 
c.  Petroleum refining. 
d.  Processing of sauerkraut, vinegar or yeast. 
e.  Rendering or refining of fats and oils. 
f.  Explosives, fireworks and ammunition for small arms. Establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing explosives or utilizing explosives as a component of their manufacturing process such as those manufacturing fireworks, or ammunition for small arms or other industrial processes requiring explosives. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-2019-5 , § 6, 1-22-19) 
DIVISION 4. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Section 3.71. - Purpose of division 4. 
3.71.01.  Purpose. This division sets out the requirements and restrictions that apply to all signs that may be located on properties in the city. 
3.71.02.  Objectives of sign regulations. 
a.  The purpose of the sign ordinance of the city is to recognize that although signs and advertising are proper and necessary uses of private property, are a means of personal free expression, and constitute a legitimate business entitled to the protection of the law, such signs and advertising should be reasonably regulated in the interest of public safety and welfare, and aesthetic concerns by the establishment of standards for the location, size, district, illumination, number, construction and maintenance of all signs and advertising structures in the city. 
b.  In order to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all its citizens, the city council hereby determines that the public health, safety and welfare, and to eliminate visual clutter and blight, require the adoption of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 3.72. - General regulations. 
3.72.01.  Applicability. 
a.  The requirements of this division shall apply to all properties, regardless of zoning district. 
b.  The requirements of this division shall apply to all signs that are visible from a street, public right-of-way or property in public ownership. 
3.72.02.  Sites near state, U.S. or interstate highways. All signs located on sites within 660 feet of or visible from any state, U.S. or interstate numbered highway shall conform to the state outdoor advertising law (O.C.G.A. section 32-6-70 et seq.) and shall meet all federal and state requirements necessary to obtain a permit under such code. In instances where the sign controls of this division are more restrictive, the terms of this division shall apply. 
3.72.03.  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs shall be prohibited: 
a.  Signs imitating warning signals; signs displaying lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; signs using words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs. 
b.  Signs with electric or other lights flashing in series, lines or rows; signs lit with liquid crystal display (LCD) or otherwise animated; signs lit with neon, except in the historic district. 
c.  Flashing, blinking, or fluctuating signs located within 25 feet of any road right-of-way; signs with blue, red or yellow lights. 
d.  Signs attached to trees or utility poles or boxes; signs painted on or otherwise attached to rocks or other natural objects; signs, other than those placed by a local, state or federal government, located within the public street right-of-way or within 12 feet of the curb or closest edge of the pavement of any public street. 
e.  Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road by a person of normal hearing. 
f.  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; signs attached in any manner to any fire escape. 
g.  Signs placed in or obstructing the view of marshland. 
h.  Banners attached to anything other than a structure. 
3.72.04.  Temporary signs. 
a.  Generally. Temporary signs are: flags in quantities of more than two, pennants, banners attached to structures, fringe, twirling, A-frame, sandwich-type, sidewalk or curb-type signs, balloons, streamers, portable display signs, air- or gas-filled figures, and other similar temporary signs. The zoning official shall issue permits for temporary signs in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Setback. All temporary signs shall be set back no less than 12 feet from any street right-of-way line, property line, street pavement, curb or gutter. 
(2)  Maximum number of days, permits. Each temporary permit will be valid for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days. No 30-day permit may be issued within 60 days after the expiration of any other 30-day permit. No individual business in a planned commercial center shall be allowed to erect a portable sign or be issued such a permit. 
(3)  One temporary permit for a combination of the listed types of temporary sign may be issued if all the temporary signs are for a concurrent time period. The permit holder shall be responsible for the prompt and complete removal of such signs upon the expiration of any temporary permit. 
(4)  All temporary signs shall have the date it is first displayed written in the lower right-hand corner, if such sign fails to have the first display date written in the lower right-hand corner then it will be presumed that the sign has been displayed for the maximum 30-day period. 
b.  Portable display signs. An applicant for a temporary permit to erect a portable display sign shall, in addition to any fee required, file a bond issued by a licensed surety company in the state or a cash bond, in the amount of $500.00 to assure the prompt and complete removal of such signs by the permit holder within 48 hours of the expiration of such temporary permit. 
3.72.05.  Permanent subdivision signs. 
a.  Location, visibility. All permanent subdivision signs shall be no less than 12 feet from any street right-of-way line, and not more than 30 feet from the intersection of two streets. All signs shall be located on the side of the entrance to a subdivision, and no sign shall be placed inside any island between lanes of traffic within the right of way. No sign shall contain any reflective element. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this ordinance, no sign shall be located so as to obscure street visibility within 60 feet in any direction from the subdivision entrance for motorists exiting the subdivision. 
b.  Plans. Prints or drawings of the plans and specifications and structural details of construction shall be submitted to the building official and the zoning official for approval, prior to final plat approval, for any permanent subdivision sign. Plans conforming to the size and locations requirements of this ordinance shall be approved. 
c.  Maintenance. The city shall not be responsible to maintain any permanent subdivision sign within or outside of the street right-of-way. If a permanent subdivision sign within an island in the street right-of-way is allowed to become dilapidated, the city reserves the right to remove such sign. 
3.72.06.  Unused sign structures. No property shall contain any sign structure with the face removed, if the sign structure is designed to be internally lit or otherwise has wiring or mechanics exposed to the elements, except face removals of three days or less for purposes of repairs or replacement. No property shall contain any sign structure covered in whole or in part with cloth, canvas, plastic sheathing or other material for the purpose of obscuring the sign face or the location of a missing sign face. 
3.72.07.  Computation of sign area. In order to determine compliance with the maximum allowable sign areas permitted under this division, the area of a sign shall be considered the area of the sign structure unless otherwise stated. The area of a sign structure (for freestanding signs) and the area of a sign face (for building signs) shall be computed as follows: 
a.  Area of sign structure (for freestanding signs). 
(1)  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign face modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face but are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
(2)  Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face, sign face module, or sign structure shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face, sign face module, or sign structure. 

Sign Face Area Measurements 
(3)  For multi-faced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 45 degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one time from any angle. 
b.  Area of sign face (for building signs). 
(1)  The area of a sign face shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign face module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
(2)  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those portions contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign face module. 
(3)  For any sign on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 

Sign Structure Area Measurements 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 10—13, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-05-09, §§ 1, 2, 3-7-05; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 11, 12, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-07-16, §§ 1, 2, 2-19-07; Ord. No. O-08-016, § 1, 4-21-08; Ord. No. O-2015-20, § 1 , 5-18-15) 
Section 3.73. - Regulation of signs by land use. 
3.73.01.  Developed residential property. 
a.  High-density residential not included. 
(1)  Any developed property which is zoned high-density residential (attached residential at six units per acre density or greater), and is not located within the historic district, shall comply with the requirements of section 3.73.02. 
(2)  Any developed residential property which is located within the historic district, shall comply with the requirements of section 3.73.04. 
b.  Any developed residential property which is zoned other than high-density residential, and is not located within the historic district, may post only such signs as are authorized by this section, and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Freestanding signs, wall signs. Such property may contain not more than one freestanding sign or wall sign, the area of which may be not greater than 16 square feet: any freestanding sign shall be 12 feet in height or shorter and shall be set back so that their support members are located no closer than 12 feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the face is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Signs shall not project over property lines. Provided, however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. Except during a political election, all freestanding signs shall be monument signs. No fee and no permit are required for such freestanding signs. 
(2)  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain one standard informational sign, without a permit or fee, located so that the stake is not closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the placard is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Exceptionally, an unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
(3)  Permanent subdivision signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, if such property is located at the entrance to any residential subdivision, then such property may contain not more than one permanent subdivision sign. 
3.73.02.  Other developed property. For properties not located within the historic district, any developed residential property which is zoned high-density residential and any developed property which is zoned for any commercial, office, or industrial use may post only such signs as are authorized by this section. All signs not expressly authorized by this section are prohibited on such properties. Authorized signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Freestanding signs. Such property may contain one or more freestanding signs in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Number of signs, sign area. One freestanding sign, with sign area limited to the greater of 75 square feet or one square foot per linear foot of lot frontage not to exceed 300 square feet, shall be allowed for each street frontage. Exceptionally, any planned commercial center may have one freestanding sign with sign area limited to the greater of 100 square feet or one square foot per linear foot of lot frontage not to exceed 300 square feet, for each street frontage; no separate freestanding sign other than that permitted by this subsection will be allowed for an individual business in a planned commercial center. 
If the lot frontage for a lot not located in a planned commercial center is greater than 300 linear feet, then one additional freestanding sign with the same area limitations may be placed on that street frontage. If the street frontage for a planned commercial center is greater than 300 linear feet, then one additional freestanding sign with the same area limitations may be placed on that street frontage. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, no freestanding sign shall be closer than 250 feet to any other freestanding sign on any property, as measured from the closest points of each sign. Provided, however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs with faces of 16 square feet or less and 12 feet in height or shorter are allowed during a political election (between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate for a local or state election, or at any time within the 12 months immediately preceding a presidential election), and during such period there shall be no requirements for spacing between such signs nor for permits for the same. Provided further, until September 1, 2009, any developed lot zoned for commercial or office use and lying adjacent to Westmoreland Plaza or North Cherokee Boulevard, or for such lots adjacent to Highway 92 and lying west of Interstate Highway 20 and east of Plaza 92 Drive, may contain one more freestanding sign that is otherwise allowed by this ordinance. 
(2)  Reader boards, computation of area. Changeable reader boards which constitute no more than 50 percent of the total sign area of a freestanding sign and are contained wholly within a permanent freestanding sign shall not be considered in determining the maximum allowable sign area. 
(3)  Drive-through menu boards. In addition to any other freestanding signs authorized by this section, if such property contains a commercial or industrial building or structure where materials are delivered at a drive-through delivery point located other than on the front side of the building, then one additional freestanding sign per delivery point shall be allowed to be located on the property in the side or rear yard; no such sign shall exceed 32 square feet in area, nor eight feet in height. 
(4)  Encroachment, required setbacks. Freestanding signs may encroach into front and side yards provided that their support members are located no closer than 12 feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the face is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Signs shall not project over property lines. 
(5)  Height restrictions. The height of all freestanding signs at their highest point above the level of the ground shall not exceed twelve feet, and except during political elections, all such signs shall be monument signs; provided, however, that a sign located on property adjacent to or within 500 feet of a federal interstate highway may be any style of freestanding sign and may be 70 feet at its highest point; and except that any commercial lot fronting on the south side of Concourse Parkway may be any style of freestanding sign and may be 100 feet at its highest point. If the ground is lower than the level of the adjoining street pavement, then a sign may be raised so as to be no more than the maximum allowed height above the level of the pavement, the level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
b.  Wall signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, such property may contain one or more wall signs, provided that the total sign area for all wall signs on any wall frontage shall not exceed 25 percent of the total area of the wall on that frontage. 
c.  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain one standard informational sign, without a permit or fee, located so that the stake is not closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the placard is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Exceptionally, an unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
d.  Permanent subdivision signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, if any lot is located at the entrance to any subdivision, then that lot may contain not more than one permanent subdivision sign. 
e.  Directional signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, any such property may contain not more than two directional signs per street entrance. 
f.  Temporary signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, any such property may contain temporary signs as permitted by this division. 
g.  Billboards. In lieu of all freestanding signs authorized by subsection (1), any such property located within 500 feet of Interstate Highway 20 may contain one billboard which complies with the following: 
(1)  All portions of the face and support members of any billboard shall be located within 500 feet of Interstate Highway 20. 
(2)  All portions of the face and support members of any billboard shall be setback from all buildings, structures, and property lines at least 75 feet. 
(3)  Sign area. The sign area of any billboard shall not exceed 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length with or without trim. 
(4)  Illumination. All illuminated billboards shall use basemounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
(5)  Height above interstate grade. All billboards on property adjacent to the Interstate Highway 20 shall be a minimum of ten feet above the adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lowest portion of the sign face. 
(6)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of any billboard, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(7)  Location and number of signs. Only one billboard shall be allowed per lot. No billboard shall be placed on any lot which contains any freestanding sign. Billboards shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart measuring from the two closest points and only one sign face shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side-by-side or over and under) facing the same direction. 
(8)  Spacing on the interstate. Sign locations on property adjacent to the Interstate Highway 20 shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart, measuring from the two closest points. 
(9)  Spacing at interchanges. Only three signs shall be allowed per interchange adjacent to the interstate highway. All billboard at interstate highway interchanges are restricted to an area 1,200 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest exit/entrance ramp. 
(10)  Height. Billboards shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two billboards in the same location, back-to-back or in a "V" formation shall be the same height above the interstate surface. 
(11)  Marsh area prohibitions. No billboard shall be placed in or obstruct the view of marshland. 
3.73.03.  Vacant and undeveloped property. Any property which is not occupied on a regular basis and any property which is not developed property as defined by this division, whether inside or outside the historic district, may contain only one sign authorized by this section, except during an election period as provided herein. Such property that is also located within the historic district shall also comply with the requirements for that district. Vacant and undeveloped properties shall comply with the following requirements: 
a.  Freestanding signs. Such property may contain one or more freestanding signs in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Number of signs, sign area. One freestanding sign limited to 32 square feet of sign area is allowed with a permit. Provided, however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs with faces of 16 square feet or less and 12 feet in height or shorter are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, and permits shall not be required for these signs. 
(2)  Encroachment, required setbacks. Freestanding signs may encroach into front and side yards provided that their support members are located no closer than 12 feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the face is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Signs shall not project over property lines. 
(3)  Height restrictions. The height of any freestanding sign at its highest point above the level of the ground shall not exceed 12 feet at its highest point. Provided, however, if the ground is lower than the level of the adjoining street pavement, then a sign may be raised so as to be no more than 12 feet above the level of the pavement. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way as to provide additional sign height. 
b.  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain one standard informational sign, without a permit or fee, located so that the stake is not closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the placard is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Exceptionally, an unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
c.  Permanent subdivision signs. In lieu of any other sign authorized by this section, if such property is located at the entrance to any subdivision, then such property may contain not more than one permanent subdivision sign. 
d.  Billboards. In lieu of any other sign authorized by this section, any such property located within 500 feet of Interstate Highway 20 may contain one billboard, provided that: 
(1)  All portions of the face and support members of any billboard shall be located within 500 feet of Interstate Highway 20. 
(2)  All portions of the face and support members of any billboard shall be setback from all buildings, structures, and property lines at least 75 feet. 
(3)  Sign area. The sign area of any billboard shall not exceed 12 feet in height and 50 feet in length with or without trim. 
(4)  Illumination. All illuminated billboards shall use basemounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
(5)  Height above interstate grade. All billboards on property adjacent to the Interstate Highway 20 shall be a minimum of ten feet above the adjacent interstate pavement measuring from the lowest portion of the sign face. 
(6)  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of any billboard, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
(7)  Location and number of signs. Only one billboard shall be allowed per lot. No billboard shall be placed on any lot which contains any freestanding sign. Billboards shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart measuring from the two closest points and only one sign face shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back-to-back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two signs (side-by-side or over and under) facing the same direction. 
(8)  Spacing on the interstate. Sign locations on property adjacent to the Interstate Highway 20 shall be no less than 1,000 feet apart, measuring from the two closest points. 
(9)  Spacing at interchanges. Only three signs shall be allowed per interchange adjacent to the interstate highway. All billboards at interstate highway interchanges are restricted to an area 1,200 feet long beginning 500 feet from the point where the pavement widens on the main traveled way to accommodate the longest exit/entrance ramp. 
(10)  Height. Billboards shall not exceed 30 feet in height. Two billboards in the same location, back-to-back or in a "V" formation shall be the same height above the interstate surface. 
(11)  Marsh area prohibitions. No billboard shall be placed in or obstruct the view of marshland. 
3.73.04.  Historic District. 
a.  Generally. The Douglasville Historic District is identified and designated as that area within the city shown and identified on that certain map of the Douglasville Historic District, as now or hereafter amended, adopted by resolution of the city council. The Douglasville Historic District includes areas designated as historic sites and may include more than one designated "historic district" as defined by O.C.G.A. section 44-10-22(5). A copy of such map is on file for inspection in the office of the zoning official and is hereby incorporated in this section by reference. 
b.  Permits. All signs in the Douglasville Historic District, with the exception of standard informational signs, certain freestanding signs during an election period as provided in this section, and nonconforming signs as provided for in this division, must be permitted by the zoning official. 
c.  Signs authorized. Any property which is located in the historic district, may post only such signs as are authorized by this section, and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. Such property may contain one or more freestanding signs in accordance with the following: 
(a)  Number of signs, sign area. One freestanding sign, with sign area limited to the greater of 75 square feet or one square foot per linear foot of lot frontage not to exceed 300 square feet, shall be allowed for each street frontage. Exceptionally, any planned commercial center may have one freestanding sign with sign area limited to the greater of 100 square feet or one square foot per linear foot of lot frontage not to exceed 300 square feet, for each street frontage; no separate freestanding sign other than that permitted by this subsection will be allowed for an individual business in a planned commercial center. 
If the lot frontage for a lot not located in a planned commercial center is greater than 300 linear feet, then one additional freestanding sign with the same area limitations may be placed on that street frontage. If the street frontage for a planned commercial center is greater than 300 linear feet, then one additional freestanding sign with the same area limitations may be placed on that street frontage. 
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this subsection, no freestanding sign shall be closer than 250 feet to any other freestanding sign on any property, as measured from the closest points of each sign. Provided, however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs with faces of 16 square feet or less and 12 feet in height or shorter are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, and during such period there shall be no requirements for spacing between such signs nor for permits for the same. 
(b)  Reader boards, computation of area. Reader board means any portion of a sign designed for changeable text. A reader board may be incorporated within any freestanding sign but shall constitute no more than six square feet of the freestanding sign and no more than 50 percent of the area of any freestanding sign; any reader board shall not be considered in determining the maximum allowable sign area for any freestanding sign. 
(c)  Encroachment, required setbacks. Freestanding signs may encroach into front and side yards provided that their support members are located no closer than 12 feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the face is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Signs shall not project over property lines. 
(d)  Height restrictions. The height of all freestanding signs at their highest point above the level of the ground shall not exceed six feet, and except during political elections all such signs shall be monument signs; provided however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs of any authorized style with faces of 16 square feet or less and up to 12 feet in height are allowed during a political election, between the dates of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
(2)  Wall signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, such property may contain not more than one wall sign per wall frontage and one wall sign menu board, provided that the total sign area for all wall signs on any wall frontage shall not exceed 15 percent of the total area of the wall on that frontage; the face of any wall sign shall be not taller than 2.5 feet. In lieu of all wall signs, such property may contain one or more awning signs or canopy signs. Such property may contain not more than one wall sign menu board of not more than six square feet in area, which may be separate from any other wall sign and may protrude not more than four inches from any wall adjacent to a public sidewalk. No protruding wall sign shall be placed closer than 12 inches to any other protruding wall sign. For non-residential buildings which have a cornice or a transom, principal wall signs may not be mounted in locations other than the cornice or transom. Wall signs mounted on masonry walls may be attached with bolts at mortared joints, but shall not be attached through brick, stone, or masonry and shall not be attached with glue or epoxy. 
(3)  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain one standard informational sign, without a permit or fee, located so that the stake is not closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the placard is closer than 12 feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Exceptionally, an unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
(4)  Roof signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, any property may contain not more than one roof sign, which may not protrude beyond the face of the structure to which it is anchored. Roof signs shall be subject to the height restrictions of the zoning district and in no event to exceed ten feet in height. The area of any roof sign shall not exceed five percent of the area of the wall face with which it fronts. 
(5)  Directional signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, any such property may contain not more than two directional signs per street entrance, with a permit. 
(6)  Temporary signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, any such property may contain temporary signs, with a permit from the zoning official. 
(7)  Projecting or overhanging signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this division, any such property may contain not more than one projecting or overhanging sign. No projecting or overhanging sign shall be greater than 16 square feet in area. No projecting or overhanging sign shall protrude more than six feet from the wall to which it is anchored, and none shall project past any property line (other than the public sidewalk) nor onto any driveway. No projecting or overhanging sign shall hang lower than 80 inches from the ground at its lowest point. No projecting or overhanging sign shall be installed without adequate mounting and assembly approved by the zoning official, and plans shall be submitted for this purpose, prior to approval. All projecting or overhanging signs shall be required to meet the standards of ANSI and ADA. 
(8)  A-frame or easel signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this division, any such property may contain not more than one A-frame or easel sign per street frontage, for which each face shall have an area of not more than ten square feet. No A-frame or easel sign shall be placed on any public sidewalk so as to leave less than five feet of clearance for pedestrians. No A-frame or easel sign shall remain on any public sidewalk adjacent to any business at a time when the business is closed to the public. All A-frame or easel signs shall be adequately weighted or otherwise anchored to prevent accidental movement of the sign and obstruction of any public street. 
d.  Prohibited signs. The following signs are prohibited within the Douglasville Historic District: 
(1)  Billboards and permanent subdivision signs. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Folding signs, portable display signs, and similar movable signs. 
(4)  Signs erected on or located on any street or public right-of-way, curbs, curbstone, hydrant, lamp post, trees, barricade, temporary walk, public system except public directory and information signs. 
(5)  Signs painted directly on the exterior walls of a building or structure, not including graphic designs. 
(6)  Signs with revolving or rotating beams of light. 
(7)  Rotating signs. 
(8)  Signs placed upon a structure in any manner so as to disfigure or conceal any window opening, door or significant architectural feature or detail of any building. 
(9)  Signs with visible elements of plastic or similar manufactured materials, excluding temporary signs, faces of wall sign menu boards, and standard informational signs. 
(10)  Signs with visible elements made of interior grade wood. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-38, § 1, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 14—18, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 7, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-04-48, §§ 12—16, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-09, §§ 3, 4, 3-7-05; Ord. No. O-05-62, § 1, 11-21-05; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 13, 14, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-08-010, § 1, 2-18-08; Ord. No. O-08-016, § 2, 4-21-08; Ord. No. O-2012-52, §§ 1, 2, 11-19-12) 
Section 3.74. - Uniform sign plan. 
3.74.01.  Planned commercial centers. 
a.  A uniform sign plan is required for any planned commercial center, such as a shopping center with three or more establishments, before any signs for the planned commercial center or the center's tenants may be erected on the property. 
b.  The uniform sign plan shall govern the placement and design of all signs within the planned commercial center as to their location, materials, size, letter style, and color. 
c.  A uniform sign plan shall be submitted and approved as follows: 
(1)  The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs within the development. 
(2)  The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the zoning official. The uniform sign plan shall be approved upon a finding by the zoning official that: 
(a)  The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
(b)  The signs proposed in the uniform sign plan shall comply with the requirements of this division, such as number, location, and size restrictions. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  All tenants of the planned commercial center, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
3.74.02.  Modifications to sign restrictions. 
a.  Modifications to the restrictions on signage for a specific property or development may be requested for administrative approval. 
b.  Such requests shall be submitted to the zoning official for review and handling. 
c.  A request for modification shall be supported by a uniform sign plan. 
(1)  The uniform sign plan shall consist of such drawings and specifications as may be required to clearly illustrate the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all and every sign to be placed as freestanding and building signs with in the development. 
(2)  The uniform sign plan shall establish design standards such that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
(3)  The uniform sign plan is to be submitted to the zoning official. The uniform sign plan shall be approved upon a finding by the zoning official that: 
(a)  The plan provides that signs of a similar type and function within the development shall have a consistency of size, lettering style, color scheme, and construction materials so as to present a unified design concept while respecting the differences between tenant types and occupancies. 
(b)  The plan elements are consistent with the intent and objectives of this zoning ordinance. 
d.  Denial. If the zoning official denies the requested modification, the applicant may appeal to the board of adjustments and appeals as a special exception, in accordance with the "appeals" article of this zoning ordinance. 
e.  All tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved uniform sign plan. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-13, §§ 8, 9, 4-19-04) 
Section 3.75. - Sign permits. 
3.75.01.  Sign permits required. 
a.  Except as otherwise exempted as provided in this section, no sign shall be erected, reconstructed, expanded or replaced without securing a permit from the zoning official. For any sign requiring a permit, the applicant shall submit an application to the zoning official. Every such application shall be granted, denied or rejected for incompleteness, in writing, within five business days of submission of the application. All applications meeting the requirements of this ordinance shall be granted. If an application fails to meet the standards of this ordinance, the denial shall identify the standards that are not met by the application. Any application rejected for incompleteness shall identify the reasons further action cannot be taken. 
b.  All nonconforming signs shall be registered with the zoning official within 90 days of the effective date of this zoning ordinance [December 4, 2000]. 
c.  A permit and fee shall be required for the following signs: 
(1)  Temporary signs, except as exempted in subsection 3.75.02.d. 
(2)  Directional signs; 
(3)  Freestanding signs on developed residential property which is zoned other than multi-family and is not located in the historic district; 
(4)  Freestanding signs (except during election periods as otherwise provided in this division) on a any developed multi-family residential property or any developed property which is zoned for any commercial, office, or industrial use; 
(5)  Wall signs, including but not limited to reader boards, wall sign menu boards, and protruding signs. 
(6)  All other signs not exempted under section 3.75.02. 
3.75.02.  Permit and fee exemptions. 
a.  No permit and no fee shall be required for a change of copy on a sign, the customary use of which involves frequent and periodic changes of copy. 
b.  No permit and no fee shall be required for the following: 
(1)  Standard informational signs in any district; 
(2)  Freestanding signs on vacant or undeveloped property; 
(3)  Freestanding signs on developed residential property which is zoned other than high-density residential, and is not located within the historic district; 
c.  A permit but no fee shall be required for all permanent subdivision signs. 
d.  A permit but no fee shall be required for: (i) banners attached to structures at any time of year, and (ii) all temporary signs displayed on developed non-residential property during the 66-day winter holiday period from November 1 through January 5. 
3.75.03.  Application. Each application for a sign permit shall be in writing and in the form prescribed by the zoning official and shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name, address and telephone number of the sign erector and sign owner; 
b.  Location of building, structure, or lot which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
c.  A site plan showing setbacks from all adjacent streets, structures and property lines; 
d.  Prints or drawings of the plans and specifications and structural details of construction and attachment to a building or in the ground (a single submission may be permitted for any standardized signs). Signs in excess of a height of 50 feet must be accompanied by stamped engineering drawings; 
e.  Any electrical and building permits required for such sign, or certification from the building official that electrical and building permits are not required; 
f.  A performance bond or cash deposit, if for a temporary permit; and 
g.  Application fees. An application fee as set by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 19, 20, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, §§ 10, 11, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 17, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-09, §§ 5, 6, 3-7-05; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 15, 16, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-2015-20, § 2 , 5-18-15) 
Section 3.76. - Nonconforming signs. 
a.  In all use districts, signs which on the effective date of this zoning ordinance [December 4, 2000] become nonconforming with respect to the requirements set forth in this division may continue in existence so long as the size is not increased beyond that existing as of the effective date of this zoning ordinance; except that no portable display sign shall be considered a nonconforming sign. 
b.  Existing signs which were legally erected which have become nonconforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this division due to a road widening project may be moved to meet the setback requirements of this division but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to meet the requirements of this division; provided however, this subsection shall not allow the relocation of any sign for which the value has been paid to the owner by any government or government agency in conjunction with a road widening project. No sign shall be relocated pursuant to this subsection before such time as the sign owner shall provide to the Zoning Official a signed copy of the purchase contract or condemnation documents showing transfer of the owner's land for road widening. 
c.  In all use districts, signs which were: 
(1)  Illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances, 
(2)  Made of paper, cloth, or nondurable materials (except standard informational signs), 
(3)  Located in the public right-of-way (except as permitted by this ordinance) shall be prohibited by this division and shall be removed by the owner. Upon failure to comply with requirements of this division, the zoning official may cause the removal of such signs at the expense of the owners. 
d.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
e.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repairs shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this division. Signs damaged by fire or acts of God may be restored to their original condition. 
f.  Existing signs on interstate highways that were legally erected which would become nonconforming as a result of this division would be allowed to remain until purchased by the state department of transportation or the city, provided that the sign owner meets the requirements of state laws, rules and regulations governing such signs. 
g.  Each nonconforming sign shall be registered within 90 days of the enactment date of this ordinance from which this division is derived by the owner, and if it is determined that such nonconforming sign was legally erected under the prior ordinance or resolution requirements then a sign permit shall be issued to the sign owner and the sign so marked with the permit decal. Should the owner of a nonconforming sign fail to register such sign within 90 days from the enactment of this zoning ordinance, such failure to register shall be deemed a violation of this division, and such person, firm or corporation shall be subject to citation in the recorder's court of the city. 
h.  Existing signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become nonconforming under this section upon annexation by the city will be allowed to remain. Such signs shall be registered with the city within 90 days of being annexed by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-05-67, § 17, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-07-05, § 3, 1-16-07) 
DIVISION 5. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Section 3.81. - Findings. 
Whereas, the City of Douglasville finds that buffers adjacent to streams provide numerous benefits including: 
(a)  Protecting, restoring and maintaining the chemical, physical and biological integrity of streams and their water resources; 
(b)  Removing pollutants delivered in urban stormwater; 
(c)  Reducing erosion and controlling sedimentation; 
(d)  Protecting and stabilizing stream banks; 
(e)  Providing for infiltration of stormwater runoff; 
(f)  Maintaining base flow of streams; 
(g)  Contributing organic matter that is a source of food and energy for the aquatic ecosystem; 
(h)  Providing tree canopy to shade streams and promote desirable aquatic habitat; 
(i)  Providing riparian wildlife habitat; 
(j)  Furnishing scenic value and recreational opportunity; and 
(k)  Providing opportunities for the protection and restoration of greenspace. 
(Ord. No. O-08-013, § 5, 3-17-08) 
Section 3.82. - Purposes. 
The purpose of this Division is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Create buffer zones along the streams of the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(b)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. O-08-013, § 5, 3-17-08) 
Section 3.83. - Applicability; compatibility with other buffer regulations. 
This Division 5 shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 8.152.02. of this ordinance. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law or section 3.22 of this ordinance, and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. This Division 5 is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this Division 5 should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. O-08-013, § 5, 3-17-08) 
Section 3.84. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities are exempt from this Division 5. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property. 
3.84.01. Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; 
b.  Public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
c.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
d.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the river, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
e.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
f.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
3.84.02. Public sewer line easements paralleling the creek, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection 3.84.01. 
3.84.03. Land development activities within a right-of-way existing on April 1, 2008 or approved under the terms of this division or by variance. 
3.84.04. Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this ordinance takes effect or approved under the terms of this ordinance, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
3.84.05. Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the zoning official on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within 10 days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the zoning official to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
3.84.06. Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(Ord. No. O-08-013, § 5, 3-17-08) 
Section 3.85. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
All land development activity subject to this ordinance shall meet the following requirements: 
3.85.01. An undisturbed natural vegetative stream buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
3.85.02. An additional stream setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
3.85.03. No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the stream buffer or the stream setback. 
(Ord. No. O-08-013, § 5, 3-17-08) 
ARTICLE IV. - LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS 

Section 4.01. - Purpose of article IV. 
This article sets out the standards that control the size of lots, the placement of buildings and structures on a lot, and the bulk and intensity of development on a lot. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 4.02. - Lot area, density, width and frontage. 
Every property upon which a principal building or use may be located shall meet or exceed the following requirements for the zoning district in which the lot is situated: 
Table 4-1. Lot Size Requirements. 

 
1 See also the provisions for manufactured homes under the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance. 
2 45 feet for lots fronting on a cul-de-sac or circle. 
3 Requirements shown are for the overall development project. Specific requirements for lots within the development are shown under "R-4 dwellings." 
4 Requirements shown are for the overall development project. 
5 Requirements shown are for the overall development project. See also "Townhouse developments; special provisions" in this article, below, for a townhouse development. 
6 As established as part of the zoning approval for each Design Concept Development. 
7 Lots in the historic district are exempt. 
8 Frontage on a major thoroughfare required. 
** As established as part of the zoning approval for each Design Concept Development. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 18, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-2012-23, § 1(Exh. A), 6-4-12; Ord. No. O-2012-50, § 1(Exh. A), 11-19-12) 
Section 4.03. - Minimum setbacks. 
4.03.01.  Minimum setbacks; principal buildings. 
a.  All principal buildings on a lot shall be set back from the street and from the side and rear lot lines bounding the lot no less than the distances shown as follows: 
Table 4-2. Minimum Setback—Principal Buildings. 

 
9 As measured at a right angle from the right-of-way line along the full length of the property frontage. 
10 See also the buffer requirements under Landscaping, Buffers and "tree conservation" article of appendix B: Development Regulations of the Municipal Code. 
11 Requirements shown are for the overall development project. 
12 Requirements shown are for the overall development project. See also "Townhouse developments; special provisions" in this article, below, for a townhouse development. 
13 As established as part of the zoning approval for each Design Concept Development. 
14 Lots in the historic districts are exempt. 
15 The setback also applies to all other structures, including service areas and access drives. 
b.  The front yard requirements of this ordinance for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line in a substantially developed area on lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot, within the same block and zoning district, and fronting on the same side of the street or road as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, and in no case less than 20 feet from the street or road right-of-way. 
4.03.02.  Minimum setbacks; accessory buildings and structures. 
a.  Accessory buildings. Minimum setbacks for accessory buildings shall be as follows: 
(1)  Guest house. Guest houses must be located to the rear of the main home on the lot and must meet the same setbacks as required for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
(2)  Night watchman residence. Night watchman residences shall conform to the minimum setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
(3)  All other accessory buildings. 
(a)  Accessory buildings located in any residential district may not be located within any front yard (i.e., between a principal building and a street). 
(b)  Accessory buildings having a floor area less than 144 square feet must be at least five feet from any property line. 
(c)  Accessory buildings having a floor of 144 square feet or more must comply with the same setbacks as required for principal buildings in each zoning district. 
b.  Accessory structures. Minimum setbacks for accessory structures (excluding buildings) shall be as follows: 
(1)  Fences and free-standing walls. There shall be no minimum setback for fences or free-standing walls, provided that any fence or free-standing wall shall not obstruct visibility at street intersections (see the sight triangle provisions under the "project design standards" article of appendix B: Development Regulations of the Municipal Code). 
(2)  Gasoline pumps. Pumps that dispense gasoline, kerosene, propane, natural gas or diesel fuels must be located at least 25 feet from any property line or public right-of-way line. 
(3)  Canopies. 
(a)  Canopies shall conform to the minimum building setback requirements for principal buildings in each zoning district; except that, 
(b)  A canopy or overhang over gasoline pumps may be located no less than 25 feet from any property line or public right-of-way line. 
(4)  All other accessory structures. 
(a)  Accessory structures located in any residential district may not be located within any front yard. 
(b)  Accessory structures not listed above must be at least 25 feet from any street right-of-way and at least five feet from any other property line (except driveways that connect to a street or adjoining property). 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 19, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-2012-23, § 2(Exh. B), 6-4-12; Ord. No. O-2012-50, § 2(Exh. B), 11-19-12) 
Section 4.04. - Minimum building separation. 
4.04.01.  Multi-family developments. When more than one multi-family dwelling is located on a lot, the open space between buildings measured at the closest point shall not be less than 20 feet for one-story buildings and 30 feet when one or both are two-story buildings. 
4.04.02.  Shopping centers and office developments. When more than one principal building is located on a lot in the CSC shopping center zoning district or the O-I office-institutional district, the open space between buildings measured at the closest point shall not be less than 20 feet. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 4.05. - Floor area provisions. 
4.05.01.  Maximum floor area in CN neighborhood commercial district. 
a.  The gross floor area occupied by a single business establishment in the CN neighborhood commercial zoning district may not exceed 5,000 square feet, nor may a multi-tenant commercial building exceed 25,000 square feet. 
b.  For the purpose of this subsection, a business that contains other businesses within it occupying the same space, such as a grocery store with a branch bank or fast food restaurant inside, shall be considered a single business establishment. 
4.05.02.  Minimum floor area in CSC shopping center district. The minimum floor area for any development project in the CSC shopping center district is 100,000 square feet. 
4.05.03.  Maximum dwelling unit bedrooms in CBD central business district. Mixed-use dwellings allowed in the CBD central business district are not to contain more than two bedrooms in each dwelling unit. 
4.05.04.  Minimum floor area within a dwelling. Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no dwelling shall contain less than the minimum square footage of building floor area (heated living space) as set forth below: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings and townhouses. Except as provided in subsection 3.02.06, each single-family detached dwelling and each townhouse shall have at least 1,500 square feet of building floor area. 
b.  All other dwellings. 
(1)  Each efficiency or one-bedroom dwelling unit shall have at least 750 square feet of building floor area. 
(2)  Each two-bedroom dwelling unit shall have at least 1,050 square feet of building floor area. 
(3)  Each dwelling unit containing three bedrooms or more shall have at least 1,500 square feet of building floor area. 
4.05.05.  Minimum residential floor area per person. 
a.  No dwelling containing 2,000 square feet of building floor area or less shall house more than seven people. 
b.  Dwellings containing more than 2,000 square feet of building floor area may house one additional occupant over seven for each 500 additional square feet. 
c.  In no case shall a single-family detached dwelling house more than 12 residents. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 20, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 10, 5-15-06) 
Section 4.06. - Townhouse developments; special provisions. 
4.06.01.  Townhouse developments; defined. 
a.  Townhouse subdivision. A townhouse subdivision is a development of single-family attached dwellings 12 [] in which each dwelling unit is located on a separate lot. 
b.  Townhouse condominium project. A townhouse condominium project is a development of single-family attached dwellings that share a common, unsubdivided property while each dwelling unit is sold separately. Such developments must also meet all requirements of the Georgia Condominium Act. 
4.06.02.  Townhouse subdivisions, exceptions. Townhouse subdivisions may comply with the following minimum requirements in lieu of the requirements shown on tables 4-1 and 4-2, as long as the overall development meets the zoning district requirements as a whole: 
a.  Number of dwelling units attached in a row: At least 2 but no more than 10. 
b.  Staggered front façades: The dwelling units in a building shall be staggered, singly or in pairs, by at least three feet. 
c.  Minimum lot width: The average width for the units in a single building shall be at least 20 feet, with no lot being less than 18 feet wide. 
d.  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: 
(1)  The average lot area for the units in a single building shall be at least 2,400 square feet, with no unit having less than 2,000 square feet of lot area. 
(2)  The subdivision as a whole must provide a total area equal to or greater than the minimum lot area required on table 4-1 for the zoning district, and may not exceed the maximum density for the zoning district. 
e.  Minimum principal building setbacks: None between attached units or between buildings and interior lot lines or streets. On the periphery of the subdivision, buildings must meet the minimum setback requirements shown on table 4-2 for the zoning district. 
4.06.03.  Townhouse condominium projects; exceptions. Townhouse condominium projects must comply with the following minimum requirements in addition to the requirements shown on tables 4-1 and 4-2, which apply to the overall development as a whole: 
a.  Number of dwelling units attached in a row: At least 2 but no more than 10. 
b.  Staggered front façades: The dwelling units in a building shall be staggered, singly or in pairs, by at least three feet. 
c.  Minimum principal building setbacks: None between attached units. On the periphery of the development project, buildings must meet the minimum setback requirements shown on table 4-2 for the zoning district. 
4.06.04.  Access to rear required. Townhouse developments shall be designed to provide proper access to the rear of all dwelling units for fire fighting purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
See the definition in the glossary, under "Dwelling, single-family attached." 

Section 4.07. - Lot coverage. 
4.07.01.  Open space required in the O-I office-institutional district. Lot coverage in the O-I office-institutional district must not exceed 80 percent, with at least 20 percent of the lot area maintained as open area. Not less than 50 percent of the minimum required open area shall be located between the building and the public streets. No parking or other similar uses shall be permitted therein. On lots with multiple street frontage, the 50 percent area shall be evenly distributed along all street frontages. Lots in the historic district are exempt from the requirements of this subsection. 
4.07.02.  Open space required in the O-D office-distribution district. Lot coverage in the O-D office-distribution district must not exceed 80 percent, with at least 20 percent of the lot area maintained as open area. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 4, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-2012-23, § 3(Exh. C), 6-4-12) 
Section 4.08. - Exterior siding (façades). 
4.08.01. Generally. Exterior siding (façades) for buildings and structures shall conform to the requirements of this section. 
4.08.02. Definitions. For purposes of this section 4.08 only, the following definitions shall apply: 
a.  Brick means traditional full-sized, unpainted, fired units composed of clay-bearing soil, sand, and lime; "brick" excludes veneers and painted materials. 
b.  Metal means any weather-resistant metallic siding product other than corrugated metal or unfinished metal. 
c.  Stone means unpainted rock, including but not limited to granite, limestone, marble, terra cotta, and unpainted cast stone: "stone" excludes painted materials. 
4.08.03. Calculating acceptable façade materials. The amount of restricted material shall be calculated using the gross square footage of wall area per façade. Windows constituting less than 30 percent of the gross area of any façade shall not be counted in the façade calculation for purposes of this section. Entry doors and roll-up doors on any façade shall not be counted in the façade calculation for purposes of this section. A building material that is unrestricted (such as brick) may be used in any percentage throughout the structure. A material that is restricted is allowed as a maximum percentage. Materials not expressly shown in this section as acceptable or prohibited may be the presented to the City in accordance with section 1.06 for interpretation. 
4.08.04. Façade requirements for principal buildings in residential districts and base zones. 
a.  Façade materials classified: 
(1)  Acceptable façade materials. With the limitations imposed by this subsection, the following types of building materials are permitted: 
(a)  Unrestricted materials: Brick, stone, tilt-up concrete and architectural pre-cast concrete. 
(b)  Restricted materials: High-grade stucco, natural wood and cement-based artificial wood siding, and shakes and shingles. 
(c)  Accent only materials: metal and vinyl. 
(2)  Prohibited façade materials: concrete block, split-face block, CMU, brick veneers, painted prick, painted natural stone, tile, and glass. 
b.  Percentages and number types allowed. Every façade shall be comprised as follows: 
(1)  Ten percent accent component: any unrestricted materials or restricted materials or accent only materials or combination thereof, without regard to the number of different materials in this component; and 
(2)  Forty percent primary component: no more than two unrestricted materials; and 
(3)  Fifty percent remainder component: one restricted material, or one of the unrestricted materials chosen for the 40 percent primary component. 
4.08.05. Façade requirements for principal buildings in commercial and office districts and base zones. 
a.  Façade materials classified: 
(1)  Acceptable façade materials. With the limitations imposed by this subsection, the following types of building materials are permitted: 
(a)  Unrestricted materials: Brick, stone, tilt-up concrete and architectural pre-cast concrete, and glass. 
(b)  Restricted materials: High-grade stucco, masonry hardi-plank shakes and shingles, and natural wood and cement-based artificial wood siding. 
(c)  Accent only materials: metal and vinyl. 
(2)  Prohibited façade materials: concrete block, CMU, split-face block, painted brick, painted natural stone, and tile. 
b.  Percentages and number types allowed. Every façade shall be comprised as follows: 
(1)  Front façades: 
(a)  Ten percent accent component: any unrestricted materials or restricted materials or accent only materials or combination thereof, without regard to the number of different materials in this category; and 
(b)  Seventy percent primary component: no more than two unrestricted materials; and 
(c)  Twenty percent remainder component: no more than one restricted material, or one of the unrestricted materials chosen for the 70 percent primary component. 
(2)  Side and rear façades: 
(a)  Ten percent accent component: any unrestricted materials or restricted materials or accent only materials or combination thereof, without regard to the number of different materials in this category; and 
(b)  Forty percent primary component: one or two of the same unrestricted materials chosen for the front façade; and 
(c)  Fifty percent remainder component: no more than one restricted material, and/or one of the unrestricted materials chosen for the 40 percent primary component for the side and rear façades. 
4.08.06. Façade requirements for principal buildings in industrial districts and base zones. 
a.  Façade materials classified: 
(1)  Acceptable façade materials. With the limitations imposed by this subsection, the following types of building materials are permitted: 
(a)  Unrestricted materials: Brick, stone, tilt-up concrete and architectural pre-cast concrete, glass, high-grade stucco, shakes and shingles, natural wood and cement-based artificial wood siding. 
(b)  Restricted materials: CMU, split-face block, concrete block. 
(c)  Accent only materials: metal and vinyl 
(2)  Prohibited façade materials: Painted brick, painted natural stone and tile. 
b.  Percentages and number types allowed. Every façade shall be comprised as follows: 
(1)  Front façades: 
(a)  Ten percent accent component: any unrestricted materials or restricted materials or accent only materials or combination thereof, without regard to the number of different materials in this component, except there shall be no concrete block; 
(b)  Ninety percent primary component: no more than two unrestricted materials. 
(2)  Side façades: 
(a)  Ten percent accent component: any unrestricted materials or restricted materials or accent only materials or combination thereof, without regard to the number of different materials in this category; 
(b)  Forty percent primary component: one or two of the same unrestricted materials chosen for the front façade; and 
(c)  Fifty percent remainder component: no more than one restricted material, and/or one of the unrestricted materials chosen for the 40 percent primary component for the side and rear façades. 
(3)  Rear façades: 
(a)  Ten percent accent component: any unrestricted materials or restricted materials or accent only materials or combination thereof, without regard to the number of different materials in this category; 
(b)  Thirty percent primary component: one or two of the same unrestricted materials chosen for the front façade; and 
(c)  Sixty percent remainder component: CMU, split-face block or one of the unrestricted materials chosen for the thirty percent primary component for the side and rear façades. 
4.08.07. Accessory structures. In all districts and base zones, façade materials for any accessory structure shall be limited to wood, vinyl, brick, stone, stucco, and hardi-plank siding. Exceptionally, where the existing principal structure on a lot is sided, in whole or in part, with legal nonconforming materials, then a new accessory structure may be sided with any of the same nonconforming materials. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-91 , § 3, 11-20-17) 
ARTICLE V. - REZONING AND SPECIAL USE APPROVAL 

Section 5.01. - Purpose of article V. 
This article describes the process through which a rezoning or special use may be approved on a property. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 5.02. - Zoning changes. 
The Official Zoning Map may be amended from time to time and special uses may be approved for specific properties by the city council under the procedures in this article. In addition, changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning or special use approval may also be approved by the city council following the procedures in this article. All of these types of actions are referred to as "zoning changes." 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 5.03. - Applications. 
5.03.01.  Initiation of request for rezoning or special use approval. An application for a zoning change for any property or properties may be initiated by the city council, by the zoning board, or by the owner of the property. Unless initiated by the city council or the zoning board, all such applications shall be initiated by or with the written permission of the owner of a majority interest in the property affected. 
5.03.02.  Application forms and fees. 
a.  An application for rezoning or special use approval shall be submitted to the planning and zoning department on the department's application forms. A non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the city council shall accompany the application. A fee shall not be charged if the city council or the zoning board has initiated the application. 
b.  An application for rezoning or special use approval, submitted by a party other than the city council or the zoning board, must include the following: 
(1)  A legal description of the property proposed to be rezoned. 
(2)  A recent survey plat showing the dimensions and location of the subject property prepared by a land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid and whose seal is affixed to the plat. 
(3)  The present and proposed zoning classification for the subject property. 
(4)  The names and addresses of the owners of the subject property and their agents if any. 
(5)  Notarized consent of the owner if applicant is not owner. 
(6)  A map of the property sought to be rezoned showing its location in the city and its relationship to adjoining properties, public facilities, and public services and also showing the zoning classification on the adjoining property. 
(7)  Information regarding the demand that will be placed on public facilities and services by any contemplated development, including but not limited to increased population density, traffic volume, school enrollment, drainage, traffic, and utility facilities. 
(8)  Proof that all city, county, and state and valorem taxes due upon the property have been paid in full. 
(9)  Campaign contribution disclosure report by the applicant and the applicant's attorney, if applicable, in accordance with O.C.G.A. section 36-67A-1 et seq. 
(10)  The applicant's response to each of the standards for approval for the rezoning or special use contained in this article, below. 
(11)  A traffic study if required by section 3.03.07. 
c.  The zoning department shall review all applications for completeness within five days of submission. Incomplete or improper applications, as determined in the sole discretion of the zoning official, will be returned to the applicant with written reasons for the rejection. The zoning official shall process all applications not rejected to the zoning board for hearing to the first available hearing date after all of the following: 
(1)  The filing deadline; 
(2)  Completion of any required finding for a development of regional impact; 
(3)  Reserved. 
d.  For any property to be annexed, where the Douglas County government has objected, the city council shall delay final action as required by O.C.G.A. section 36-36-11. 
5.03.03.  Restriction on reconsideration after denial. 
a.  If an application for a zoning change is denied by the city council, another application for a zoning change affecting the same property shall not be considered by the city council within less than six months from the date of denial. 
b.  Where an application for a zoning change affecting a particular piece of property is denied by the Douglas County Board of Commissioners, no petition for annexation of any part of said property shall be considered for vote by the city council within six months of the county's zoning denial, regardless of the zoning classification that may be proposed to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-03-17, § 22, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 12, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-06-01, §§ 1, 2, 1-17-06; Ord. No. O-06-14, §§ 6, 7, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-2018-50 , § 3, 11-19-18) 
Section 5.04. - Concept plan. 
5.04.01.  Concept plan; when required. 
a.  An application for a zoning change related to a design concept development must be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction or alteration of the site is proposed or if prior conditions of approval are proposed to be changed. 
b.  The concept plan shall be binding as a condition of approval of the rezoning or special use by the city council or as a part of an application for a design concept development, to the extent that the concept plan is consistent with the provisions and requirements of this zoning ordinance and all other codes and ordinances adopted by the city. A concept plan may be accompanied by a development standards text, which may be approved as a condition of zoning or special use, providing development standards and uses for the project which vary, augment or limit the requirements of this zoning ordinance and the development code. 
5.04.02.  Concept plan; preparation. 
a.  A concept plan may be prepared by the applicant, a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, a landscape architect, a land planner or any other person familiar with land development activities. 
b.  The concept plan shall be a map or other graphic representation drawn to approximate scale on a boundary survey of the tract or on a property map showing the approximate location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract. 
5.04.03.  Concept plan; contents. The concept plan shall show the following, as appropriate to the zoning or special use requested: 
a.  Name and address of the property owner. 
b.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
c.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
d.  Proposed density and use of the property, with each area (other than open space areas, recreation and amenities areas, dedicated space, utilities, streets and the like) designated for development consistent with the uses and standards prescribed for one of the zoning districts, other than DCD, authorized by this zoning ordinance. The development standards, density, and land uses for each such area shall be those prescribed for the zoning district shown, except as varied, augmented, or limited by an approved development standards text incorporated as a condition of zoning in the DCD. For DCD's of 500 acres or less containing any residential use, concept plans shall additionally show sufficient data to verify compliance with the requirements of subsections 3.03.06 and 3.03.07 of this ordinance. 
e.  Location (land lot, district, section, parcel number), size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre), and the acreage of each land use area. 
f.  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one-inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
g.  Zoning district classification (including any overlay zoning) of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
h.  Manmade features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
i.  The proposed project layout including private streets, means of ingress and egress, open space, recreation areas and amenities. 
j.  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-58, § 3, 8-20-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, § 23, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 23, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-2011-50, § 6, 12-19-11) 
Section 5.05. - Process for rezoning or special use approval. 
Before the city council may take final action on a proposed zoning change, the zoning board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
5.05.01.  Public notice. 
a.  At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to each public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The planning and zoning department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
b.  A zoning change initiated by a party other than the city council shall be heard at a public hearing only upon: 
(1)  Published notice: In addition to the requirements above, notice shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property or the special use requested; and 
(2)  Sign posting: The planning and zoning department shall require a sign or signs to be posted at least 15 days prior to the public hearing, stating the date, time and place for the public hearing, the present zoning classification and the nature of the proposed zoning change. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the zoning change has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. Unauthorized tampering with any zoning sign shall constitute an offense, punishable by the municipal recorder's court. 
5.05.02.  Zoning board public hearing. The public hearing held by the zoning board for zoning changes shall be scheduled no less than 60 days after receipt of a complete application, but not before completion of any required Development of Regional Impact study. The public hearing shall be conducted in the following manner: 
a.  The public hearing shall be convened at the scheduled time and place by the chairperson, the vice-chairperson or the zoning board's designee, who shall act as the presiding official. 
b.  The presiding official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the zoning board. 
c.  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the presiding official. 
d.  It is required that the applicant or an agent for the applicant be present, and should the applicant or his agent fail to appear the application may be tabled. 
e.  At the public hearing concerning the requested zoning change, the applicant or his agent shall be allowed to present evidence. Any parties in support of or in opposition to the application shall also be allowed to present sworn testimony. 
f.  For each application, the applicant and proponents of the application shall have no less than ten minutes for presentation of data, opinions and evidence at the public hearing, and opponents of the application shall likewise have a minimum of ten minutes for presentation. The proponents of each application shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, and the opponents of each application likewise shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, unless these time limitations are waived at the discretion of the presiding official. 
g.  At the scheduled public hearing on the proposed zoning change, the zoning board shall make its recommendation or take such other action as it may deem appropriate. If the matter is tabled, it shall be tabled not later than to the next regular meeting not more than 45 days after the first scheduled hearing, when the zoning board shall take final action and make its recommendation. 
(1)  A motion to recommend approval or denial of an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of members present and voting, in order for the motion to pass. 
(2)  If a motion to recommend approval of an application fails, the application is automatically recommended for denial. If a motion to recommend denial of an application fails, it shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(3)  The zoning board chairman shall vote only in the case of a tie vote among the other members. A tie vote (calculated after the chairman has abstained, declined or otherwise failed to vote at the meeting) on a motion to recommend approval of an application shall be deemed a recommendation for denial of the application. A tie vote (calculated after the chairman has abstained, declined or otherwise failed to vote at the meeting) on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(4)  If final action is not taken on an application at the first scheduled meeting or at the next regular meeting of the zoning board, then the application will go forward to the city council with no recommendation, and no other public hearing or further consideration by the zoning board will be required. 
5.05.03.  City council public hearing. 
a.  The city council shall consider an application for a zoning change at their first or second scheduled meeting following the recommendation of the zoning board. 
b.  The presiding official shall call for each proposed zoning change to be presented to the city council. 
c.  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the presiding official. 
d.  It is required that the applicant or an agent for the applicant be present, and should the applicant or his agent fail to appear the application may be tabled. 
e.  At the public hearing concerning the requested zoning change, the applicant or his agent shall be allowed to present evidence. Any parties in support of or in opposition to the application shall also be allowed to present sworn testimony. 
f.  For each application, the applicant and proponents of the application shall have no less than ten minutes for presentation of data, opinions and evidence at the public hearing, and opponents of the application shall likewise have a minimum of ten minutes for presentation. The proponents of each application shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, and the opponents of each application likewise shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, unless these time limitations are waived at the discretion of the mayor. 
g.  After the public hearing and any information presented by the zoning department, action shall be considered by vote of the city council. 
(1)  A motion to approve or deny an application must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(2)  If a motion to approve an application fails, the application is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
(3)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an application shall be deemed a denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(4)  If no action is taken on an application, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the city council. 
h.  In taking action on an application, the city council may: 
(1)  Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposal; or, 
(2)  Allow withdrawal if so requested by the applicant (with or without imposing a period during which another zoning change on the property may not be considered); or, 
(3)  Table the proposal for consideration [at] a later meeting; or, 
(4)  Refer the application back to the zoning board for further consideration. 
i.  No application shall be tabled more than twice, nor tabled for a cumulative period exceeding 90 days. 
5.05.04.  Referral to zoning board for further consideration. If the city council refers an application back to the zoning board for further study: 
a.  The zoning department shall give public notice of the zoning board's hearing for further consideration in the same manner as described above, and the zoning board shall conduct its additional public hearing and take action as described above. 
b.  After the zoning board's rehearing and recommendation on the referred application, the city council shall follow the same procedures set forth above to consider the application. 
5.05.05.  Withdrawal. 
a.  An applicant may withdraw an application for a zoning change at any time prior to final action by the city council. 
b.  Refund of filing fees shall be guided by the following: 
(1)  If the request for withdrawal is received by the zoning official prior to publication of the public notice for the application (or when publication is irrevocably set), all fees paid for filing such application shall be returned to the applicant. 
(2)  If the request for withdrawal is received by the zoning official after publication of the public notice for the application (or after such publication is irrevocably set), all fees paid for filing such application shall be retained by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-02-44, § 1, 10-21-02; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 24—26, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, §§ 13, 14, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 24, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-67, § 20, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-2011-51, § 1, 12-19-11) 
Section 5.06. - Standards for zoning changes. 
5.06.01.  Standards for zoning map amendment (rezoning). The zoning board and the city council shall consider the following standards in considering any zoning proposal that would result in a change in the boundary of a zoning district, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
a.  Is the proposed use or development consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district? 
b.  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
c.  Will the proposed use not adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
d.  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
e.  Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
f.  Will the proposed use not cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
g.  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
h.  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
5.06.02.  Standards for special use approval. A special use otherwise permitted within a zoning district shall be considered to be compatible with other uses permitted in the district, provided that due consideration is given to the following objective criteria as applicable to the specific use proposed: 
a.  Is the proposed special use consistent with the stated purpose of the zoning district? 
b.  Is or will the type of street providing access to the use be adequate to serve the proposed special use? 
c.  Is or will access into and out of the property be adequate to provide for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles? 
d.  Are or will public facilities such as schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection be adequate to serve the special use? 
e.  Are or will refuse, service, parking and loading areas on the property be located or screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare or odor? 
f.  Will the hours and manner of operation of the special use have no adverse effects on other properties in the area? 
g.  Will the height, size or location of the buildings or other structures on the property be compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties? 
5.06.03.  Change in conditions of approval. Any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the city council through action on a rezoning or special use approval shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this section for a map amendment or special use, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 5.07. - Developments of regional impact. 
Any development of regional impact (DRI) as defined under state law shall be submitted to the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC). 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 5.08. - Effect. 
5.08.01.  Effect on pre-existing uses. For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this zoning ordinance prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for nonconforming development in article I of this zoning ordinance. 
5.08.02.  Effect on pre-existing permits. Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this zoning ordinance prior to the effective date of a zoning change affecting the property may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for nonconforming development in article I of this zoning ordinance, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 5.09. - Special hearing required; drug addiction rehabilitation center. 
5.09.01.  Special public hearing; when required. When a proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a special public hearing shall be held on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six months and not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on the zoning decision. The hearing required by this subsection shall be in addition to any hearing required under this article relating to the process for rezoning or special use approval. 
5.09.02.  Public notice of the special hearing. The city shall give notice of such hearing by: 
a.  Posting notice on the affected premises in the manner prescribed by subsection (b) of this Code section; and 
b.  Publishing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city a notice of the hearing at least 15 days and not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
c.  Both the posted notice and the published notice shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 5.10. - Temporary suspension of permitting. 
5.10.01.  Zoning changes requested by a property owner. Upon submission of a valid application for a rezoning or special use approval by an applicant, no permits shall be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on the subject property of the application that may be affected by the outcome of such zoning change. 
5.10.02.  Zoning changes or text amendments initiated by city. Upon the initiation of a zoning change or text amendment by the zoning board or city council, no permits shall be issued nor shall any actions be undertaken on any property that may be affected by the outcome of such zoning change or text amendment. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
ARTICLE VI. - APPEALS 

Section 6.01. - Purpose of article VI. 
This article sets out the process to obtain relief from the requirements or interpretation of this zoning ordinance that may create practical difficulty or particular hardship in its enforcement or application to a specific property or situation. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 6.02. - Appeals of an administrative interpretation. 
6.02.01.  Initiation. 
a.  An appeal of an administrative interpretation may be initiated by any person aggrieved by such interpretation. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the administrative interpretation by filing such appeal in writing with the zoning official, whereupon the city council shall render a final decision. 
b.  It is the intention of this zoning ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the interpretation of this ordinance shall be presented first to the zoning official, from whom an appeal can then be taken to the city council. 
6.02.02.  Interpretations by city council. The city council, upon appeal of an aggrieved party or at the request of the zoning official, is authorized to: 
a.  Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this zoning ordinance. 
b.  Determine the boundaries of the various zoning districts where uncertainty exists. 
c.  Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by any person acting under authority of this zoning ordinance, where a misinterpretation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this zoning ordinance is alleged. 
d.  Interpret such other provisions of this zoning ordinance as may require clarification or extension in specific or general cases. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-37, § 2(Exh. B), 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, § 27, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 15, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-67, § 21, 12-19-05) 
Section 6.03. - Variances. 
6.03.01.  Initiation. 
a.  An appeal for a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this zoning ordinance to a property may be initiated by any party aggrieved by such application. 
b.  In no case, however, shall a variance be granted for any of the following: 
(1)  A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a zoning change granted by the city council. 
(2)  To permit a use or a special use that is not allowed in the zoning district applicable to the property pursuant to table 2-1 of subsection 2.05.05. 
(3)  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(4)  To reduce any side yard building setback to less than 7½ feet. 
(5)  To allow a billboard higher than 70 feet or any other sign higher than 100 feet. 
(6)  To allow more than 75 percent impervious surface on any individual lot outside a master planned community, or on a project-wide basis for master planned communities. 
6.03.02.  Standards for approval of a variance. 
a.  Signs. Variances from the sign regulations of this zoning ordinance shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Where the proximity of existing signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible, due to spacing requirements, for a sign of the type sought; or 
(2)  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
i.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; and 
ii.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
iii.  The variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. 
b.  Stream buffer protection. Variances from the stream buffer protection regulations (Division 5) of this ordinance shall be limited to the following situations: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Where the shape, topography or other physical condition of the lot on April 1, 2008, prevents land development consistent with the stream buffer protection regulations of this ordinance, or unusual circumstances exist such that strict adherence to such requirements would create an extreme hardship, provided that no variance shall be granted on the basis of any hardship created by any property owner on or after April 1, 2008. 
(3)  The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
(a)  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(b)  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
(c)  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
(d)  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
(e)  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance; 
(f)  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
c.  Other matters. 
(1)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this zoning ordinance, other than those related to signs, may be granted only upon a finding that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare or that there is an extraordinary condition on the property. 
(2)  Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship or extraordinary condition and not as a convenience to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over other but similar properties. 
(3)  A variance may be granted only upon a finding that: 
(a)  The variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good. 
(b)  The variance, if granted, would not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity. 
(c)  The variance, if granted, would not diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  The variance, if granted, would not impair the purpose and intent of the zoning ordinance. 
6.03.03.  Administrative variances. 
a.  The zoning official, following consultation with the affected departments, is authorized to grant a variance from certain requirements of this ordinance, subject to the limitations and standards of this section. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements to the extent indicated: 
(1)  Front yard setback. Variance not to exceed 15 percent of the required setback. 
(2)  Side yard setback. Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(3)  Rear yard setback. Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(4)  Minimum building square foot requirements. Variance not to exceed ten percent of the required floor area. 
(5)  Sign regulations. Dimensional requirements of the sign regulations article not to exceed ten percent. 
(6)  All other dimensional requirements of this ordinance, excluding stream buffer protection . Variance not to exceed 15 percent of the required dimension. 
b.  An appeal from an adverse decision of the zoning official may be taken to the board of adjustments and appeals at the request of the applicant. Such request shall be filed in writing with the zoning official within 30 days of the decision of the zoning official. 
6.03.04.  Variances by the board of adjustments and appeals. 
a.  The board of adjustments and appeals is authorized to grant a variance from the requirements of this zoning ordinance, subject to the limitations and standards of this section. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements to the extent indicated: 
(1)  Front yard setback. Variance not to exceed 35 percent of the required setback. 
(2)  Side yard setback. Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(3)  Rear yard setback. Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(4)  Minimum square foot requirements. Variance not to exceed 35 percent of the required floor area. 
(5)  Sign regulations. Dimensional requirements of the sign regulations article not to exceed 35 percent. 
(6)  All other dimensional requirements of this ordinance, excluding stream buffer protection . Variance not to exceed 35 percent of the required dimension. 
b.  An appeal from an adverse decision of the board of adjustments and appeals may be taken to the city council at the request of the applicant. Such request must be filed in writing with the zoning official within 30 days of the decision of the board of adjustments and appeals. 
6.03.05.  Variances by the city council. The city council is authorized to grant a variance from any requirement, term or provision of this zoning code, subject to the limitations and standards of this section, and applicable provisions of state law. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-37, § 2(Exh. B), 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 28, 29, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 16, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-62, § 2, 11-21-05; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 22—24, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-08-013, §§ 6, 7, 3-17-08; Ord. No. O-2014-07, §§ 1—4, 1-21-14) 
Section 6.04. - Process for granting an appeal or variance. 
6.04.01.  Receipt of request. 
a.  Upon receipt of a written appeal or request for a variance, the zoning official shall assemble such memos, papers, plans or other documents as may constitute the record for the appeal or as may provide an understanding of the issues involved. 
b.  An application for an appeal or variance shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action requested. The zoning official may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the applicant's request. 
c.  At a minimum, a variance request from the requirements of stream buffer protection regulations (Division 5) shall include the following information: 
(1)  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
(5)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
(6)  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
(7)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and, 
(8)  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
d.  Once the record has been assembled, the zoning official shall consider the request for administrative approval. Every request shall be granted, denied or rejected for incompleteness, in writing, within five days of submission of the request. If a request is denied, the denial shall identify the standards that are not met by the application. Any application rejected for incompleteness shall identify the reasons further action cannot be taken. If approved, the applicant shall be notified in writing and no further action by the city shall be required. 
6.04.02.  Public hearing. For all requests for variances other than administrative variances, and for appeals from an administrative interpretation or denial of a variance, the zoning official shall schedule the request or appeal for public hearing at the next meeting of the board of adjustments and appeals or the city council (as appropriate to the request or appeal) for which adequate public notice can be given. Such hearing shall be scheduled not later than 45 days after request, and final action shall be taken within 45 days after the initially scheduled hearing. 
6.04.03.  Public hearing notice. 
a.  At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing on the interpretation by the city council or variance by the city council or the board of adjustments and appeals, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
b.  A request specifically for an appeal or variance other than an administrative variance shall be heard at a public hearing as follows: 
(1)  The published notice also shall include the location of the property in issue, the present zoning classification of the property, and the nature of the requested action; and 
(2)  Where specific property is in issue, at least 15 days prior to the public hearing, the planning and zoning department shall post a sign or signs stating the date, time and place for the public hearing, the present zoning classification and the nature of requested action. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the subject property. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
6.04.04.  Withdrawal of appeal. Any appellant wishing to withdraw an appeal prior to the public hearing shall file a written request for such withdrawal with the zoning official. The appeal shall thereupon be withdrawn and the request shall have no further effect. 
6.04.05.  Public hearing procedures. 
a.  The public hearing shall be convened at the scheduled time and place by the appropriate body, as advertised. 
b.  The presiding official may administer oaths. 
c.  The zoning official shall submit the assembled record of the appeal. The zoning official shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the appeal. 
d.  It is required that the appellant or an agent for the appellant be present, and should the appellant or his agent fail to appear the appeal may be tabled. 
e.  At the public hearing concerning the appeal or variance, the appellant after being sworn in, shall be allowed to present evidence. Any parties in support of or in opposition to the appeal or variance shall also be allowed to present sworn testimony. 
f.  For each appeal or variance, the appellant and proponents of the request shall have no less than ten minutes for presentation of data, opinions and evidence at the public hearing, and opponents of the appeal or variance shall likewise have a minimum of ten minutes for presentation. The proponents of each appeal or variance shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, and the opponents of each appeal or variance likewise shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, unless these time limitations are waived at the discretion of the presiding official. 
g.  Hearsay testimony shall not be considered and shall be ruled out of order. 
h.  After the public hearing and any information presented by the zoning official, action on the appeal or variance shall be considered. 
(1)  A motion to approve or deny an appeal or variance must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members in attendance in order for the motion to be approved. 
(2)  If a motion to approve an appeal or variance fails, the appeal or variance is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an appeal or variance fails, another motion would be in order. 
(3)  A tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal or variance shall be deemed a denial of the appeal. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(4)  If no action is taken on an appeal or variance request, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting. 
i.  In taking action on an appeal or variance request, the board of adjustments and appeals or city council may: 
(1)  Approve, approve with changes, or deny the request; or, 
(2)  Table the appeal for consideration at a later meeting; or, 
(3)  Allow withdrawal of the appeal or variance at the request of the applicant. 
j.  No request shall be tabled more than twice, nor tabled for a cumulative period exceeding forty-five days. 
6.04.06.  Waiting period for re-filing. If a request specifically for a variance is denied by the city council, another request for a variance affecting the same property shall not be considered by the city council for a period of six months from the date of denial provided, however, that the city council may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-37, § 2(Exh. B), 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 30—33, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, §§ 17, 18, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 25, 26, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-08-013, § 8, 3-17-08) 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 7.01. - Purpose of article VII. 
This article sets out the structure for administering and enforcing this zoning ordinance, including amendments to the text of this ordinance and the responsibilities and procedures of the zoning official in carrying out enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 19, 4-19-04) 
Section 7.02. - Schedules and fees. 
From time to time, the city council may adopt fees for the submission of applications and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this zoning ordinance, and may adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary to regulate the application, review and hearing processes required by this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00) 
Section 7.03. - Amendment to the text of this ordinance. 
7.03.01.  Initiation and hearing of text amendment. 
a.  The city council by resolution, the mayor individually, the zoning board by Majority vote, or any city official designated by the mayor and city council may initiate an amendment to the text of this zoning ordinance, including the adoption of a new zoning ordinance to replace this ordinance in whole. 
b.  Before the city council may take final action on a proposed text amendment, the zoning board shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
7.03.02.  Public notice. At least 15 days but not more 45 days prior to each public hearing, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The planning and zoning department shall prepare such notice, which shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. 
7.03.03.  Zoning board public hearing. The public hearing held by the zoning board for a text amendment shall be conducted in the following manner: 
a.  The public hearing shall be convened at the scheduled time and place by the chairperson, the vice-chairperson or the zoning board's designee, who shall act as the presiding official. 
b.  The presiding official shall call for each proposed text amendment to be presented to the zoning board. 
c.  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the presiding official. 
d.  At the public hearing concerning the text amendment, any parties in support of or in opposition to the amendment shall be allowed to present testimony. 
e.  For each text amendment, the proponents of the amendment shall have no less than ten minutes for presentation of data, opinions and evidence at the public hearing, and opponents of the amendment shall likewise have a minimum of ten minutes for presentation. The proponents of each amendment shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, and the opponents of each amendment likewise shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, unless these time limitations are waived at the discretion of the presiding official. 
f.  At the public hearing on the text amendment or at their next regular meeting, the zoning board shall make its recommendation or take such other action as it may deem appropriate. 
(1)  A motion to recommend approval or denial of an amendment must be approved by an affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(2)  If a motion to recommend approval of an amendment fails, the amendment is automatically recommended for denial. If a motion to recommend denial of an amendment fails, another motion would be in order. 
(3)  A tie vote on a motion to recommend approval of an amendment shall be deemed a recommendation for denial of the amendment. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(4)  If no action is taken on an amendment, it will go forward to the city council with no recommendation. 
7.03.04.  City council public hearing. 
a.  The city council shall consider a proposed text amendment at their first or second scheduled meeting following the recommendation of the zoning board. 
b.  The presiding official shall call for each proposed text amendment to be presented to the city council. 
c.  No person in attendance shall speak unless first formally recognized by the presiding official. 
d.  At the public hearing concerning the text amendment, any parties in support of or in opposition to the amendment shall be allowed to present sworn testimony. 
e.  For each text amendment, the proponents of the amendment shall have no less than ten minutes for presentation of data, opinions and evidence at the public hearing, and opponents of the amendment shall likewise have a minimum of ten minutes for presentation. The proponents of each amendment shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, and the opponents of each amendment likewise shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, unless these time limitations are waived at the discretion of the presiding official. 
f.  Hearsay testimony shall not be considered and shall be ruled out of order. 
g.  After the public hearing and presentation by the zoning department, action shall be considered by vote of the city council. 
(1)  A motion to approve or deny an amendment must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(2)  If a motion to approve an amendment fails, the amendment is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an amendment fails, another motion would be in order. 
(3)  In the event of a tie vote, the mayor may cast a vote. If there is a tie vote with the mayor's vote, or in the absence of the mayor on a motion for approval of an amendment shall be deemed a denial of the amendment. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(4)  If no action is taken on an amendment, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting of the city council. 
h.  In taking action on an amendment, each city council may: 
(1)  Approve, approve with changes, or deny the proposal; or, 
(2)  Table the proposal for consideration at a later meeting; or, 
(3)  Refer the amendment back to the zoning board for further consideration. 
i.  [ Reserved. ] 
j.  No request shall be tabled more than twice, nor tabled for a cumulative period exceeding 45 days. 
7.03.05.  Standards for text amendments. The zoning board and the city council shall consider the following standards in considering any proposal that would result in a change to the text of this zoning ordinance, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
a.  Is the proposed amendment consistent with the purpose and intent of this zoning ordinance as stated under article I? 
b.  Does the proposed amendment further or is it compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
c.  Is the proposed amendment required to adequately address new or changing conditions or to properly implement the Comprehensive Plan? 
d.  Does the proposed amendment reasonably promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare? 
7.03.06.  Effect. 
a.  For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this zoning ordinance prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for Nonconforming Uses in article I of this zoning ordinance. 
b.  Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this zoning ordinance prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for nonconforming uses in article I of this zoning ordinance, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O—03-17, §§ 34, 35, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 20, 4-19-04) 
Section 7.04. - Inspection and enforcement. 
7.04.01.  Enforcement officer. 
a.  The zoning official shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be reasonably deemed necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this zoning ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection. 
b.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
7.04.02.  Inspection. If the zoning official or his designee finds that a provision of this zoning ordinance or a condition of approval established in connection with a grant of a variance or zoning change is being violated, the code enforcement official shall notify the person responsible for such violation in writing, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Upon continuing non-compliance, or initially in the case of an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the city's code compliance officers shall have authority to issue citations and to prosecute violations before a court of competent jurisdiction. 
7.04.03.  Cease and desist orders. The zoning official shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures; removal or relocation of illegal buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of illegal work being done; or shall take any other appropriate or necessary action to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-13, § 21, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-67, §§ 27, 28, 12-19-05; Ord. No. O-2018-20 , § 2, 5-21-18) 
Section 7.05. - Violation and penalties. 
7.05.01.  Penalties for violation of this ordinance. Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this ordinance shall be tried in the Municipal Recorders Court of the City of Douglasville and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in article IV of the charter. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
7.05.02.  Additional remedies. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, such as injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-59, § 2, 8-20-01) 
ARTICLE VIII. - GLOSSARY OF DEFINITIONS 
The following is a glossary of all definitions specifically used in the text of this zoning ordinance. Refer also to section 1.06 regarding the interpretation of figures, words and phrases as used in this ordinance. 
8.01.01.  Abutting Properties: Abutting properties are those that have contiguous lot lines at any point. 
8.02.01.  Academic School: See under "School." 
8.03.01.  Accessory Structure Setback Line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street and an accessory structure or building on a lot. 
8.04.01.  Accessory Use or Structure: A use or structure that is permitted on a property in conjunction with a principal use. An accessory use is incidental to the principal use and would not exist independent of the principal use. 
8.05.01.  Alteration of a Building: Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, beams, columns or girders) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another. 
8.06.01.  Alternative Tower Structure: Man-made structures such as clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennae and towers. 
8.07.01.  Amusement or Recreational Attraction: A business establishment offering leisure time activities such as a billiard or pool hall, bingo parlor, go-cart track, miniature golf, golf driving range, judo or karate instruction, softball field, batting cage or skating rink. 
8.08.01.  Amusement Park: A business establishment that groups together a number of leisure time activities such as mechanical rides, amusement devices, refreshment stands and picnic grounds. 
8.09.01.  Amusement Parlor: A business establishment providing leisure entertainment utilizing video games, pinball machines or other coin-operated amusement devices. 
8.10.01.  Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
8.11.01.  Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the city for approval of a zoning change, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of their property under the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
8.12.01.  Application: A petition for approval of a zoning change, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the use or development of a property under the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
8.12.02.  Aquifer: Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
8.13.01.  Automobile Parking Lot, Commercial: An area or structure dedicated to the temporary storage of automobiles or other vehicles for periods of less than 24 hours for a fee, operated as the principal use of the property or structure. 
8.14.01.  Automobile Sales and Service: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used automobiles, panel trucks, vans or busses, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. See also "Boat Dealers," "Motorcycle Sales and Service," and "Recreational Vehicle Dealer." 
8.15.01.  Automobile Storage Lot, Wrecker Service: Lots, premises or buildings, other than junkyards and salvage yards, where: 
a.  any automobiles are stored or held for a fee; or 
b.  wrecked, inoperable or dismantled automobiles are towed in a state of disrepair and held for repair or other disposition at another location; or 
c.  the premises contains a business listed on the wrecker towing list for any state or local government. 
8.16.01.  Automobile Service Station: Buildings and premises where gasoline or diesel fuel is dispensed at retail for automobiles, recreation vehicles and motorcycles, and where in addition at least one of the following services is rendered: sale, replacement, or servicing of spark plugs, oil, water hoses, batteries, ignition components, tires, carburetors, brakes, fuel pumps, or similar service items. 
Uses permissible at an automobile service station do not include major mechanical and bodywork, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of automobiles not in mechanically operable condition. See "Automotive Repair Shop" where major mechanical and bodywork activities are allowed. 
8.17.01.  Automotive Repair Shop: The use of a building or premises for the repair of automobiles or other motorized vehicles, or the installation or repair of equipment or parts on motorized vehicles such as mufflers, brakes, tires, radios, transmissions, glass, and engines or engine parts. Automotive Repair Shops also include: 
a.  Automotive Paint or Body Shop: The use of a building or premises for the repair of automotive bodies and/or major mechanical works, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, or storage of automobiles not in operable condition. 
b.  Tire Sales or Repair Shop: The use of a building or premises for the selling or repairing of automotive tires, with or without automotive tune-up services. 
8.18.01.  Awning: A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, walkway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
8.19.01.  Awning Sign: See "Building Sign." 
8.20.01.  Bank, Savings and Loan or Credit Union: A financial depository institution or related banking facility that accepts money for deposit into accounts from the general public or other financial institutions, and may include personal or business loans, wire transfers and safe deposit boxes as accessory uses. 
8.21.01.  Banner: A sign other than an official flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material, not larger than 32 square feet, and usually containing a message or logo. 
8.21.011.  Banquet Hall: A commercial meeting hall establishment where food and drink may be provided to guests by staff, by the lessee/host, or by independent caterers, for pre-planned events only, and not for walk-in customers; a banquet hall is not a restaurant. 
8.21.02.  Base Zone: The primary zoning designation of a property that confers restrictions on buildings and land use. All property in Douglasville has one base zone (such as R-1 single-family residential or C-3 general commercial), but properties may be further regulated by one or more overlay zoning districts. 
8.22.01.  Basement: That portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on two or more sides. 
8.23.01.  Bed and Breakfast Inn: A business establishment operated within a dwelling by the owner-occupant, offering temporary lodging and one or more meals to the traveling public while away from their normal places of residence. See in contrast "hotel or motel." 
8.24.01.  Billboard: A sign, with an area of 300 square feet or greater, which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and is not attached to a building and is not mobile or temporary. 
8.25.01.  Boarder: An individual who lives in a part of a dwelling unit at the behest of the resident family and is provided lodging or lodging and meals for pay or other consideration on a temporary basis. 
8.26.01.  Boarding House: See "Rooming or Boarding House." 
8.27.01.  Boat Dealer: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used motorboats or other watercraft, and which may include the sale of marine supplies or outboard motors and repair service conducted as accessory uses. 
8.28.01.  Buffer: An area of natural vegetation or man-made construction which is intended to provide a visual and dimensional separation between dissimilar land uses. 
a.  Natural Buffer: A visual screen created by existing vegetation (and as may be supplemented with additional plantings) of such density so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
b.  Structural Buffer: A visual screen created through construction of a solid wooden fence, decorative masonry wall, earthen berm, or combination of fence or wall with an earthen berm, which may be supplemented with vegetation, so as to present an opaque visual separation when viewed from one side to the other throughout the year. 
c.  Undisturbed Buffer: A natural buffer. 

Structural Buffer 
   
Structural Buffer with earthen berm and opaque fence 
8.29.01.  Building: Any structure over 100 square feet in size, having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
8.30.01.  Building Floor Area: The total floor area of all heated spaces within a building as measured within the outside of the exterior walls, exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces, and unheated stairwells, storage areas, garages and loading docks. 
8.31.01.  Building Height: The vertical distance measured to the eaves of the highest habitable floor of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
8.32.01.  Building Materials Sales: An establishment offering lumber or other construction materials used in buildings for sale to contractors or the general public. 
8.33.01.  Building Sign: A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window, door, or roof of a building. The term "building sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Awning Sign: A sign imposed or painted upon an awning. 
b.  Marquee Sign: Any sign attached flat against the marquee or permanent sidewalk canopy of a building and not extending above the roof line. 
c.  Projecting Sign: A sign affixed to a wall and extending more than four inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
d.  Roof sign: A sign that is mounted on, applied to, or otherwise structurally supported by the roof of a building. 
e.  Under Canopy Sign: A display attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over any public or private sidewalk or right-of-way. 
f.  Wall Sign: A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building and extends from the surface of the wall no more than 18 inches. 
g.  Window Sign: A sign that is placed on or behind a window pane and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
8.34.01.  Business or Vocational School: See under "School." 
8.35.01.  Business, Professional or Trade Association: See under "Membership Organization." 
8.36.01.  Business Service: The use of a building or premises primarily for rendering a service to other business establishments on a contract or fee basis, such as advertising, credit reporting, computer programming, photocopying, and employment services. 
a.  Miscellaneous Business Service Establishment: An establishment offering such business services as private security, photofinishing, appraisals, map drafting, paralegal, press clipping, recording studio, repossession, and telephone answering. 
8.37.01.  Canopy: A roof-like structure supported by columns or projecting from a building and open on at least three sides. 
8.38.01.  Carnival: See "Special Outdoor Event." 
8.39.01.  Carwash: The use of a building or premises primarily for washing automobiles, recreation vehicles and motorcycles, whether by hand or mechanical means. 
8.40.01.  Cemetery: A facility for the burial of deceased human beings or animals. 
8.41.01.  Church or Place of Worship: See under "Membership Organization." 
8.42.01.  Civic, Social or Fraternal Association: See under "Membership Organization." 
8.43.01.  Common Open Space: See "Open Space." 
8.44.01.  Comprehensive Plan: The text, maps and other data adopted in accordance with the Georgia Comprehensive Planning Act (O.C.G.A. 36-70-1 et seq.) and as officially amended from time to time. 
8.45.01.  Condition of Zoning Approval: A requirement adopted by the city council at the time of approval of a rezoning or special use, placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this zoning ordinance in order to reduce an adverse impact of the rezoning or special use and to further the protection of the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
8.46.01.  Congregate Personal Care Home: See under "Personal Care Home." 
8.47.01.  Convalescent Home: An intermediate care facility primarily engaged in providing inpatient nursing or rehabilitative services to residents who require watchful care or medical attention or treatment, but not on a continuous basis, although staff is on duty 24-hours per day. 
8.48.01.  Convenience Gas Station: A building or premises where gasoline, diesel fuel and oil may be dispensed at retail with no automobile repair facilities. Uses permissible also include the sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco and similar household convenience goods for station customers. 
8.48.02.  Creek: (See "Stream"). 
8.49.01.  Custom Service Restaurant: See under "Restaurant, Custom Service." 
8.50.01.  Day Care Facility: The use of a building or premises for the care and supervision of children or elderly adults who do not reside on the property, for periods of less than 24 hours. 
a.  Day Care Center: A day care facility other than a single-family dwelling that enrolls for pay, supervision and non-medical care, 13 or more children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
b.  Family Day Care Home: An accessory use within a private residence operated by the occupant of the dwelling that enrolls for pay, supervision and non-medical care, five or fewer children or elderly adults with no overnight stays, or no more than six children or elderly adults if the structure meets the building code requirements for institutional uses. 
c.  Group Day Care Home: A day care facility that enrolls for pay, supervision and non-medical care, seven to 12 children or elderly adults with no overnight stays. 
8.51.01.  Density: 1) Residential—The number of dwelling units per acre within a development or defined area; 2) Nonresidential—The number of square feet of building floor area per acre. 
8.51.011.  Developed Property: a parcel of property having a structure with a certificate of occupancy. 
8.51.02.  Directional Sign: A sign to facilitate the safe and efficient movement of traffic onto or from any lot, no more than 30 inches in height, with a face no more than 480 square inches, made of durable materials. 
8.52.01.  Drive-in Motion Picture Theater: See under "Theater." 
8.53.01.  Duplex: A two-family dwelling (see under "Dwelling, Two-Family Dwelling"). 
8.54.01.  Drug Addiction Rehabilitation Center: A halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or any other facility for treatment of drug dependency. 
8.55.01.  Dwelling: A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families on a permanent or long-term basis. 
a.  Single-Family Dwelling: A residential building, whether site-built or a manufactured home or an industrialized building, designed for occupancy by one family. 

Dwelling, Single-Family Detached 
(1)  Site-Built Single-Family Detached Dwelling: A single-family detached dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the building codes as adopted by the city. 
(2)  Class A Single-Family Detached Dwelling: A site-built single-family detached dwelling, a one-family manufactured home or a one-family industrialized home that meets or exceeds the standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under this Code. 
(3)  Class B Single-Family Detached Dwelling: A site-built single-family detached dwelling, a one-family manufactured home or a one-family industrialized home that does not meet the standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under this Code. 
(4)  Single-Family Attached Dwelling: A single-family dwelling in which the dwelling units may adjoin one another only at the vertical walls and no dwelling unit may be located above another. 

Dwelling, Single-family Attached 
b.  Two-Family Dwelling: A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(1)  Site-Built Two-Family Dwelling: A two-family dwelling constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, and which is constructed in accordance with all requirements of the building codes as adopted by the city. 
(2)  Class A Two-Family Dwelling: A site-built two-family dwelling, a two-family manufactured home or a two-family industrialized home that meets or exceeds the standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under this Code. 
(3)  Class B Two-Family Dwelling: A site-built two-family dwelling, a two-family manufactured home or a two-family industrialized home that does not meet the standards for single-family and two-family dwellings under this Code. 
c.  Multi-Family Dwelling: A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(1)  Multi-Family Apartment Building: A multi-family dwelling in which a dwelling unit may be located above another, such as in a garden apartment building. 

Dwelling Garden Apartment 
(2)  Quadraplex: A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by four families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
(3)  Triplex: A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy by three families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other. 
d.  Multi-Use Dwelling: A dwelling unit located within a building that is also designed for or occupied separately by nonresidential uses, such as shops or offices. 
8.56.01.  Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment with complete provisions for cooking, eating, sleeping, bathing and personal hygiene, and physically set apart from any other dwelling unit in the same structure. 
8.56.02.  Façade: A vertical exterior face or elevation of a building. 
a.  Front façade: Any façade which faces primarily toward a front yard. 
b.  Rear façade: Any façade which faces primarily toward a rear yard. 
c.  Side façade: Any façade which faces primarily toward a side yard. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-91 , § 4, 11-20-17) 
8.57.01.  Family: An individual or two or more persons living together as a household. 
8.58.01.  Family Day Care Home: See under "Day Care Facility." 
8.59.01.  Family Personal Care Home: See under "Personal Care Home." 
8.60.01.  Fast Food Restaurant: See "Restaurant, Fast Food." 
8.61.01.  Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of wood, wire, wire mesh, or decorative metal erected to enclose, screen or separate portions of a lot. 
8.61.02.  Floodplain: (with regard to stream buffer protection) any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
8.62.01.  Floor Area, Building: See "Building Floor Area." 
8.63.01.  Floor Area, Gross: See "Gross Floor Area." 
8.63.02.  Free-flowing Creek, Stream, or River: (See "Regulated Stream"). 
8.64.01.  Freestanding Sign: A sign, with an area less than 300 square feet and more than four square feet, which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and is not attached to a building and is not mobile or temporary. The term "freestanding sign" includes but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Pole Sign: A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face is at least six feet above the ground. 
b.  Ground Sign: A freestanding sign, other than a pole sign, in which the bottom of the sign face is less than six feet above the ground but not directly in contact with the ground. 
c.  Monument Sign: A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. 
8.65.01.  Freight Agency or Shipping Coordinator: An establishment primarily engaged in the remote arrangement of freight or cargo transportation, and not located where the freight or cargo is handled, stored or transported. 
8.66.01.  Frontage or Street Frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street from which access may be directly gained. 
8.67.01.  Funeral Home: A building used for the preparation of deceased human beings for burial or cremation and for conducting funeral ceremonies, and where cremations may be conducted as an accessory use. 
8.68.01.  Furniture or Equipment Rental Establishment: A business establishment that rents or leases items of personal property such as furniture, tools, medical equipment, appliances and construction equipment to the general public, but not including automobiles or trucks. 
8.69.01.  Garden Apartment Building: See under "Dwelling." 
8.70.01.  Garment Services: A business establishment engaged primarily in such activities as linen supply, dressmaking, custom tailoring, or fur cleaning and storage. 
8.71.01.  General Business Office: See under "Office." 
8.72.01.  General Merchandise Store: A retail establishment that sells a number of lines of merchandise, such as dry goods, apparel, furniture, small wares, hardware and boutique foods. Such stores are also known as "department stores," "variety stores" and "country general stores." 
8.73.01.  Grade: The level of the surface of the ground. 
a.  Existing Grade: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
b.  Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
c.  Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. If fill has been placed, it refers to the original ground level beneath the fill. 
8.74.01.  Grandfathered Use, Structure or Lot: A use, structure or lot that was legally established prior to the imposition of current regulations and that does not conform to the requirements of those regulations. Also known as a "Nonconforming" use, structure or lot. 
8.75.01.  Greenhouse: A building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for subsequent sale or for personal enjoyment. 
8.76.01.  Gross Floor Area: The total area of all floors of a building, measured from the outside planes of the exterior walls. 
8.77.01.  Ground Elevation: See under "Grade." 
8.78.01.  Group Day Care Home: See under "Day Care Facility." 
8.79.01.  Group Home for the Elderly: See "Retirement Community." 
8.80.01.  Group Personal Care Home: See under "Personal Care Home." 
8.81.01.  Guest House: An accessory use to a dwelling designed and intended for the temporary housing of visitors to a property at the behest of the property residents for no fee or other consideration, and meeting or exceeding the Standards for Single-Family and Two-Family Dwellings under this Code. 
8.82.01.  Guy Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
8.83.01.  Health Club or Fitness Center: A business that provides facilities for aerobic exercises, such as running and jogging tracks, exercise equipment, game courts, gymnasium, or swimming facilities. 
8.84.01.  Health Services Facility: An establishment primarily engaged in outpatient health services and counseling, such as a kidney dialysis center, blood bank, or childbirth preparation center, but specifically excluding a "Drug Addiction Rehabilitation Center." 
8.85.01.  Height: See "Building Height." "Sign Height." "Structure Height" and "Transmission Tower Height." 
8.86.01.  Home Occupation: Any activity carried out for profit by the resident and conducted as an accessory use in the resident's dwelling unit. 
a.  Home Office: A home occupation that is limited to an office use and does not involve visits or access by the public, suppliers or customers, and does not involve the receipt, maintenance, repair, storage or transfer of merchandise at the home. 
b.  Residential Business: A home occupation that is limited to the office use of a practicing professional, an artist or a commercial representative, and may involve very limited visits or access by clients or customers, but does not involve the maintenance, repair, storage or transfer of merchandise received at the home. 
8.87.01.  Hospital: The use of a building or premises for the provision of diagnostic health services and medical or surgical care to inpatients and out-patients suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity and other physical or mental afflictions, and including as an integral part of the institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities. 
8.88.01.  Hotel or motel: A business establishment offering temporary lodging to the traveling public while away from their normal places of residence, and often including a restaurant as an accessory use. See in contrast "Bed and Breakfast Inn." 
8.89.01.  Household: An individual living alone or a group of individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, sharing common use of and access to all living and eating areas, bathrooms, and food preparation areas, who mutually combine their efforts and share responsibilities for domestic chores such as child rearing, cleaning and cooking in a permanent and long-term relationship, as contrasted to one in a transient relationship who pays for lodging such as a boarder. 
8.90.01.  Illuminated signs: 
a.  Internally-illuminated sign. Any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
b.  Externally-illuminated sign. Any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
8.90.02.  Impervious Cover: (with regard to stream buffer protection) any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
8.90.03.  Impervious Surface: Man-made structures, improvements and surfaces that prevent or significantly limit the infiltration of stormwater. Examples of impervious structures and improvements are: buildings, structures, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, patios, and sidewalks. Examples of impervious materials often used to construct such improvements are asphalt, concrete, gravel, brick, stone, wood, asphalt shingles, metal, and composite materials. 
8.91.01.  Industrialized (or Modular) Home: A dwelling manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act (O.C.G.A. title 8, chapter 2, article 2, part 1) and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto. State approved buildings meet the State Building and Construction Codes and bear an insignia of approval issued by the commissioner. 
8.92.01.  Junkyard or Salvage Yard: A building or premises, enclosed by an eight-foot high opaque fence, used primarily for the collecting, storage or sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal or other discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, or salvage of machinery or vehicles not in running condition and not awaiting eminent repair, or for the sale or reuse of parts removed from such machinery or vehicles. 
8.93.01.  Kennel: A shelter where dogs or cats are bred, raised, trained or boarded as a business, which commonly include outside facilities. 
8.93.02.  Land Development: (with regard to stream buffer protection) any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
8.93.03.  Land Development Activity: (with regard to stream buffer protection) those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
8.93.04.  Land Disturbance: (with regard to stream buffer protection) any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
8.93.05.  Land Disturbance Activity: (with regard to stream buffer protection) those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
8.94.01.  Lattice Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
8.95.01.  Livestock: Animals used for the production of food or products, such as all animals of the equine, bovine and swine classes, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle and other grazing animals; poultry, such as chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks and guinea fowl; and all ratites, such as ostriches, emus and rheas. 
8.96.01.  Lot: A parcel or tract of land held in single ownership. 
a.  Corner Lot: Any lot bounded by two streets at their intersection. 
b.  Double-Frontage Lot: A lot bounding on two or more streets, but not at their intersection, so that it is not a corner lot. 
c.  Interior Lot: A lot having frontage on only one street. 

Types of Lots 
8.97.01.  Lot Area: The total horizontal area included within lot lines. 
8.98.01.  Lot Coverage: The portion of a lot that is occupied by structures that create an impervious surface on the ground, such as buildings, parking lots, loading areas, driveways, patios, plazas, recreation courts, and paved outdoor storage or display areas. 
8.99.01.  Lot Line: The boundary dividing a given lot from the street or adjacent lots; the boundary defining the limit of ownership of a property. 
a.  Front Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that abuts a street right-of-way line. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line. 
b.  Rear Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
c.  Side Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 

Types of Lot Lines 
8.100.01.  Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the clerk to superior court, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded. 
8.101.01.  Lot Width: The distance measured along the front principal building setback line between intersecting lot lines. The lot width shall be measured along a straight line between such points of intersection. 
Lot Width Measurements 
8.102.01.  Major Street or Major Thoroughfare: An arterial or collector street (see under "Street Classifications.") 
8.103.01.  Manufactured Home: A dwelling fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq.), which first became effective on June 15, 1976. The term "manufactured home" includes a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term includes any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirement and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. 
8.104.01.  Manufactured Home Park: Any lot or parcel under single ownership on which two or more manufactured homes are to be located or intended to be located for purposes of residential occupancy. 
8.105.01.  Manufactured Home Sales Lot: A premises on which manufactured homes are displayed for sale. 
8.106.01.  Manufacturing: The creation of finished goods from raw materials or intermediate component parts. 
a.  Heavy Manufacturing: The extraction of natural resources or the transformation of raw materials through mechanical or chemical means into basic products for subsequent assembly, fabrication or use in the production of finished goods. 
b.  Light Manufacturing: The finishing, fabrication or assembly of previously manufactured parts into a final product or component products ready for retail sale. Light manufacturing is characterized by no emissions of noxious odors, dust, fumes, gas, noise, or vibration outside of any building. 
8.107.01.  Marquee sign. See under "Building Sign." 
8.108.01.  Monument sign. See under "Freestanding Sign." 
8.109.01.  Medical or Dental Office: See under "Office." 
8.110.01.  Membership Dwelling: A dwelling occupied by a group of people related through membership in a particular organization (as opposed to blood, adoption or marriage), such as a fraternity, sorority or convent. 
8.111.01.  Membership Organization: An organization that operates on a membership basis for the promotion of the members' interests. 
a.  Business, Professional or Trade Association: A private organization that promotes the interests of business groups, such as the Chamber of Commerce; professions, such as the Bar Association; or members of a trade, such as a labor union. 
b.  Church or Place of Worship: A religious organization operated for worship, religious training or study, and including convents, monasteries, shrines and temples. 
c.  Civic, Social or Fraternal Association: An organization dedicated to public activities of a civic and non-profit nature, such as an alumni association, American Legion, Hibernian Society, Masonic Lodge or Oddfellows. 
d.  Political Organization: An organization established to promote the interests of a local, state or national political party or candidate. 
8.112.01.  Mini-Warehouse: A structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis to the general public. 
8.113.01.  Miscellaneous Business Service Establishment: See under "Business Service." 
8.114.01.  Miscellaneous Personal Service: See under "Personal Service Establishment." 
8.115.01.  Miscellaneous Retail Stores: See under "Retail Store." 
8.116.01.  Mobile Home: A dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. 
8.117.01.  Mobile Home Court: See "manufactured home park." 
8.118.01.  Monopole Tower: See under "transmission tower." 
8.119.01.  Modular Home: See "industrialized home." 
8.120.01.  Motel: See "hotel or motel." 
8.121.01.  Motion Picture Theater: See under "theater." 
8.122.01.  Motor Freight Truck Terminal: A building or premises where trucks load and unload cargo and freight and where the cargo and freight may be broken down or aggregated into smaller or larger loads for transfer to other vehicles or modes of transportation. 
8.123.01.  Motor Vehicle Dealers, Miscellaneous: A business establishment primarily engaged in the sale of motorized vehicles and related equipment other than automobiles, motorboats, motorcycles or recreation vehicles, such as aircraft, dunebuggies, go-carts, snowmobiles and utility trailers, and which may include a repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
8.124.01.  Motorcycle Sales and Service: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used motorcycles, scooters or mopeds, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
8.125.01.  Multi-Faced Sign: A sign structure that contains two or more sign face surfaces that are located on different sides of the structure and are separated from each other at their nearest point by no more than three feet. 
8.126.01.  Non-Safe-Fall Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
8.127.01.  Nursery School: See "Day Care Facility." 
8.128.01.  Nursing Home: A skilled nursing care facility primarily engaged in providing full-time convalescent or rehabilitative care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves and require continuous care under the direction of a physician. See in contrast "Convalescent Home." 
8.129.01.  Office: The use of any building or premises primarily for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government, and generally furnished with desks, tables, files, and communication equipment. 
a.  General Business Office: An office used primarily for the administrative or legal affairs of a company. 
b.  Medical or Dental Office: An office occupied and maintained for the provision of services by a person licensed by the State of Georgia to practice in the healing arts for humans, such as a physician, surgeon, dentist, or optometrist, but not including veterinary services. 
c.  Professional Office: An office occupied by a member of a recognized profession and maintained for the provision of professional services, such as a lawyer, architect, city planner, landscape architect, interior designer, or engineer. 
8.130.01.  Open Space: An area of land or water that is permanently set aside through dedication, designation or reservation to remain in a natural and unimproved state or that may be improved only for active or passive recreation or enjoyment (if such use is otherwise allowed). 
a.  Common Open Space: Land or water areas within a development project that are available to or benefit all occupants of the development on a continuing and permanent basis, such as walking trails, community centers or clubhouses, golf courses and other recreation areas, protected flood plains or wetlands, and fishing or boating lakes. Common open space does not include any streets or public rights-of-way, or yard areas or landscape areas located on private property. 
b.  Public Open Space: Land reserved for preservation, leisure or recreational use but dedicated in fee simple to a governing body or agency to be responsible for operation and maintenance. Public open space may not be reserved for or dedicated to the exclusive use of the residents of a particular development. 
8.131.01. Outdoor Display Area: An outdoor portion of a lot where merchandise, goods or other items are placed in public view for the purpose of customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers. 
8.132.01.  Outdoor Storage: The keeping within an unroofed area of any goods, material, merchandise or vehicles in the same place for more than 24 hours for the primary purpose of storage (in contrast to display for customer selection or direct sale or lease to customers). 
8.133.01.  Outparcel: A lot deeded separately from a larger tract for individual development, but generally sharing access with the larger tract. Outparcels are most generally associated with shopping centers. 
8.134.01.  Overlay Zone: A zoning district which may be placed on property in addition to its base zoning. Property may be regulated by a single or by multiple overlay zones. 
8.135.01.  Owner: A person having or controlling a majority fee simple interest in a property, or their authorized representative. 
8.136.01.  Pawn Shop: A type of used merchandise store in which merchandise is offered as collateral for obtaining loans, and (for other than title pawn) wherein such merchandise is offered for sale in recompense for default of loan repayment; see also "Title Pawn". 
8.136.02.  Parcel: (with regard to stream buffer protection) any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
8.137.01.  Performing Arts Theater: See under "Theater." 
8.137.02.  Permanent Subdivision Sign: A monument sign located not more than 300 feet from a subdivision entrance, and not closer than 12 feet to any street right-of-way, street pavement, curb or gutter. 
8.137.03.  Permit: (with regard to stream buffer protection) the first permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
8.137.04.  Person: (with regard to stream buffer protection) any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
8.138.01.  Personal Care Home: A dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service and one or more personal care services for two or more persons who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. 
a.  Family Personal Care Home: A personal care home in a family type residence, noninstitutional in character, that offers care for two to six persons. 
b.  Group Personal Care Home: A personal care home in a residence or other type of building that is noninstitutional in character and offers care for seven to 12 persons. 
c.  Congregate Personal Care Home: A personal care home that offers care to 13 or more persons. 
8.139.01.  Personal Enrichment School: See under "School." 
8.140.01.  Personal Service Establishment: A business primarily engaged in providing a service generally to individuals, such as a laundry, portrait photographic studio, or beauty or barber shop. 
a.  Miscellaneous Personal Service: An establishment offering such personal services as tax return preparation, clothing or costume rental, dating service, hair removal or replacement, or tanning salon. 
8.141.01.  Pet: An animal most commonly kept for personal enjoyment or companionship, such as a dog or a cat. 
8.142.01.  Place of Public Assembly: Any church, school, day care center, hospital, nursing home, recreational facility, performing arts facility or any like establishment. 
8.143.01.  Planned Commercial Center: Three or more commercial establishments that are planned, developed, and managed as a unit and which provide free parking facilities on one lot or contiguous lots. 
8.144.01.  Plant Nursery: Land or greenhouses used to raise flowers, shrubs, trees, and other plants for sale to distributors or for subsequent replanting by the owner, a landscape company or others. 
8.145.01.  Political Organization: See under "Membership Organization." 
8.146.01.  Premises: An area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, is one unit of real estate. 
8.147.01.  Principal Building: A building in which is conducted a principal use. 
8.148.01.  Principal Building Setback Line: A line delineating the minimum allowable distance between a property line or the right-of-way line of an abutting street, and a principal building on a lot. 
a.  Front Building Setback: The minimum allowable distance between the right-of-way line of any abutting street and any part of a principal building on a lot. The front setback distance is applied along the full length of the right-of-way line and is parallel to it. 
b.  Rear Building Setback: The minimum allowable distance between a rear lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The rear building setback extends along and parallel to the full length of the rear lot line. 
c.  Side Building Setback: The minimum allowable distance between a side lot line and any part of a principal building on a lot. The side building setback extends along and parallel to the side lot line between the front building setback and a rear building setback (if any). 

Principal Building Setback Lines 
8.149.01.  Principal Use: The specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
8.150.01.  Professional Office: See under "Office." 
8.151.01.  Prohibited Use: A use that is not permitted in a zoning district. 
8.152.01.  Property or Parcel of Land: See "Lot." 
8.152.02.  Protection Area, or Stream Protection Area: (with regard to stream buffer protection) with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
8.153.01.  Public Open Space: See under "Open Space." 
8.154.01.  Quadraplex: See under "Dwelling, Multi-Family Dwelling." 
8.154.02.  Recharge Area: Any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
8.155.01.  Record and Video Tape Sales: A business establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale (but not rental) of prerecorded music, movies or other audio or video programs. See also "Video Tape Rental Store." 
8.156.01.  Recreation Facility, Community: A swimming pool, tennis court, or other recreation facility owned by or provided for the use of the residents of a subdivision, apartment project, or other residential development. 
8.157.01.  Recreation Facility, Private: An accessory use to a dwelling designed and equipped for the conduct of personal leisure time activities such as a swimming pool, tennis court, deck, or patio. See also "Community Recreation Facility." 
8.158.01.  Recreational Vehicle: A motorized camper, converted bus, tent trailer, motor home, or other similar vehicular or portable structure used or designed for temporary portable housing or occupancy while on vacation or other recreational trip and provided with sleeping accommodations. 
8.159.01.  Recreational Vehicle Dealer: The use of any building or premises for the display and sale of new or used recreational vehicles, and which may include any repair service conducted as an accessory use. 
8.160.01.  Recycling Center: A use operated exclusively for the collection and temporary storage of used paper, glass, metal, and similar materials suitable for reprocessing, which are transported elsewhere for separating, processing, or storage. 
8.160.02.  Regulated Stream: (See "Stream, Regulated") 
8.161.01.  Repair Shop, Miscellaneous: A business establishment primarily engaged in specialized repair services such as bicycle repair, leather goods repair, lock and gun repair, musical instrument repair, septic tank cleaning, furnace cleaning and taxidermists. 
8.162.01.  Residential Business: See under "Home Occupation." 
8.163.01.  Restaurant, Custom Service: An establishment where food and drink are prepared to individual order, ordered and served at the table, and consumed primarily within the principal building or in established outdoor dining areas, as contrasted to a fast food restaurant. Any restaurant that provides drive-in or drive-through service to customers in their cars is considered a "fast food" restaurant. 
8.164.01.  Restaurant, Fast Food: Any establishment, building or structure where food or drink are served for consumption, either on or off the premises, by order from or service to persons either over an interior counter, outside the structure or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window, or by delivery. This definition shall not include otherwise permitted restaurants where outdoor table service is provided to customers in established outdoor dining areas or where take-out service is provided incidental to a custom service restaurant. 
8.165.01.  Retail Store: An establishment principally engaged in offering a category of similar goods or products for sale to the general public, such as a grocery store, hardware store, pharmacy, clothing shop, home furnishings store, office supplies store, and the like. 
a.  Miscellaneous Retail Stores: Retail stores such as florists, tobacco stores or newsstands, optical goods stores, artists' supplies, stamp and coin shops, pet stores, telephone stores, and home swimming pool or hot tub stores. 
8.166.01.  Retirement Community: An age-restricted residential development that offers significant services and facilities for the elderly, including social and recreational activities, personal care services, or health facilities limited to use by the development's residents. At least 80 percent of the units must be occupied by residents 62 years old or older, and the remaining units must be occupied by at least one resident 55 years old or older. 
8.166.02.  River: A natural, free-flowing watercourse that is typically of greater volume than a stream or creek. 
8.166.03.  Riparian: (with regard to stream buffer protection) belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
8.167.01.  Roof Sign: See "Building Sign." 
8.168.01.  Rooming or Boarding House: A dwelling within which a resident family or resident manager offers lodging or lodging and meals to two or more persons not under the resident's parental or protective care in exchange for monetary compensation or other consideration. 
8.169.01.  Safe-Fall Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
8.170.01.  School: A facility used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
a.  Academic School: A private educational facility offering instruction following the same curriculum used in a public kindergarten, elementary, secondary, trade or technical, or higher education facility, and accredited to award diplomas as such. 
b.  Business or Vocational School: A business establishment offering courses of instruction oriented to improving business skills or securing employment in a specific field, such as data processing, secretarial or office services, banking, commercial art, nursing, real estate, truck driving, or other trade or vocation. 
c.  Personal Enrichment School: A business establishment offering courses in the arts or personal skills, not necessarily related to employment, such as automobile driving, drama, ceramics, cooking, diction, languages, modeling, music, public speaking or reading. 
8.171.01.  Semi-Public Use: A use owned or operated by a nonprofit, religious, or charitable institution for the purpose of providing educational, cultural, recreational, religious, or social services to the general public. 
8.172.01.  Service Station: See "Automobile Service Station." 
8.173.01.  Setback: The shortest straight-line distance between a street right-of-way or lot line and the nearest point of a structure or building or projection therefrom (excluding roof overhangs of 18 inches or less). 
8.174.01.  Setback, Minimum: The shortest distance allowed between a street right-of-way line or any other lot line and any principal or accessory building on a lot. Minimum setback requirements for buildings are associated with the type of lot line from which the setback is taken; for instance, a "side yard setback" is measured from a side lot line. 
8.174.02.  Reserved. 
8.174.03.  Reserved. 
8.174.04.  Siding Type C Material: Material used for the finish for exposed exterior walls, and limited to the following permitted materials: steel and aluminum without finish prescribed as Type B, plain concrete block, masonite, particle board, vinyl siding and sheet wafer board. 
8.175.01.  Sign: Any structure, display, or device, visible from the public street that is used to convey a specific message or to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement or illumination. Signs do not include purely artistic displays or decorations. 
Sign Types 
8.176.01.  Sign Face: That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
8.177.01.  Sign Face Module: Each portion or unit of a sign face that is clearly separable from other such units by virtue of the expression of a complete thought, message, logo, or idea. 
8.178.01.  Sign Height: The vertical distance to the highest point of a sign structure. The height is measured from the lowest point of the ground at the base of the structure or directly below a projecting structure, or from the surface of the nearest adjacent street at a point on the roadway centerline nearest the sign, whichever is higher. 
8.178.02.  Significant Recharge Area: Those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
8.179.01.  Sign Structure: All elements of a freestanding sign, including the sign face, background or decorative elements related to the presentation of the sign's message, and the structural supports. 
8.180.01.  Single-Family Detached Dwelling: See under "Dwelling." 
8.181.01.  Solid Waste Transfer Station: A facility where refuse and garbage (but no hazardous waste) is delivered for compaction or aggregation and loaded on trucks for shipment to a remote landfill or other disposal facility. 
8.182.01.  Special Outdoor Event: An event which is conducted in the open air or within a tent or other temporary structure and is produced for a limited time, and is: 
a.  A festival, carnival or exhibition where: 
i.  Unpackaged food is served, sold or transferred to members of the public, or 
ii.  Motorized amusement devices, a tent or an outdoor stage is used; or 
b.  Any temporary commercial event conducted on residential property, other than a yard sale; or 
c.  Any temporary event conducted on residential property where more than 200 guests or attendees are expected on any one day; or 
d.  Any outdoor sales or commercial activity by a peddler or transient merchant on non-residential property, other than a licensed flea market. 
Provided, however, that "special outdoor event" excludes the following: 
a.  Any event conducted on property owned by any government entity if authorized by the property owner; and 
b.  Any event conducted on the grounds of any developed lot whose principle use is one of public assembly, such as a church, school, library, park or membership organization. 
8.183.01.  Sports Facility, Commercial: The use of any building, structure or premises for the conduct of a professional or semi-professional sport, such as a boxing pavilion, track and field racetrack, stadium or sports field where admission is charged in order to pay the players or fund a prize purse. 
8.184.01.  Standard Informational Sign: A sign with an area not greater than 480 square inches, with a placard made entirely of biodegradable materials for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than 30 inches, and is mounted on a stake with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
8.185.01.  State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
8.186.01.  Storage: The placement, keeping, or retention of vehicles, equipment, materials, goods, or products on a temporary basis for intermittent use or subsequent distribution or transfer. 
8.187.01.  Story [of a building]: That portion of a building comprised between a floor and the ceiling or the floor next above. The first floor of a two or multi-story building shall be deemed the story that has no floor immediately below it that is designed for living quarters or for human occupancy, other than a basement. 
8.187.02.  Stream: any natural, freeflowing watercourse beginning at: 
1.  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; or 
2.  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
3.  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the (local permitting authority) may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
8.187.03.  Stream, Perennial: (with respect to watershed protection) a stream that has normal stream flow consisting of base flow (discharge that enters the stream channel mainly from groundwater or both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. 
8.187.04.  Stream Bank: (with regard to stream buffer protection) the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. The land forming the bank is considered part of the stream buffer. 
8.187.05.  Stream Buffer: a strip of natural indigenous vegetation (of width determined by the watershed protection regulations and the stream buffer protection regulations) adjacent to the bank of a stream designed to preserve and improve the quality if water within the stream and its watershed. A stream setback does not include the adjacent stream buffer. 
8.187.06.  Stream Channel: (with regard to stream buffer protection) means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
8.187.07.  Stream Setback: (with regard to stream buffer protection) the area established by Division 5. extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream, and within which certain activities and structures are prohibited. 
8.188.01.  Street: An improved way for the conveyance of motor driven, rubber-tired vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks. 
8.189.01.  Street Classifications: Streets and roads are shown in the Comprehensive Plan according to their classification. 
8.190.01. Structure: Anything above ground constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Among other things, structures include but are not limited to buildings, walls, signs and fences other than rear-yard fences on residential lots. 
8.192.01.  Tenant: One who possesses or occupies land or buildings by title, under a lease, or through payment of rent; an occupant, inhabitant, or dweller of a place. 
8.193.01.  Theater: A building or interior space devoted to showing motion pictures, or for live dramatic or musical performances. 
a.  Motion Picture Theater: A building primarily used for the exhibition of movies or other prerecorded productions to the general public in an indoor setting. 
b.  Performing Arts Theater: A building primarily used for the presentation of live performances of plays or music. 
8.194.01.  Theater, Drive-in: An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or other prerecorded productions to patrons seated in automobiles. 
8.195.01.  Tire Retreading or Repair Shop: See under "Automotive Repair Shop." 
8.195.02.  Title Pawn. A type of pawn shop in which the only type of merchandise accepted as collateral for obtaining loans is merchandise having a motor vehicle title issued by a state government; no merchandise shall be offered for sale on the premises, and no inventory shall be stored on premises for longer than 24 hours. 
8.196.01.  Townhouse: See under "Dwelling." 
8.196.05.  Traffic Study: A written report for specified property prepared and stamped by a professional engineer including the following: 
a.  A vicinity map showing location of the proposed development in relation to the transportation system; 
b.  A description of proposed development including size and nature of the entire proposed development and proposed site access points; 
c.  A proposed site plan; 
d.  A description of adjacent land uses and roadway network including road names, classifications, lane configurations, traffic control and pedestrian, bicycle and transit facilities; 
e.  Traffic volumes on existing roads at proposed access point measured within the last 12 months; 
f.  Operational analysis including average delay, level of service, volumes/capacity ratios, and queue length analysis of intersection of site access and main road and any additional study intersection(s); 
g.  Accident data summary and analysis (data may be obtained from the City); 
h.  Safety analysis of proposed site access including stopping sight distance, intersection sight distance, and operational characteristics; 
i.  Growth factor based on historical count data in the area; 
j.  Future no build base year volumes and performance evaluation; 
k.  Future no build horizon year (five years beyond base year) volumes and performance evaluation; 
l.  Any assumptions including pass-by and internal capture; 
m.  Trip generation from ITE latest edition; 
n.  Trip distribution show distribution percentages and volumes; 
o.  Access location and spacing; 
p.  Turn lane warrants and analysis; 
q.  Driveway analysis including lane configuration, queue lengths, throat length and channelization; 
r.  Future build base year volumes and performance evaluation; 
s.  Future build conditions horizon year (five years beyond base year) volumes and performance evaluation; 
t.  Parking needs, required and provided spaces; 
u.  Description and analysis of mitigation measures; and 
v.  Appendix to include applicable raw count data, calculation sheets, computer software output of performance evaluation, and warrant worksheets. 
8.197.01.  Transmission Tower: A structure, such as a self-supporting tower, lattice tower, guy tower, monopole tower, a safe-fall tower, or a non-safe-fall tower constructed as a free-standing structure or in association with a building, or other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. The term excludes any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height and owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, and satellite earth station antennae one meter in diameter or less which receive only home television transmissions, and any satellite earth station antennae two meters or less in diameter which is located in a commercial or industrial zoning district. 
a.  Guy Tower or Guyed Tower: A self-supporting transmission tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
b.  Lattice Tower: A communications tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
c.  Monopole Tower: A communications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy Wires or ground anchors. 
d.  Non-Safe-Fall Tower: Any tower other than a safe-fall tower as defined by this ordinance, including but not limited to all guy towers and all monopole towers. 
e.  Safe-Fall Tower: A self-supporting tower whose cross-sectional area diminishes with increasing height and which is certified by its manufacturer that any failure shall result in a collapse that will fall entirely or substantially within the base of the tower. 
f.  Self-Supporting Tower: A transmission tower with its base located on the ground, as distinguished a rooftop tower. 
g.  Unified Tower Array: A group of two or more self-supporting towers located on a single lot and functioning as one broadcasting antenna. 
8.198.01.  Transmission Tower Height: When referring to a transmission tower, antennae or other structure, means the distance measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest point which is defined as the bottom of the base of the structure being measured at either roof or ground level, whichever is applicable. The height of a tower shall include the height of any antennae positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to the highest point on the tower. 
8.199.01.  Travel Trailer: See "Recreational Vehicle." 
8.200.01.  Triplex: See under "Dwelling, Multi-Family Dwelling." 
8.201.01.  Truck Loading Docks: A portion of a building designed for the loading and unloading of trucks. 
8.202.01.  Truck Terminal: See "Motor Freight Truck Terminal." 
8.203.01.  Two-Family Dwelling: See under "Dwelling." 
8.204.01.  Under canopy sign: See "Building Sign." 
8.205.01.  Uniform sign plan: Coordinated drawings and specifications that establish a unified design concept with regard to the location, materials, size, letter style, and color of all signs to be placed on a property. 
8.206.01.  Use: The specific purpose for which land or a building or other structure is designed or arranged, or for which it is occupied. See also "Principal Use" and "Accessory Use or Structure." 
8.207.01.  Used Merchandise Store: The use of a building or premises primarily for the retail sale of used merchandise or secondhand goods, such as used clothes, antiques, secondhand books or rare manuscripts, or items of architectural salvage, but not including used cars or other motorized vehicles. A pawn shop is a type of used merchandise store. 
8.208.01.  Utility Company: A private business providing electricity, natural gas, telephone, or other services under the regulation of the Georgia Public Services Commission. 
8.209.01.  Utility Company Substation: A facility used for the transmission or distribution of services provided by a utility company, such as an electrical transformer station, telephone junction box, cable television box or natural gas regulator station. 
8.210.01.  Veterinarian: A hospital or clinic providing medical care and treatment for livestock or pets. 
8.211.01.  Video Tape Rental Store: An establishment primarily engaged in renting movies or other entertainment programs prerecorded on tape, disks or other media, to the general public for personal or household use. 
8.212.01.  Wall Sign: See "Wall Sign" under "Building Sign." 
8.213.01.  Warehouse or Indoor Storage Facility: A building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials. See also "Mini-Warehouse." 
8.213.02.  Watershed: The total area of land that is drained by a river or stream and its tributaries. 
8.213.03.  Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
8.213.04.  Wetlands, Jurisdictional: An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
8.214.01.  Wholesale Trade Establishment: A place of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
8.215.01.  Window sign: See "Building Sign." 
8.216.01.  Yard: An area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line. 
a.  Front Yard: A yard situated along any public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
b.  Rear Yard: A yard situated along a rear lot line. 
c.  Side Yard: A yard situated along a side lot line, but not extending into a front or rear yard. 

Types of Yards 
   
8.217.01.  Yard Sale: The offering of household items and personal possessions for sale at the residence of the owner. 
8.218.01.  Zoning Change: An amendment to the Zoning Map (rezoning), approval of a special use, or approval of a change in the conditions of approval associated with a rezoning or special use. 
(Ord. No. O-00-106, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-5, §§ 8, 9, 1-16-01; Ord. No. O-01-36, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-17, §§ 36—38, 5-19-03; Ord. No. O-04-04, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. O-04-48, § 25, 11-1-04; Ord. No. O-05-09, §§ 7, 8, 3-7-05; Ord. No. O-06-14, § 8, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-08-013, §§ 9—16, 3-17-08; Ord. No. O-08-014, § 2, 3-17-08; Ord. No. O-2010-3, § 3, 2-15-10; Ord. No. O-2012-15, §§ 1, 2, 4-16-12; Ord. No. O-2015-2, § 2 , 1-7-15; Ord. No. O-2015-3, § 1 , 1-7-15; Ord. No. O-2015-11, §§ 7, 8 , 4-20-15; Ord. No. O-2017-91 , § 1, 11-20-17; Ord. No. O-2018-50 , § 4, 11-19-18) 
APPENDIX B - DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-99-24, §§ 1, 5, adopted July 6, 1999, repealed appendix B in its entirety and replaced it with a new appendix B. Former appendix B pertained to subdivision regulations and derived from Ord. No. 86-4, § 1, adopted April 7, 1986; Ord. No. O-86-28, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1986; Ord. No. 87-11, § 1, adopted April 6, 1987; Ord. No. O-87-38, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 1987; Ord. No. O-88-36, § 1, adopted Nov. 21, 1988; Ord. No. O-92-3, §§ 1—4, adopted March 2, 1992; Ord. No. O-94-22, § 1, Sept. 19, 1994; Ord. No. O-95-4, § 1, adopted Feb. 20, 1995; Ord. No. O-95-13, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 15, 1995; and Ord. No. O-97-60, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 15, 1997. 
 Amendments to Ord. No. O-99-24, § 5 are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Section 1.01. - Title and authority. 
1.01.01.  Title. This Development Code shall be known as and may be cited as "The Development Code of Douglasville, Georgia" or, for brevity, "The Development Code." 
1.01.02.  Authority. This development code is adopted under authority of article 9, section 2, Paragraphs 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and other applicable laws enacted by the General Assembly. 
Section 1.02. - Purpose and intent. 
This development code regulates the construction of private land development projects, the subdivision of land, and the construction of public facilities and private improvements related to the development of land. 
1.02.01.  Purpose. The purpose of this development code is to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public, and is intended: 
a.  To encourage the development of economically sound and stable communities; 
b.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
c.  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
d.  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, education, and other public purposes; 
e.  To assure, in general, the wise development of new areas, in harmony with the current land use of the community.; and, 
f.  To assure proper legal description and recordation of all subdivided land. 
1.02.02.  Intent in interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this development code all provisions shall be: 
a.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
b.  Liberally construed in favor of the city; and, 
c.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
1.02.03.  Intent relative to private property agreements. This development code is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any valid easement, covenant or deed restriction duly recorded with the clerk of the superior court, to the extent that such easement, covenant or deed restriction is more restrictive than the requirements imposed by this development code. 
Section 1.03. - General applicability. 
1.03.01.  Lands to which this Code applies. This development code applies to all lands within the city. 
1.03.02.  Acceptance of public streets. 
a.  The city shall not accept a public street unless such street substantially corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a preliminary subdivision plat approved under the provisions of this development code. 
b.  There shall not be any water mains, sewers, connections or other facilities or utilities in any street unless such street is shown on a final plat approved by the city or the street has attained the legal the status of a public street, or a public utility easement has been dedicated coterminous with a private street in a gated community. 
1.03.03.  Recordation and transfer of property. 
a.  The clerk of superior court shall not file or record a plat that would result in the division of a property into two or more lots that have not been approved as required by this development code. 
b.  Any deed or other instrument of conveyance, including a security deed, bond for title, or any other document purporting to convey, then or in the future, title to real estate, filed for record with the clerk of the superior court, wherein the property to be conveyed is described in some manner other than by reference to a recorded plat, shall be accompanied by a certificate signed by the party filing such deed or other instrument, which certificate shall be in the following form: 
I, _______, do hereby certify that the instrument herewith filed for record in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Douglas County, Georgia, does not result in the subdivision a tract of land into two or more tracts or lots. 
This _______ day of _______, _______. 
_______ (Signature) 
c.  No person, firm or corporation shall transfer, sell, or agree to sell any land by reference to, or exhibition of, or by other use of a plat of the subdivision of such land before such plat has been appropriately approved and recorded with the clerk of the superior court; provided further, that the description of metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling or transferring such land shall not exempt the transaction from the requirements of this development code. 
1.03.04.  Exemptions. 
a.  Previously Issued Permits and Variances. The provisions of this development code and any subsequent amendments shall not affect the validity of any permit or variance lawfully issued by the city if: 
(1)  The development activity or building construction authorized by the permit or variance has been completed. 
(2)  The development activity or building construction authorized by the permit or variance has been commenced prior to the effective date of this development code or the amendment, or will be commenced after such effective date but within six months of issuance of the permit or grant of the variance; and 
(3)  The development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. If the permit or variance expires, any further development or construction on that site shall occur only in conformance with the requirements of this development code in effect on the later of the date of such expiration or on the date when approval is given for a new permit or variance. 
b.  No application to city. The city and its authorities are exempt from the regulations contained in this development code; the State of Georgia and all state agencies are exempt from the provisions of article V. 
c.  Previously approved nonresidential subdivisions. Lots in subdivisions for property zoned nonresidential and other than DCD, for which a final plat has been approved prior to July 6, 1999, shall be developed in accordance with the dimensional standards of the zoning ordinance and other applicable development ordinances effective prior on July 5, 1999, provided that all necessary permits and development approvals are secured prior to July 6, 2001 and that development activity or building construction continues without interruption (except because of war or natural disaster) until the development or construction is complete. 
(Ord. No. O-99-28, § 1, 7-27-99; Ord. No. O-00-9, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. O-09-039, § 1, 7-23-09) 
Section 1.04. - Interpretation. 
1.04.01.  Responsibility for interpretation. 
a.  The development official shall be responsible for the interpretation of the requirements, standards, definitions or any other provision of this development code. 
b.  Interpretations of the development official may be appealed to the city council under the provisions of this development code relating to appeals. Upon any request for an interpretation, the development official may decline to provide an interpretation and request a ruling by the city council within 30 days of the request, and such proceeding shall be considered an appeal. 
1.04.02.  Use of figures for illustration. Figures associated with defined terms or regulatory paragraphs in this development code are provided for illustration only and do not limit or change the meaning of the term as defined or the requirements of the regulation as written. 
1.04.03.  Use of words and phrases. For the purpose of this development code, the following shall apply to the use of words and phrases: 
a.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular tense include the plural tense, and words used in the plural tense include the singular tense. The masculine person "he" or "his" also means "her" or "hers." 
b.  References to the "city" and to the city council and any public officials or appointed bodies of the city not otherwise named by political jurisdiction or defined in this development code shall always mean Douglasville, Georgia, and its governing body, appointed or employed officials, and appointed bodies as named. These include: 
(1)  The city manager, appointed as such by the city council, or the city manager's designee. 
(2)  The development official, appointed as such by the city council, also referred to as the city engineer, the community development director, or the development official's designee. 
(3)  The community development director appointed as such by the city council, or the community development director's designee. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  The board of adjustments and appeals board, created as such and appointed by the mayor. 
(6)  The historic preservation commission, created as such and appointed by the city council. 
(7)  The building official, appointed as such under the Building Code, or the building official's designee. 
(8)  The zoning official, appointed as such by the city council as the community development director, or the zoning official's designee. 
c.  References to an administrative department of Douglasville shall always mean the department created by the city council as such. These include: 
(1)  Engineering department or development department. References to action by the "engineering department" or "development department" shall mean action by that administrative official to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the community development director. 
(2)  Zoning department: References to action by the "zoning department" shall mean action by that administrative official to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the community development director. 
(3)  Fire department: A reference to action by the "fire department" shall mean action by that administrative official of the Douglas County fire department to whom responsibility for that action has been assigned by the fire chief. 
d.  References to public officials, departments or appointed bodies of jurisdictions other than Douglasville shall always mean such persons or bodies having jurisdiction over or relative to Douglasville, Georgia. These include: 
(1)  The clerk of the superior court of Douglas County, Georgia. 
(2)  The Douglas County Health Department. 
(3)  The West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
(4)  The Atlanta Regional Commission. 
(5)  The Georgia Departments of Natural Resources (DNR) and Transportation (DOT). 
(6)  The United States Army Corps of Engineers, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 
(7)  Georgia Regional Transportation Authority (GRTA). 
(8)  The Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority. 
e.  The word "person" is intended to include any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
f.  The words "shall," "will," "is to" and "must" are always mandatory and not discretionary, while the word "may" is permissive. 
g.  The word "and" indicates that all of the conditions, requirements or factors so connected must be met or fulfilled, while the word "or" indicates that at least one condition, requirement or factor so connected must be met. 
h.  The term "such as" is intended to introduce one or more examples in illustration of a requirement or point, and is intended to mean "including but not limited to the following." 
i.  The word "day" means a calendar day unless otherwise specified as a work day, which means Monday through Friday. 
1.04.04.  Meaning of words and phrases. 
a.  All words and phrases are to be interpreted within the context of the sentence, paragraph, subsection, section and article in which they occur. 
b.  Words and phrases defined. 
(1)  Words and phrases defined in this development code shall be interpreted as defined without regard to other meanings in common or ordinary use, unless the context of the word or phrase indicates otherwise. 
(2)  Words and phrases not defined in this development code but defined in appendix A—Zoning or in any other city ordinance are to be used in the interpretation of this development code if the context is appropriate. 
(3)  Words and phrases not defined in this development code, appendix A—Zoning or in any other city ordinance shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by Webster's Third New International Dictionary. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 1, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 4—7, 77, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-06-27, § 5, 7-5-06; Ord. No. O-2017-41 , §§ 1—3, 7-3-17; Ord. No. O-2018-1 , § 1, 1-8-18; Ord. No. O-2018-9 , §§ 5, 6, 3-5-18) 
ARTICLE II. - PROJECT DESIGN STANDARDS 

Section 2.01. - Purpose of article II. 
This article sets out the minimum requirements and standards for construction of land development projects, including general principals of design and layout and requirements for such public facilities as streets and utilities. 
Section 2.02. - Standards incorporated by reference. 
2.02.01.  DOT standard specifications. Unless otherwise specially set forth herein, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction and storm drainage construction shall conform to the latest standard specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
2.02.02.  AASHTO design standards. Design criteria and standards not specifically set forth herein shall conform to the latest edition of the AASHTO Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
2.02.03.  FHWA traffic control standards. Traffic control signs and devices, and street striping shall conform to the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devises for Streets and Highways," latest edition, published by the Federal Highway Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
Section 2.03. - General design standards. 
2.03.01.  Suitability of the land. Land physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, topographic, geologic or other such features that may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for solving the problems. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
2.03.02.  Conformance to the comprehensive plan and other adopted plans. 
a.  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the comprehensive plan, transportation plan, zoning ordinance and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the engineering department. 
b.  All highways, streets and other features of the comprehensive plan and transportation plan shall be platted by the developer in the location and to the dimension indicated on the comprehensive plan. 
c.  In subdivisions or developments related to or affecting any State or U.S. numbered highway, the engineering department shall require the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
d.  When features of other plans adopted by the city council (such as schools or other public-building sites, parks or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a subdivision, or when these features have not been anticipated by the plans, but are considered essential by the development official and engineering department, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
e.  Whenever such reserved land, or any portion thereof is not acquired, obtained or condemned by the appropriate public agency within one year period from the date of recording the subdivision, the subdivider may claim the original reservation, cause it to be subdivided in a manor suitable to the subdivider subject to the provisions of this development code. 
f.  The development official and engineering department may disapprove plats when such planned features, as specified by the current plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
g.  The development official and engineering department may waive the reservation requirements whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release stating that such a planned feature is not being acquired. 
h.  Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the development official and engineering department finds not required or suitable for such public use, the development official and engineering department may either refuse to approve the plat, or it may require the rearrangement of lot so included such land. The development official and engineering department shall notify the land developer of the reasons for such action. 
2.03.03.  Name of subdivision or development project. The name of each subdivision or development Project must have the approval of the engineering department. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or development project in the city or Douglas County. 
2.03.04.  Blocks. The length, width and shape of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
Zoning regulations as to lot sizes and dimension. 
Need for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
Limitations and application of topography: 
a.  Length: 
(1)  Blocks shall be at least 600 feet but not more than 1,800 feet in length, except as the engineering department considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern. 
(2)  In blocks greater than 1,000 feet in length, one or more public easements of not more less than 20 feet in width may be required to extend entirely across the block for pedestrian crosswalks, fire protection or utilities. 
b.  Width: Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two rows of lots, except where frontage lots on arterial streets are provided, or when prevented by topographic conditions or the size of the property, or for lots along the periphery of the subdivision, in which a single row of lots may be approved. 
2.03.05.  Lots. 
a.  Minimum lot dimensions and areas. All lots proposed in a subdivision shall meet or exceed the area and dimensional requirements of the Zoning Ordinance Code for the zoning district in which the lots are located. The size, shape and orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval for the type of development and use contemplated. 
b.  No lot shall be more than six times as deep as it is wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the development official and engineering department for reasons of topography or irregularity of the entire tract. 
c.  Authority of health department. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as preventing the health department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in this development code are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. 
d.  Adequate building sites. Each lot shall contain a site large enough for a normal building that will meet all building setback requirements and not be subject to flood or periodic inundation. Lot remnants shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
e.  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
f.  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the front building lines on both streets. 
g.  Frontage on highways restricted. Residential lots shall not be platted to front directly on the right-of-way of an existing, major thoroughfare, including a State or U.S. numbered), unless the lots are served by a frontage road or a street contained within the proposed subdivision. 
h.  Double and reverse frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots are prohibited except where deemed to provide separation of residential development from a State or U.S. numbered highway (whether a collector or arterial street) or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation of property. An easement of at least ten feet in width, improved with a landscaped planted screen, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting any such highway or a disadvantaged use. 

Reverse Frontage Lots 
i.  Properties adjacent to lakes. The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake, shall be such that lots abutting the lake shall be drawn to the centerline of the lake. Such requirements may be waived upon submittal to the development official and engineering department of an acceptable method for the maintenance of the lake and any recreational operations. 
2.03.06.  Inter-parcel access requirements. 
a.  Internal Access Easements Required. For any office or retail sales or services use, the property owner shall grant an access easement as described in this section to each adjoining property that is zoned or used for an office or retail sales or services use. The purpose of the easement is to facilitate movement of customers from business to business without generating additional turning movements on the public street. 
b.  Access Easement Provisions. 
(1)  The easement shall permit automobile access from the adjoining property to driveways and parking areas intended for customer or tenant use; but parking spaces may be restricted to use by the owner's customers and tenants only. 
(2)  The granting of such easement shall be effective upon the granting of a reciprocal easement by the adjoining property owner. 
(3)  Upon the availability of access to driveways and parking areas of the adjoining lot, the pavement or other surfacing of the owner's driveways and parking areas shall be extended to the point of access on the property line. 
c.  Relief. Where the proposed land use is such that adverse impact of the required easement on use of the property would outweigh the reduced impact on the public street provided by the reciprocal easements, the engineering department may waive the requirement for access easements, in whole or in part, administratively. 
2.03.07.  Easements. Easements shall be required in connection with subdivisions or developments for the following purposes, among others: 
a.  Utility Easements. Whenever it is necessary or desirable to locate a public utility line outside of the street right-of-way, the line shall be located in an easement dedicated to the city (or other appropriate public entity) for such purpose. Easements for water and sanitary sewers shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, and may be required to be wider depending on the depth of cut. 
b.  Water Course and Drainage Easements. 
(1)  A publicly dedicated stormwater easement or drainage easement is to be provided along any drainage channel, stream or water impoundment within a development located outside a street right-of-way. The easement is to be substantially centered on the watercourse or surround the high water line of the impoundment, and shall be of such width as the development official deems necessary for adequate access by maintenance equipment. All easements shall be no less than 20 feet wide when used as an open ditch. Piped storm drainage shall have a minimum easement width of 15 feet wide. 
(2)  Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner, and such property owner shall keep the easement free of obstructions and maintain that part of the easement within the property owner's boundary line so that free and maximum flow is maintained at all times. 
c.  Overlapping Easements. Easements for water and sanitary sewers and drainage purposes shall not overlap unless approved by the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. O-00-105, § 1, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 8—11, 4-19-04) 
Section 2.04. - Required improvements. 
2.04.01.  Minimum requirements. The following improvements shall be provided by the developer or at the developer's expense in every subdivision or development in accordance with the standards contained in this article. 
a.  Survey monumentation of the public streets and lot lines in a subdivision. 
b.  Public streets providing access to a development and to all lots in a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties. 
(1)  Public streets contained wholly within a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in this article. Existing streets that adjoin a development shall be improved to the minimum standards from the centerline of the street along the development's frontage. (Half streets are not allowed). 
(2)  Public streets in nonresidential areas or serving a multi-family development shall be improved to "collector" street standards. In residential subdivisions, streets that serve 100 dwelling units or more shall be improved to "collector" street standards, while those serving fewer than 100 dwelling units shall be improved to "local" street standards. 
(3)  The city may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that improvements are needed to bring the street to a higher level of classification than required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
(4)  Curb and gutter along all roadways. 
c.  All drainage structures, including channels, shall be in place, inspected by the appropriate city personnel and functioning properly prior to the start of any building construction on any lot served or adjacent to the stormwater sewer and easement. 
d.  Sidewalks shall be required as provided in section 2.06. The development official or the mayor and council may require additional sidewalks and wider sidewalks within a distance of up to one mile on streets leading to or going through commercial are as, school sites, places of public assembly, and other congested areas. 
e.  Street name signs, stop signs and traffic control signs shall be installed by the city at the developer's expense. 
f.  Public water service, where in the written opinion of the development official, a public water supply is within a reasonable distance, shall be provided to every lot in a subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection. Water mains shall be connected to the existing public water system and extended past each lot. A contractor approved by the WSA shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves and hydrants at the developer's expense. The WSA may participate in sharing the costs of construction and installation to the extent that pipe sizes are needed in excess of that size required to exclusively serve the subdivision or development. 
g.  Where a public water supply is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with a water supply system approved by the development official and the Douglas County Health Department. 
h.  Fire hydrants shall be located along the streets in every subdivision served by a public water system and within every development project. 
i.  Every lot in a subdivision and every development shall be connected to a public sanitary sewerage system unless on-site disposal is allowed by the health department. Sewer lines shall be connected to an existing sanitary sewerage system and extended past each lot. Every element of the sanitary sewer system, including mains, lift stations, outfalls, and laterals, shall be installed at the developer's expense by a contractor approved by the jurisdiction that owns the sanitary sewerage system. 
j.  Every commercial conveyor car wash permitted and constructed after August 15, 2012, regardless of the water source, shall install and maintain in good working condition a recycled water system, wherein a minimum of 50 percent of water utilized will be recycled. 
2.04.02.  Gated communities. Improvements in gated communities shall meet all requirements and standards that apply to public subdivisions. 
2.04.03.  Guarantee in lieu of completed improvements. No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the city or accepted for recordation by the clerk of superior court until one of the following conditions has been met: 
a.  All required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and approved by the director of engineering, or 
b.  The city council has received in escrow 110 percent of the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, and has approved an executed contract for installation of the improvements by a qualified contractor. Such improvements shall be limited to final topping course on the street, grassing of shoulders and deferred landscaping. The executed contract shall call for completion of the improvements within two year of approval of the final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. O-00-81, § 2, 8-21-00; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 12, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-2012-35, § 2, 7-16-12) 
Section 2.05. - Survey monuments. 
A two inch iron pipe 16 inches in length shall be placed at all corners of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision being developed and shall be set flush or up to six inches above the finished grade. Existing permanent monuments that, in the professional opinion of a registered land surveyor, are of sufficiently durable construction may be maintained in lieu of a new monuments as described above. All other street or lot corners or angle points and points of curve in each street shall be marked with an iron pipe at least three-quarters inch by 16 inches and set two inches above the finished grade. All such monuments shall be properly set in the ground and shown on the final plat and shall be approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time of final plat approval. 
Section 2.06. - Streets. 
2.06.01.  Access. 
a.  A publicly approved street meeting the requirements of this article shall serve every development and every lot within a subdivision, except for gated communities. 
b.  Every development and every subdivision shall have access to the public street system via a paved roadway. 
c.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
d.  No subdivision or development shall be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
e.  Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys or public grounds shall be prohibited. 
f.  Development along State and U.S. numbered highways. 
(1)  Where a residential subdivision abuts or contains a State or U.S. numbered highway, the engineering department shall require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way shall be constructed as a frontage road to provide access to the lots, deep lots with rear service drives or double frontage lots shall be provided (see "lots" above). Residential lots in a subdivision shall have no direct access to a State or U.S. numbered highway. 
(2)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the engineering department may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations as determined by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
(3)  Subdivision streets that intersect a State or U.S. numbered highway shall do so at intervals of not less than 800 feet, or as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation, whichever is greater. 
2.06.02.  Street classifications. Streets are classified according to the function that they serve, the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. The classifications of streets and roads are shown in the comprehensive plan. 
2.06.03.  Relation to present and future street system. 
a.  The street pattern character, extent, width, grade and location within a development or subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing street pattern and planned streets at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width in the section of the community involved, unless the engineering department deems such extension undesirable. In a situation where topography or other conditions make continuous or conformance to existing streets impossible, conformance to a plan for a neighborhood approved by the development official shall be required. 
b.  Existing streets that adjoin a development or subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the subdivision. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended no less than the required minimum width. Subdivisions that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum width requirement for the street. If any part of the subdivision includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
c.  Where, in the opinion of the engineering department, it is necessary to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property through the development. 
2.06.04.  Design standards for streets. 
a.  Arterial streets. All State or U.S. numbered highways, and other thoroughfares classified as arterials, shall meet all design requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
b.  Collector streets. A collector street that is a State or U.S. numbered highway shall meet all design requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation. All other collector streets shall comply with the design and construction requirements of this development code, except collector streets shall be improved to local street standards in subdivisions devoted to single family use with lots of 20,000 square feet or larger. 
c.  Local streets and cul-de-sacs. All local streets and cul-de-sacs shall comply with the design and construction requirements of this development code. 
d.  Minimum width of right-of-way. Minimum width of right-of-way measured from lot line to lot line shall be as follows: 
Table 2-1. Minimum Right-of-Way Width. 

 
**Per Georgia DOT for State and U.S. numbered highways. 
e.  Additional Right-of-Way. Subdivisions which include an existing platted street or road that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this ordinance and is identified as a transportation improvement project in the transportation plan shall provide additional width along one or both sides of such street or road so that the minimum right-of-way required by this article is established. Subdivisions abutting only one side of such a street or road shall provide a minimum of one-half measured from the center of the existing right-of-way, of the right-of-way required by these regulations. 
f.  Vertical alignment of streets. 
(1)  Grades on Arterials shall not exceed four percent; grades on collectors shall not exceed 8; grades on local streets shall not exceed 14. Grades between 12 and 14 percent shall not exceed a length of 150 feet. The grade across a cul-de-sac in all directions shall not exceed 1.5 percent. All streets shall have a minimum grade of one percent. Major and minor thoroughfare profile grades, unless specified by GDOT, shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 20 times the algebraic difference between rates of grade expressed in feet per 100; for all other streets, including local streets and alleys, not less than ten times. 
(2)  All changes in grade shall be connected by a vertical curve so constructed as to afford a minimum sight distance, said sight distance being measured from the driver's eyes, which are assumed to be 3.5 feet in height above the pavement surface, to an object six inches high on the pavement. The minimum sight distance shall be as follows: 
Table 2-2. Minimum Sight Distance. 

 
g.  Horizontal alignment of streets. 
(1)  Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, the radius of curvature of the center line of said street shall be not less than as follows: 
Table 2-3. Horizontal Alignment. 

 
**Per Georgia DOT for State and U.S. numbered highways. 
h.  The minimum horizontal midblock visibility measured on centerline shall be determined by the Georgia DOT or 500 feet for arterials; 300 feet for collectors and 200 feet for local streets. 
(1)  Curved streets shall have a minimum tangent of 100 feet at intersections as measured from the centerline of cross streets. A tangent of a least 250 feet in length shall be shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterials, 100 feet on collector streets, and 50 feet on local streets. 
(2)  Adjoining street intersections shall be spaced at least 200 feet apart measured from edge of right-of-way to edge of opposing right-of-way. 
(3)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet on local streets shall not be allowed. 
(4)  Intersections. The centerline of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. All streets shall intersect at no less than 60 degrees, and as near a right angle as possible. The angle of intersection is to be measured at the intersection of the street centerlines. Such intersecting streets shall provide an uninterrupted line of sight from the center point of the intersection for not less than the minimum sight distance required in accordance with this development code. Details designs of intersections may be required. 
(a)  In approaches to intersections, there shall be a suitable leveling of the street at a grade not exceeding three percent and for a distance of less than 50 feet from the nearest line of the intersecting street. 
(b)  Curb line radius at street intersections shall be at least 25 feet and where the angle of street intersection is less than 90 degrees, the city council may require a greater radius. 
(c)  At an intersection where traffic is to be controlled by stop signs on the minor road, the minor road shall be designed to intersect the major road in accordance with the standards imposed by the Georgia Department of Transportation where applicable; and where not applicable, the minor road shall intersect at such location as will provide minimum sight distance in either direction along the major road as follows: 650 feet for an arterial, 600 feet for a minor thoroughfare, 400 feet for a collector street and 350 feet for a local street. 
(5)  Islands at intersections shall be subject to individual approval by the development official. In no case shall anything extend more than 30 inches above the back of the curb within the right-of-way of the intersecting street. 
(6)  Intersecting street right-of-way lines shall parallel the back of curb or edge of pavement of the roadway, and shall be rounded with a radius of no less than four feet. 
i.  Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs). 
(1)  A cul-de-sac shall be no more than 600 feet long unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the engineering department, but in no case exceed 800 feet in length. Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a circular turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter for residential and 150 feet for commercial and industrial, and a paved turnaround with a minimum outside diameter of 80 feet. Such a street shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having the following right-of-way and roadway dimensions: 

Cul-De-Sacs 
Table 2-5. Cul-de-Sacs. 

 
(2)  Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street, other than a cul-de-sac, the engineering department may require the subdivider to provide a temporary vehicular turnaround within the right-of-way, when the development official or engineering department considers such to be necessary for effective traffic circulation. 
(3)  A dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac shall not be allowed except as a temporary stage of construction of a street that is intended to be extended in a later stage of construction. Such a temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a roadway radius of 40 feet if: 
(a)  one or more lots front exclusively on the street; and, 
(b)  extension of the street is not under construction when the final plat is submitted for recording. 
(4)  Temporary turnarounds shall consist of a tack coat and one inch of asphalt. 
j.  Alleys and service drives. Alleys or service drives may be required on any lot used for multifamily, commercial or industrial, but shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the development official or engineering department of the need for alleys or service drives. Where an alley has been specifically authorized or required by the engineering department, it shall comply with the following minimum design standards: 
(1)  The roadbed width shall be no less than 20 feet, containing a paved roadway of no less than 20 feet exclusive of gutters. 
(2)  Dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turn-around having a radius of at least 40 feet. 
k.  Street names. 
(1)  Proposed streets that are obviously in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for a proposed street duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, existing street names in the city or Douglas County, irrespective of the use of the "suffix" street, avenue, boulevard, road, pike, drive, way, place, court or other derivatives. 
(2)  Property address numbers shall be provided by the engineering department. 
l.  Half streets prohibited. Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
m.  Split Level Streets and One-way Streets. Streets which are constructed so as to have two trafficways, each at a different level with the same right-of-way, shall provide a paved traffic surface of at least 20 feet on each level and a slope between the two trafficways of not less than three to one. One-way streets and split streets will be allowed when: 
(1)  Topographic conditions are such that alternatives to the typical street construction would be more desirable. 
(2)  The shape and size of the parcel could be more efficiently developed. 
In either case, approval must be obtained from the engineering department. 
2.06.05.  Street Improvements. 
a.  Minimum width of roadway. The minimum roadway width, measured from back of curb to back of curb (or edge of pavement to edge of pavement for a swale ditch section) shall be as follows: 
Table 2-6. Minimum Roadway Width 

 
**Per Georgia DOT for State and U.S. numbered highways. 
b.  Curb and gutter. 
(1)  Curb and gutter are required on all streets. 
(2)  Local residential street curbs shall be six-inch × 24-inch vertical or roll back type 3000 psi Portland cement concrete at 28 days. Roll back type is allowed in residential subdivisions with prior written approval of the engineering department. 
(3)  Curbs along collectors and local commercial or industrial street curbs shall be six-inch × 24-inch vertical type only, 3,000 psi Portland cement concrete at 28 days. 
(4)  Curbing along streets shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  Developer's engineer or surveyor shall set line and grade. 
(b)  One-half inch expansion joints of pre-molded bitumastic expansion joint material shall be provided at all radius points and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet in the remainder of the curb and gutter. 

Curb and Gutter 
(c)  The development official and engineering department shall individually approve special curbing design (center islands, etc.). 
(d)  Curb and gutter shall be set true to line and grade and finished by skilled workers to the section shown on the plans. 
(e)  Inferior workmanship or construction methods resulting in unsightly curb and gutter will be cause for rejection of the finished work. 
(f)  All curbing shall be backfilled and grassed. 
(g)  Adequate storm drainage structures shall be provided. The curb and gutter shall be constructed so as to present a smooth, even line both horizontally and vertically. 
(5)  Valley gutters shall not be allowed across streets at street intersections. 
c.  Slopes and Shoulder Improvements. 
(1)  On streets with curb and gutter, the shoulders shall slope one-fourth inch to the foot toward the roadway for at least seven feet from back of curb, and no more than one-half inch to the foot for the remainder of the right-of-way width. 
(2)  On streets with swale ditch drainage, the shoulders shall slope three-quarters inch to the foot away from the roadway for at least five feet to the drainage channel. The maximum slope for the drainage channel shall be two feet of run for each one foot of fall, with a minimum 2-foot wide channel at the bottom of the swale. 
d.  Turning lanes. Turning lanes may be required at all entrances to subdivisions and industrial, office and commercial developments that front on arterial and collector streets. Turning lanes shall be 12 feet in width (including curb and gutter if required) for a minimum distance of 200 feet measured from the intersection of the right-of-way lines or the edge of the driveway. 
e.  Street name and traffic control signs. Street name signs of a type approved by the city are to be placed at all intersections. Traffic control signs shall be placed by the city at the developer's expense and conform to the U.S. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition. 
f.  Sidewalks. 
(1)  Sidewalks shall be provided along all curb and gutter streets other than alleys and interstate highways, as follows: 
(a)  Along both sides of all arterial streets and collector streets; 
(b)  Along one side of all local streets and culs-de-sac (where both sides of the street are not developed simultaneously, this requirement shall be applied to the side first developed or redeveloped after May 1, 2000). 
(2)  Sidewalks shall be located not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference of encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges, or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. 
(3)  Sidewalks shall be no less than five feet in width, constructed of concrete no less than four inches in depth; exceptionally, sidewalks on interior streets in residential subdivisions with driveways spaced no more than 200 feet apart shall be not less than four feet in width and constructed of concrete no less than four inches in depth. 
(4)  Sidewalks must be offset at least 18 inches from the back of curb, and the offset area shall be filled with stamped concrete or like material approved by the development official, except adjacent to residential property where the offset area may be backfilled and grassed. Areas adjacent to sidewalks and opposite the offset shall be backfilled and grassed. 
(5)  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, except where alternate materials are approved by variance granted by the mayor and council. Concrete shall be 3,000 psi at 28 days' strength. 
(6)  Curb ramps shall be provided at all street intersections and street crosswalks. 
(7)  Sidewalks shall be constructed in compliance with the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
g.  Streetlights. All developers of residential subdivisions with lots less than five (5) acres in size, and all developers of shopping centers, industrial parks and similar such developments, shall be required to provide streetlights in the public rights of way in such developments. Such developers, at the time of submission of the preliminary plat of the development, or at the time of application for a building permit, which ever shall first occur, shall present a proposed streetlight layout, acceptable to the development official, which details the proposed streetlights for the development. 
2.06.06.  Location of utilities in streets. 
a.  All developers of residential subdivisions with lots less than five acres in size, and all developers of shopping centers, industrial parks and similar such developments, shall be required to provide underground utilities in such developments. Such developers, at the time of the submission of the preliminary plat of the development, or at the time of application for a building permit, whichever shall first occur, shall present a proposed underground utility layout, acceptable to the development official, which details the proposed underground utilities within the right-of-way for the development. 
(1)  All utilities beneath pavement shall be installed and the ditch backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed, or the pipes shall be bored if installed after street construction. 
(2)  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. 
(3)  All private utilities that will cross under pavement shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate. 
b.  Above-Ground Utilities. Where above-ground utilities are existing or otherwise allowed, telephone poles, street light poles, telephone junction boxes and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a street right-of-way must be at least eight feet back from the back of the street curb (or edge of pavement) and one foot back from the edge of any sidewalk, whichever is farthermost from the roadway. 
2.06.07.  Pavement Cuts. 
a.  Pavement cuts for the installation of utilities shall be avoided whenever possible. Utility crossings shall be bored across any arterial, subject to the approval of the Georgia DOT, and across any collector unless a pavement cut is approved by the director of planning. 
b.  All utility street cuts within public rights-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the engineering department before construction begins. 
c.  Pavement cuts across local streets shall be permitted, provided the road is repaired with at least six inches of 3000 psi Portland cement and topped with at least two inches of E or F hot plant mix asphaltic cement. The top of the concrete pad shall not exceed the elevation of the aggregate base course of the original road construction. 
d.  Pavement cuts across local streets shall conform to the following: 

Pavement Cuts Across Local Streets 
(Ord. No. O-00-81, § 3, 8-21-00; Ord. No. O-03-10, § 1, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-05, § 1, 2-16-04; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 13—20, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-04-37, § 1, 9-7-04; Ord. No. O-04-52, § 1, 11-16-04) 
Section 2.07. - Driveways. 
2.07.01.  Approval required. 
a.  No driveways shall be connected to a public street and no curbs or medians on public streets or rights-of-way shall be cut or altered for access without a driveway permit issued by the engineering department. 
b.  Requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation shall apply whenever more restrictive than the standards in this development code. 
2.07.02.  Driveway connections. 
a.  Vehicular access from properties to streets shall comply with the following dimensional requirements, measured at the right-of-way line: 
Table 2-9. Driveway Width Requirements. 

 
1 Includes divided entrances with center islands. 
2 At least one driveway for every lot shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide, unobstructed for fire apparatus accessibility. 
b.  Driveway aprons. Driveway connections shall be provided between the edge of pavement or back of curb to the right-of-way line. No property may be afforded access from a public street except as follows: 
(1)  Curb and gutter streets shall be provided with a driveway apron constructed of 3000 psi concrete at least six inches thick. Sidewalks, where provided, shall be warped to the driveway apron and are to be identified across the driveway apron by construction joints or control joints. 
(2)  All driveway aprons shall have a radius connecting the driveway to the curb line or pavement edge as follows: 
Table 2-10. Driveway Apron Radii. 

 

Example—Residential Driveway Apron w/sidewalk and curb and gutter: 
c.  The distance from a driveway to the intersection of two streets, and the distance between driveways along a street, shall be based on the type of street the driveway connects to, in accordance with the following table. All measurements shall be taken along the right-of-way lines. 
Table 2-11. Driveway Separations. 

 
d.  The driveway apron shall be constructed such that no water shall enter from the street. 
2.07.03.  Number of driveways limited along major streets. 
a.  Along all arterial streets and any other State or U.S. numbered highway, no more than one point of vehicular access from a property shall be permitted for each 300 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof. 
b.  Along collector streets that are not State or U.S. numbered highways, no more than two points of vehicular access from a property to each abutting public street shall be permitted for each 400 feet of lot frontage, or fraction thereof; provided however, that lots with less than 100 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to any one public street. The engineering department shall determine whether the points of access may be unrestricted or will have to be designed for right-in, right-out traffic flow. 
(Ord. No. O-06-15, § 1, 5-15-06) 
Section 2.08. - Sight triangle at street and driveway intersections. 
a.  A sight visibility triangle shall be located at every street intersection with another street or a private driveway. 
(1)  At public street intersections, the sight visibility triangle is delineated by the two intersecting street right-of-way lines and a line connecting the right-of-way lines at the points indicated in the Sight Triangle Table. The connecting points shall be measured from the right-of-way lines extended to their point of intersection. 
(2)  At private driveway intersections with public streets, the edge of the driveway's pavement or back of curb will be used for the sight triangle measurements along the driveway. 

Table 2-12. Sight Visibility Triangle Table. (See Drawing) 

 
b.  The planting of trees or other vegetation or the location of structures exceeding 30 inches in height that would obstruct the clear sight across the sight visibility triangle shall be prohibited. 
c.  No commercial driveway shall be constructed within 150' of the ROW corner of an intersection. 
Section 2.09. - Storm drainage. 
2.09.01.  Applicability and exemptions. 
a.  An adequate drainage system, including necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, drains, inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
b.  All persons proposing development or construction in the city shall prepare a stormwater management plan. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no development or building permit shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has been reviewed and approved by the director of planning, except as exempt below. 
c.  Exemptions from Storm Drainage Requirements. The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this section and the requirement of providing a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Agricultural land management. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family detached dwellings. 
(3)  Residential development consisting of single-family houses, each on a lot of two acres or greater. 
2.09.02.  System design. 
a.  Analyses shall be performed in accordance with the publication entitled Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
b.  All drainage facilities shall be so designed as to serve the entire drainage area in which these facilities are located. 
c.  All drainage features shall be in accordance with standards and specifications of Douglasville and no extension shall be made from the street drainage through abutting property without approval of the city. 
d.  Improvements, such as widening, deepening, relocating, clearing, protecting, or otherwise improving existing lake and shore lines, stream beds and other watercourses for the control of mosquitoes and public health nuisances, shall be provided by the developer in accordance with standards and requirements of Douglas County Health Department. 
e.  Any water impoundment structure shall be constructed so as to minimize mosquito breeding and other nuisance hazards. The outside toe of any dam to be constructed within the city shall require the approval of the city, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications as determined by the city. 
f.  No land subject to flooding as determined by the city shall be platted or improved for residential or other use which may be endangered by floods, unless such land shall be raised four feet above existing or forecast flood level with fill dirt taken from within that part of the subdivision within the floodplain, unless a greater height is specified by the city; such filling operations shall not deepen the floodplain below its lowest level or reduce the cross-section of the floodplain. Provided further that all existing natural cover shall be replaced in kind after cutting and filling operations are complete. 
g.  In order to obtain a Development Permit, a hydrology report shall be prepared that includes appropriate calculations for the two year, 10-year, 25-year, and 100-year design frequency storms as defined by the National Weather Service. The report shall show detailed calculations indicating the formula used, along with the co-efficient of runoff, the time of concentration, the rainfall intensity, the discharged velocity, and the source of all data used. 
h.  The hydrology report shall include a map outlining the areas and showing the acreage of all on-site and off-site drainage basins contributing flow through the project for both the pre and post development conditions. 
i.  The hydrology report shall include calculations for the runoff peak rate of discharge to determine the configurations and sizes of pipes, channels and other routing or flow control structures; and the runoff volume to determine the necessity for and sizing of stormwater detention facilities. The peak runoff rate at the point or points of discharge for the ten-year, 24-hour storm. 
j.  Runoff peak rate of discharge for drainage areas less than 20 acres in size may be calculated using the Rational Method, with a minimum time of concentration of five minutes. Flows from drainage areas larger than 100 acres in size shall be calculated using the SCS Method or other approved methodology, calculations done using the (bow string method) shall not be accepted. 
k.  Rainfall intensities used in hydrologic analyses shall not be less than those shown by applicable rainfall curves published by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) for the city and the county area. Those curves are on file and available for inspection in the department of engineering services. 
l.  Runoff coefficients used for pre- and post-development activity shall reflect the eventual maximum development of the parcel under the existing zoning conditions for the Rational Method shall be consistent with local conditions. For the SCS method, the runoff curve numbers found in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia shall be used. Talbot's Formula shall use 0.80 runoff index or the equivalent. 
m.  Hydraulic capacity for open channel or closed conduit flow shall be determined using the Manning Equation. Values used for "n" shall be 0.021 for corrugated metal pipe and 0.013 for reinforced concrete. 
n.  All stormwater shall be conveyed from point of collection to a natural waterway by a stormwater conveyance structure. For the purpose of this policy, a natural waterway shall be defined as a stream, creek, branch, etc., which experiences constant year-round flow of such a degree as to exhibit a defined channel of the magnitude required to accommodate discharge from storm sewers during normal rainfall occurrences. A stormwater conveyance structure shall be a culvert, pipe, spillway, or channel. 
o.  The stormwater flow velocity at the site's downstream property line shall not exceed the pre-development activity velocity. 
p.  All free flowing storm drainage systems shall be designed to accommodate the runoff generated by a 100-year design storm utilizing the available head at the entrance. 
q.  The controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all developments or construction in order to prevent an increase in the predevelopment rate of runoff in excess of ten percent, or one cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency 24-hour storm, whichever is greater. Such releases shall prevent any increase in the predevelopment rate of runoff of less frequent storms up to and including the 100-year storm. 
2.09.03.  Street cross drains. 
a.  Pipe size for culverts under streets (street cross drains) shall be determined by design runoff and hydraulic capacity. The minimum allowable street cross drain diameter shall be 18 inches, with a minimum slope of one percent. 
b.  Street cross drains shall be constructed of Class III reinforced concrete. 
c.  Street cross drains shall be sized to handle the runoff of a 100-year, 24-hour storm. Cross drains shall be designed to handle the peak rate of discharge associated with a 100-year storm with at least 1-foot of freeboard from the top of the roadway shoulder. 
d.  Velocity at design flow shall be sloped so as to maintain a minimum velocity of at least three feet per second but not more than the velocity that would cause erosion damage to the conduit. 
e.  Street cross drain design is to be in accordance with the methods contained in the State Highway Standard 1030D, latest edition. 
f.  Street cross drains carrying live streams shall extend to where the crown of the pipe intersects the street embankment slope and shall have flared end sections with a one foot wide collar of six inch thick concrete. 
g.  Maintain full shoulder width across all cross drains as the minimum length. 
h.  Street water shall be limited to a maximum distance as follows: 400 feet on grade up to seven percent; 300 feet on grades from seven to ten percent; 250 feet on grade over ten percent. 
i.  Bridges shall be designed on a 100-year storm frequency. 
j.  Junction boxes having access to the pipe shall be constructed to meet the requirements of Georgia DOT Standard 1030D (or most current). 
2.09.04.  Traffic and erosion. 
a.  Before any traffic over a storm drain is allowed, the developer shall provide an adequate depth and width of compacted backfill to protect the structure from damage or displacement acceptable to the development official. Where the developer chooses to leave the drain open and same is crossed by a driveway, the size of pipe shall be determined by the development official, and no building permit will be approved unless the installation meets the requirements of the city. 
b.  The developer shall remove any debris or silt that constricts the flow through a pipe as often as necessary to maintain drainage. 
c.  All pipe structures shall be cleaned before the work is accepted. Any damage or displacement that may occur due to traffic or erosion shall be repaired or corrected at the developer's expense. 
d.  The developer's obligation to clean and repair pipes ceases after acceptance of the system by the proper authority at the end of the one-year maintenance period. 
2.09.05.  Inlets and catch basins. 
a.  Inlets and catch basins shall be designed in accordance with the Georgia Department of Transportation's Drainage Manual for Highways, latest edition. 
b.  Frames and grates shall be as selected by the development official and engineering department based upon site conditions. 
c.  Stormwater catch basins shall be spaced so that the spread in the street for a 10-year design peak rate of discharge shall not exceed eight feet, as measured from the face of the curb. 
d.  Catch basins shall be located at all low points of streets and shall be located so as to service no more than four acres. 
2.09.06.  Piped systems. 
a.  Design runoff and hydraulic capacity shall determine pipe size. The minimum allowable pipe diameter shall be 24 inches under a street and 18 inches under a driveway. 
b.  Minimum Clearances. Minimum clearances are: one foot between the bottom of the roadway base and the exterior crown of the culvert, and a minimum of six inches between underground utilities and exterior crown of culverts. 
c.  Trench Construction. Trench construction for storm drainage pipe shall be in accordance with standard drawings. 
d.  Storm drainpipes shall be constructed of Class III reinforced concrete or aluminized Type II corrugated culvert. 
(1)  Concrete Pipe. 
(a)  Concrete pipe shall be reinforced within the right-of-way but may be plain pipe outside of the right-of-way. 
(b)  Flat bottom and circular pipe sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with the socket ends pointing upstream. Sections shall be joined in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  Corrugated Aluminum or Pipe. Corrugated aluminum pipe and pipearches sections shall be laid in a prepared trench with outside laps of circumferential joints pointing upstream and with longitudinal joints at the sides. Coupling bands, fastened by two or more bolts, shall join the sections. The space between adjoining sections shall be not more than the width of one corrugation. 
(3)  Elongation. Elongation of metal pipes shall be as shown on the plans. The contractor shall order the elongation of the vertical axis of the pipe to be done in the shop. Corrugated metal pipe shall be shipped with wire-tie in the pipe ends. Wire-ties shall be removed as soon as possible after the fill is completed. 
e.  The design of piped stormwater collection systems shall be based upon conveyance of the peak rate of discharge associated with a 100-year, 24-hour storm. 
f.  Stormwater pipes that do not carry live streams shall extend at least 50 feet beyond the front building setback lines, and may be required to extend farther where necessary to provide an adequately protected building site on the property. 
g.  Any storm drainage pipe dedicated to the public that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a minimum 20-foot wide easement. 
h.  All storm drainage pipes shall be at least 18 inches below the surface and shall have a slope of at least one per cent. Subdrainage will be installed to control the surplus groundwater by intercepting sidehill seepage or by lowering or regulating the groundwater level where such conditions exist. 
i.  Pipe bedding shall be provided as specified in Design and Construction of Sanitary and Storm Sewers, prepared by the American Society of Civil Engineers (Manuals and Reports on Engineering Practice No. 37), latest edition. 
j.  Development storm drain outlet systems shall connect to a public stormwater conveyance system or to a free-flowing stream. The developer shall be required to provide evidence of acceptable capacity to receive additional flow. 
k.  Under no circumstances shall structures be constructed over an existing or proposed storm drain, whether public or private. 
l.  Maximum continuous length of pipe shall be 300 feet. 
2.09.07.  Headwalls. 
a.  Headwalls or flared end sections with concrete collars are required at the inlet and outlet on all street cross drains and storm drain pipes. 
b.  Headwalls are to be precast concrete, stone masonry with reinforced concrete footings, or poured-in-place, reinforced concrete with reinforced concrete footings. 
c.  Flared end sections shall be constructed of the same material as the drainage pipe to which they are being connected. 
d.  High water elevation contour is to be based on a 100-year storm at the entrance of each head wall. 
e.  Energy dissipation devices, such as splash pads, riprap, stilling basins, etc., shall be provided at the outlet of every street cross drain and storm drainpipe. 
2.09.08.  Open channels. 
a.  The plat must be marked and an easement shown for a 15 foot easement for the drain. 
b.  All stormwater channels shall be designed to carry at least the 100-year frequency storm with one foot of freeboard. 
c.  Velocity at design flow shall be six and one-half feet per second. A higher velocity may be allowed if actions are taken that would avoid erosion or scouring of the channel. 
d.  All stormwater channels must be designed to retain natural design characteristics and to convey flows that prevent dwelling flooding, property damage, or public access and/or utility interruption. 
e.  The development official may determine that the expected long-term maintenance of a surface drainage system could prove impractical, and a stormwater pipe collection system may be required. 
f.  Any storm drainage channel that extends outside of the street right-of-way shall be located within a 20-foot wide easement. 
g.  In cases in which a subdivision or development is traversed by a stream, there shall be provided a conservation easement extending 25 feet from each side of the stream bank. 
h.  All drainage easements, natural ditches, and drainage areas shall have a flat bottom construction of rip rap of appropriate size. Side slopers shall have a maximum slope of 3:1 and shall be stabilized with grass and/or riprap as necessary to control erosion. 
i.  Cross drains under driveways shall meet the standards for street cross drains. 
2.09.09.  Stormwater detention. 
a.  Stormwater detention facilities providing for the storage and controlled release of runoff shall be required in the event that stormwater cannot be conveyed to a natural waterway or that the increase in runoff due to development may create problems of downstream flooding, overloading of existing structures or other problems directly attributable to the development of a parcel of land. The release rate (quantity and velocity) of stormwater shall be no greater than the calculated point discharge prior to development. 
b.  All stormwater detention facilities shall be designed to control the runoff volumes associated with storms having 2-year, 10-year, 25-year and 100-year return frequencies, considered individually. 
c.  Detention shall be provided such that the peak rate of flow from the site after development will not exceed the corresponding flow that would have been created by the same return frequency storms prior to development. 
d.  Reservoir routing methods shall be used for all detention facility design. 
e.  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to bypass through the development the flow from all upstream areas for a storm of 100-year design frequency for the land off site and upstream under existing development. The bypass flow rate shall be not less than the 100 year flow rate of record or computed using a runoff coefficient of not less than 0.50 
f.  The live detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 100-year frequency rainfall as published by the National Weather Service for the affected areas. The detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of a 100-year rainfall, for any and all durations, from the proposed development less that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate as specified above. 
g.  The development official may permit several developers to construct joint facilities. The development official shall approve or disapprove the waiver of on-site drainage or detention facilities on the basis of the engineering feasibility of a combined facility. No use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the retention and drainage structures, except upon specific approval. 
h.  The engineering department shall be authorized to approve alternative methods of stormwater detention based on appropriate engineering studies that do demonstrate equal or better performance in accordance with accepted stormwater management practices. Approved alternatives may include well maintained and landscaped lakes that may be provided to act jointly as detention reservoirs and recreation facilities or aesthetic focal points within forest preserve areas, public or private parks, housing developments, shopping centers, and industrial parks. Other control methods to regulate the rate of stormwater discharge which may be acceptable include, but not be limited to, detention on flat roofs, parking lots, streets, lawns, underground storage, and oversized storm drains with restricted outlets. 
i.  Detention facilities and drainage structures shall, where possible, use natural topography and natural vegetation. In lieu thereof these shall have planted trees and vegetation such as shrubs and permanent ground cover on their borders. All on-site facilities shall be properly maintained by the owner in such a way that they do not become nuisances. Nuisance conditions shall include: improper storage resulting in uncontrolled runoff and overflow; stagnant water with concomitant algae growth, insect breeding, and odors; discarded debris; and safety hazards created by the facility's operation. Private facilities are the perpetual responsibility of the landowner 
j.  Principal outlets such as weirs shall be constructed of concrete block or reinforced concrete with watertight joints. Outlet pipes shall be at least six inches in diameter. Riser pipes, if used, shall be at least eight inches in diameter. 
k.  No portion of any detention facility shall be located in any required buffer, street right-of-way or within a flood hazard area. 
l.  The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public street. 
m.  An easement at least 25 feet in width shall be required to provide access to the detention facility from a street. 
n.  Every detention facility shall be completely enclosed within a drainage easement. The drainage easement shall extend at least ten feet beyond the ponding limits of the 100-year storm. 
o.  Detention facilities shall be enclosed with a minimum four-foot high black powder-coated chainlink fence around all facilities having a maximum water or undercut depth of more than four feet or a bank slope greater than 1.5 to 1 and shall be equipped with a minimum four-foot wide access as necessary for maintenance. Fencing may be waived by the development official and engineering department in other than areas zoned residential and where the pond is more than 500 feet from a residential district. 
p.  Developments that adjoin and flow directly into a river are exempt from stormwater detention requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-00-105, § 2, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 21—25, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-08-029, § 1, 6-2-08) 
Section 2.10. - Public utilities. 
2.10.01.  Sanitary sewerage. 
a.  No septic tanks shall be allowed if public sewerage is available, as determined by the Water and Sewer Authority. The subdivider or developer shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with the specifications of the providing agency. 
b.  In a drainage basin which, at the time of plat approval is scheduled for a public sewerage system within three years, all subdivisions shall be provided with a temporary commercial sewer disposal system, as approved by the Environmental Protection Division of the Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia. Such system shall include permanent sewerage outfall lines plus a temporary treatment system to be installed by subdivider. 
c.  Whenever installation of a sanitary sewer is required as provided by these regulations, no new street shall be paved without such sewer being first installed in accordance with the requirements of the Public Health Division, Georgia Department of Human Resources sewer specifications. 
d.  When the sewer is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. 
e.  Where connection to the sanitary sewerage system is not feasible in the view of the development official, the lot shall contain adequate area for the installation and safe operation of a septic tank and disposal field, as approved by the health department. 
f.  Prior to the construction of any private community sewerage disposal system, the location, size, plans and specifications of such a facility shall be approved by the development official and engineering department, the health department and the State Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
2.10.02.  Public water. 
a.  Each subdivision or development shall connect to the city's public water system, where available within a reasonable distance, and shall provide service to each lot or the development as a whole, as appropriate, at the expense of the developer. 
b.  The layout and specifications of the system shall be in accordance with city specifications, and shall be installed by a contractor approved by the city. 
c.  Fire hydrants in subdivisions shall be spaced no more than 500 feet apart, and meet all requirements of the fire department. 
d.  When the water main is located in the street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lot, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line and a meter box installed to serve each lot prior to surfacing the street. Alternatively, lines may be bored at the builder's expense. 

Typical Street Section "A" Residential Curb & Gutter Street 
*Per Georgia DOT for State and U.S. numbered highways. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 26, 4-19-04) 
Section 2.11. - Building and structure heights. 
2.11.01.  Building and structure heights; how measured. 
a.  Building height. The vertical distance measured to the eaves or top of parapet of a building from the average finished grade across those sides of a building that face a street. 
b.  Structure height. The vertical distance to the highest point of a structure (other than a building), as measured from the average grade at the base of the structure or from the average grade directly below a projecting structure. 
2.11.02.  Maximum building and structure heights generally. The maximum height of all buildings and structures in each land use category, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall be as follows: 
Table 2-13. Maximum Structure Heights. 

 
2.11.03.  Exceptions to height restrictions. 
a.  Exemptions. The following structures are exempt from the height limitations imposed by this section, provided that no structure may exceed 200 feet in height from the average finished grade at its base: 
(1)  Cooling towers, gas holders, or other industrial structures where required as part of the manufacturing process. 
(2)  Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, citizens band and ham radio antennae, utility substations, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, and personal AM/FM radio and TV reception antennae. 
b.  Transmission towers. Maximum heights of transmission towers and antennae, such as commercial radio and television broadcast towers and cellular telephone or other telecommunication towers, are controlled under "transmission towers" in the "restrictions on particular uses" article of this zoning ordinance. 
c.  Height limitations for fences and freestanding walls. 
(1)  In the commercial, office-distribution and industrial zoning districts, no fence or free-standing wall may exceed eight feet in height, with no more than an additional two feet of security wire. 
(2)  In the attached dwelling residential, mixed use and office institutional districts, no fence or freestanding wall may exceed eight feet in height. 
(3)  In the single-family detached zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
(a)  A fence or freestanding wall in any front yard area may not exceed four and one-half feet in height. 
(b)  A fence or freestanding wall in any side or rear yard area may not exceed eight feet in height. 

d.  For lots in or immediately adjacent to historic districts or historic sites, no building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height. 
2.11.04. Height restrictions near airport. Structures near the Fulton County/Brown Field Airport or any approved aircraft landing strip or helicopter landing area, that would be located under the landing or take-off corridors or under any of the control surfaces established by FAA around the airport, landing strip or helicopter landing area shall comply with all height restrictions of the FAA and obtain approval from the FAA prior to permitting by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-06-15, § 2, 5-15-06) 
Section 2.12. - Screening of utility units on nonresidential lots. 
On nonresidential lots, all outdoor utility units, including but not limited to heating and cooling units, outdoor refrigeration units and power meters, shall be completely screened from view from the perspective of any point on a public street located within 50 feet of the subject lot. Any rooftop utility unit shall be screened by the parapet of the building(s) on the subject lot; utility units in other locations on the lot shall be screened with the same facade/siding materials required for the nearest adjacent building wall on the lot. 
(Ord. No. O-2010-9, § 1, 4-5-10) 
ARTICLE III. - LANDSCAPING, BUFFERS AND TREE CONSERVATION 

Section 3.01. - Purpose; benefits and authority. 
The purpose of this article is to improve the aesthetic qualities of the City and to protect and preserve the appearance, character and value of its neighborhoods and business areas by: 
a.  Providing for quality and consistency in the design of landscaping and screening. 
b.  Providing for the separation of incompatible types of land use. 
c.  Providing for the conservation of existing trees and the planting of new trees in pace with the land development process. 
d.  For the improvement of air quality and water quality and a higher standard of environmental living. 
3.01.01.  Benefits of landscaping and tree conservation. Benefits to the City of Douglasville derived from tree protection and replanting include: 
a.  Improved control of soil erosion. 
b.  Moderation of stormwater runoff and improved water quality. 
c.  Interception of airborne particulate matter and the reduction of some air pollutants. 
d.  Enhanced habitat for desirable wildlife. 
e.  Reduction of noise and glare, and the establishment of wind breaks. 
f.  Production of oxygen and reduction in the level of carbon monoxide in the air. 
g.  Purification of the air through transpiration. 
h.  Climate moderation. 
i.  Aesthetics and scenic amenity enhancement. 
j.  Increased property value. 
3.01.02.  Authority. This article is enacted pursuant to the City's planning authority granted by the Constitution of this State, including but not limited to Ga. Const. Art. IX, Section II, paragraphs 3 and 4; O.C.G.A. section 36-70-3; the City's general police power; and all other state and local laws that authorize municipalities to act on behalf of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.02. - Landscaping; where required. 
3.02.01.  Residential subdivisions, single-family or two-family lots. Landscaping requirements are imposed on any residential subdivision for single-family or two-family development, or on the lot when a single-family or two-family dwelling is to be constructed, only to the extent required under this article. 
3.02.02.  Multifamily and nonresidential uses. Landscaping shall be installed on the property of any multifamily or nonresidential use or development as a condition of site plan approval, or issuance of a development permit or building permit, whichever occurs first. Landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of this article, which includes the following: 
a.  Within the yard areas of the property, in landscape strips along the street frontages, and within the minimum side and rear principal building setbacks. 
b.  Within parking lots containing five or more parking spaces and between such lots and streets from which they are visible. 
c.  As buffers between incompatible land uses and zoning districts. 
d.  As replacement trees for those removed during construction, or as a supplement, in order to achieve the tree conservation requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.03. - Calculation of tree units. 
3.03.01.  Use of tree units. Where the requirements of this article with regard to the preservation or planting of trees are not expressed in terms of number of trees, they are expressed in terms of "tree units". This approach provides the developer with wide latitude of choice as to the number and sizes of trees to be planted, and their distribution following aesthetic landscaping practices, while achieving a common standard on all properties. 
3.03.02.  Establishment of tree unit values. The diameter of a tree's trunk establishes the "tree unit" value of an existing tree, as shown on table 3-1, or for a newly planted tree as shown on table 3-2. The values assigned to trees of the same size are different for existing and new trees, as indicated in the tables. One "unit" is not the same as one "tree." Actual tree diameters or calipers are to be rounded to the nearest whole number for the calculation of tree unit values (e.g., 4.5 inches in diameter = 5 inches). 

 

 
3.03.03.  Minimum standards. On each property for which a Tree Conservation Plan is required by this Development Code, existing trees may be retained and new trees shall be planted so that the property shall attain or exceed the required tree density standard for the proposed use, exclusive of any acreage within a zoning buffer area (as required under this article) or a stream buffer. Existing tree retention, as opposed to tree clearing and replanting, is encouraged by this Development Code. The minimum required tree density standard shall be as follows: 
Residential - 18 tree units per acre. 
Office/Commercial - 20 tree units per acre. 
Industrial - 15 tree units per acre. 
3.03.04.  Proposed project's tree density calculation. The proposed project's tree density shall be calculated by summing the credits for trees to be retained and trees to be planted, and dividing that number by total acreage of the project (excluding zoning buffer and stream buffer acreage). 

 
3.03.05.  Achieving tree density required. Every reasonable effort must be made to achieve the minimum required tree density standard on each development site. However, this Development Code contemplates that, due to topographic or other conditions, the exact number of tree units required by the proposed project's tree density calculation may not be able to be planted and still meet professional standards for spacing and survival. A method of alternative compliance, therefore is provided. 
3.03.06.  Alternative compliance to tree density requirements. 
a.  Overview. The intent of the tree conservation requirements is to insure that the required density of trees is maintained on all developed sites. Occasionally, this intent cannot be met because a project site will not bear the required density of trees. To provide a viable alternative for such cases, the developer may be allowed to contribute to the City of Douglasville Tree Replacement Fund. The Development Official must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance to ensure that physical compliance with established standards cannot be achieved due to site considerations. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site in question. In no instances shall more than 50 percent of the required tree site density be met through alternative compliance. 
b.  The number of newly planted trees that can reasonably be expected to survive on a site shall be determined from the following criteria: 
Overstory Trees - 200 square feet of pervious root zone. 
Understory Trees - 75 square feet of pervious root zone. 
c.  Developers are required to plan their projects in such a manner as to comply with the standards provided by this Development Code. Overdevelopment of a lot will not be recognized by the City as a criteria allowing use of the alternative compliance method. Site characteristics permitting use of alternative compliance are limited to those physical features outside the control of the owner and/or developer, such as the presence of rock, unusually steep grades, or ravines. 
d.  The land-disturbance permit will only be issued after the Development Official has verified entitlement to use the alternative compliance under the standards of this section. 
e.  Tree Replacement Fund. If, in the determination of the Development Official, conditions do not allow for the planting of the required tree units on site due to physical characteristics of the lot outside the owner/developer's control, the permit holder may pay the City 125 percent of the total cost of purchase, delivery and installation (including a 2-year warranty) of trees at 2" (two inch) caliper, and the City will use this money to plant trees on public property. Actual fees shall be set by the City Council from time to time pursuant to the Administration and Enforcement Article of this Code regarding schedules and fees. 
f.  Fund Administration. The City of Douglasville Tree Replacement Fund will be maintained by the Finance Director. A report for the City of Douglasville Tree Replacement Fund will be made available to the City Council no less often than annually. Use of funds from the Tree Replacement Fund shall be approved by City Council. 
CITY TREE REPLACEMENT FUND  Calculating Contribution Amounts 
EXAMPLE: A 4.0 acre commercial development project site has the following: 
• A required Tree Density Factor of 80.0 (20 units per acre x 4.0 acres). 
• Existing trees that will remain, totaling 36.0 tree units. 
• Enough room on the property to accommodate some new trees, but only 32.0 tree units. 
• Substantiation that sufficient open acreage exists to meet the ordinance standards, but physical features of the site preclude installation of the remaining required tree units. 
1.  Determine the Tree Density Deficit as follows: 
80.0 tree units required minus 36.0 existing tree units on site minus 32.0 new tree units = a deficit of 12.0 tree units. 
2.  Determine the acceptable contribution as follows: 
Deficit of 12.0 tree units/2-inch tree units (0.3) x $FEE* 
In this example, (12.0 ° 0.3) x $FEE = 40 x $FEE 
*Estimated cost of purchase, delivery, installation and 2-year warranty of a 2-inch caliper tree, times 125 percent. 
3.03.07.  Specimen trees. The City of Douglasville strongly advocates the preservation of specimen trees. In order to encourage the preservation of specimen trees and the incorporation of these trees into the design of projects, the following shall apply: 
a.  All specimen trees shall be located on the grading plan and the landscaping, buffers, tree conservation, and land-disturbance plans, whether or not the trees are proposed to be retained. 
b.  The tree unit values shown on Table 3-1 may be increased by 100 percent for an existing tree that meets the definition of a "specimen tree" or for a "specimen tree stand" as defined herein, provided that extraordinary measures as needed are taken to protect the tree and assure its survival. Such measures may include, but are not limited to, the provision of tree wells, retaining walls, aeration, or supplementary irrigation, as applicable to the site of the tree and as approved by the Development Official according to the provisions of this article. 
c.  Removal of specimen trees. Specimen trees may not be removed from property other then single-family residential property for any reason not specifically enumerated as an exemption in section 3.14.18 without first obtaining a variance. Such variance must be granted by the City Council under the standards set for in section 10.03 of this Development Code. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 2, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-07-06, § 1, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
DIVISION 1. - LANDSCAPING OF PROJECTS IN GENERAL 

Section 3.04. - Landscaping of yard areas. 
3.04.01.  Minimum requirements. 
a.  The front yard of every single-family and two-family residential lot shall have a minimum of two shade trees, each of which shall be at least two and one half inches in diameter. Every single-family and two-family residential lot shall have a minimum of one tree unit, the calculation for which may include the individual trees required in the front yard. The tree units required by this subsection may be counted toward compliance with the requirement for the tree density standard for the development. 
b.  The minimum landscaping requirement for all uses, excluding single-family and two-family uses or developments, is two shrubs per 5,000 square feet of total lot area. 
3.04.02.  Open yard areas. All portions of the site not covered with paving or buildings shall be landscaped. Open areas not covered with other materials shall be covered with turf or ground cover. Turf or ground cover utilized on all slopes in excess of 25 percent (1 foot of rise in four feet of run) must be specifically selected to stabilize the slope. 
3.04.03.  Screening of trash receptacles, storage and loading docks. All storage areas, loading docks or areas, trash receptacles, equipment storage, and service vehicles which are visible from any public right-of-way shall be attractively screened from all streets or public rights-of-way by any dense planting of evergreens or by an attractive solid wall or fence or combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 3, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.05. - Landscape strips along front lot lines. 
3.05.01.  Landscape strips along front lot lines; where required. A minimum 10-foot-wide landscape strip shall be provided along the full length of any street frontage of a multifamily or nonresidential development. 
3.05.02.  Location of structures in frontage landscape strip. Frontage landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities or any other accessory uses except for the following: 
a.  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
b.  Pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks. 
c.  Underground utilities. 
d.  Driveways required to access the property. 
e.  Signs otherwise permitted by this Code. 
3.05.03.  Landscaping required in frontage landscape strips. 
a.  All portions of a frontage landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, flowers, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
b.  Trees shall be provided within the frontage landscape strip at the rate of one tree unit for every 75 feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such trees may be deciduous or evergreen, but must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions and that will normally reach a height of at least 15 feet upon maturity. 
c.  Upon planting, new trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
d.  Trees and shrubs in the frontage landscape strip are not to extend into the street right-of-way, and must not obstruct vision for ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. O-07-06, § 2, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.06. - Landscape strips along side and rear lot lines. 
3.06.01.  Landscape areas along side and rear lot lines; where required. All portions of a lot containing a multifamily or nonresidential use, between a side or rear lot line and the minimum required side or rear setback line for principal buildings shall be landscaped as required by this section. Buffers, where required under section 3.09, shall be installed in lieu of the landscaping required under this section. 
3.06.02.  Location of structures in side or rear landscape areas. Side and rear yard landscaping areas shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities or any other uses except for the following: 
a.  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
b.  Underground utilities. 
c.  Driveways required in order to access neighboring property. 
3.06.03.  Landscaping required in side and rear landscaping areas. 
a.  All portions of a side or rear landscaping area shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
b.  Trees shall be provided within the side yard landscape strip at the rate of at least one tree unit for every 75 feet of length or portion thereof, or the side yard landscape strip may be planted in a continuous hedge or junipers (except for approved access drives and utility easements). 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING LOT AND LOADING AREA LANDSCAPING 

Section 3.07. - Parking lot trees. 
3.07.01.  Parking lot trees; where required. Shade trees shall be provided within any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more, in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
3.07.02.  Parking lot trees; minimum standards. 
a.  Shade trees shall be provided within the parking lot at a ratio of at least one tree unit for every 30 parking spaces, or portion thereof. Each tree shall be located within the parking lot in reasonable proximity to the spaces for which the tree was required. Trees provided to meet the minimum requirements of any landscape strip or buffer under this article may not be counted toward this requirement. 
b.  New trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches upon planting, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
3.07.03.  Parking lot islands and planting areas. 
a.  As a minimum, a landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall be no less than eight feet wide for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. The island shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass, or ground cover except for those areas that are mulched. 
b.  Tree planting areas shall be no less than eight feet in width and shall provide at least 100 square feet of planting area per tree. No tree shall be located less than two and one-half feet from the back of curb. All parking lot landscape islands, strips or other planting areas shall be curbed with minimum six-inch high rolled or vertical curbs. 
c.  Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
(Ord. No. O-07-06, § 3, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.08. - Street-side screening for parking and loading areas. 
3.08.01.  Parking lot and loading area screening; when required. Any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more, and any area set aside for loading or unloading of trucks or vans, that are visible from a street right-of-way, must provide a visual screen of the parking lot or loading area that meets the requirements of this subsection. 
3.08.02.  Street-side screening; minimum standards. 
a.  Screening to a height of two and one-half feet must be provided along the edge of the parking lot or loading area closest to and parallel to the street, and along any edge closest to and within 30 degrees of being parallel to the street. A driveway to the parking lot or loading area may interdict the landscaping. 
b.  The visual screening shall be decorative and opaque to a height of two and one-half feet above the elevation of the parking lot or loading area or the street, whichever is highest. 
3.08.03.  Street-side screening; techniques. Parking lot or loading area screening may be provided in any of the following ways: 
a.  Planted only. A hedge consisting of at least 12 shrubs per 40 linear feet that will spread into a continuous visual screen within two growing seasons. Shrubs must be at least 18 inches tall at the time of planting, and be certified by a registered Landscape Architect to be of a species that will normally exceed two and one-half feet in height at maturity and are suitable for the parking lot application. 
b.  Earthen berm. An earthen berm constructed to a height of two and one-half feet above the adjacent elevation of the street or loading area, wherever is highest, shall not exceed a slope of one vertical in two horizontal (1:2) and shall have a crown of at least two feet. The berm shall be planted in ground covers or other plant materials to achieve a decorative effect. 
c.  Wall. A wall of brick, stone or finished and textured concrete may be constructed to the required height and opacity, and landscaped with plant material to achieve a decorative effect. 
d.  Combination. Any combination of hedge, berm or wall that effectively provides a visual screen of the parking lot or loading area to a height of two and one-half feet and achieves a decorative effect through appropriate use of landscaping and plant material. 
3.08.04.  Street-side screening; location. The loading area screening treatment may be located within the frontage landscape strip required under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
DIVISION 3. - BUFFERS BETWEEN INCOMPATIBLE LAND USES. 

Section 3.09. - Land use buffers; where required. 
A land use buffer shall be required in any multifamily or nonresidential development project along a side or rear lot line that abuts a less intense land use, as follows: 
Table 3-3. Situations Where Land Use Buffer Required. 

 
X = buffer required 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.10. - Buffer design standards. 
3.10.01.  General. Buffer areas shall contain no driveways, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities, or any other structures or accessory uses except for a fence, wall, or earthen berm constructed to provide the visual screening required to meet the standards of this development code. Utilities may be permitted to cross a buffer if the screening standards of this development code will be subsequently achieved. Vehicular access through a buffer may be allowed only as a condition of rezoning, special use or planned development approval by the city council. 
3.10.02.  Minimum Required Screening. Minimum required screening shall consist of a natural buffer utilizing existing vegetation or, if existing vegetation is inadequate to provide an opaque screen, a structural buffer, in order to achieve an opaque continuous visual screen to a height of six feet, or any combination of existing and replanted vegetation which can reasonably be expected to create an opaque visual screen six feet high within two growing seasons. 
3.10.03.  Natural buffers. 
a.  Width. A natural buffer shall have a minimum width of 50 feet, or greater as required to achieve an opaque visual screen. 
b.  Natural buffers may contain deciduous or perennial vegetation, but shall contain evergreen shrubs and trees suitable to local growing conditions that will provide an opaque visual screen during all seasons of the year. 
3.10.04.  Structural buffers. Structural buffers shall meet the following criteria: 
a.  Width. A structural buffer shall have a minimum width of 25 feet, or greater as required to achieve an opaque visual screen. 
b.  Structural buffers shall be vegetated throughout the minimum area required for the buffer around any fences or walls and upon any earthen berms, which may include grass, ground covers, shrubs, and trees. 
(1)  All earthen berms shall have a maximum side slope one vertical of rise to two horizontal (2:1). Earthen berms shall not be constructed within the drip line of any existing trees that will remain on the property. 
(2)  Trees shall be located or planted within any structural buffer at a density of no less than one tree unit for each 30 feet of buffer length or portion thereof. New trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches upon planting, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
(3)  Fences and freestanding walls shall present a finished and decorative appearance to the abutting property, and shall be located no closer to the property line than two feet. Shrubs, ground covers, or other vegetation shall be provided between the fence or wall and the property line so as to provide a decorative effect, following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location and design. 
(4)  Fences used in buffers must be made of rot-resistant material or protected from deterioration with waterproofing material. 
3.10.05.  Examples of Buffers. The accompanying illustration provides examples of natural and structural buffers. Other solutions meeting the minimum requirements of this section are also acceptable. 
Buffer Examples 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.11. - Maintenance of buffers. 
Every buffer and every fence required by this ordinance, by the zoning ordinance or by special stipulations of zoning shall be maintained by the property owner. Every buffer required by this article shall be maintained by the owner of the property where the buffer is located, so as to provide an opaque continuous visual screen to a height of six feet on a continuous, year-round basis. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.12. - Buffer modifications. 
3.12.01.  Automatic reduction in buffer width. If a structural buffer is provided that creates an opaque screen to a height of no less than eight feet instead of six, the buffer may be reduced to a width of no less than 15 feet. 
3.12.02.  Location of buffers. 
a.  Buffers may be relocated on the site to best achieve the screening required. 
b.  Buffers may be located on adjoining property upon approval of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.13. - Waiver for unnecessary buffers. 
The mayor and council may waive a buffer requirement or reduce its extent to a temporarily appropriate level of screening if the comprehensive plan anticipates future development on the adjoining property in a land use category such that a buffer would not be required by this Code once the adjoining property is rezoned or developed. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
DIVISION 4. - TREE CONSERVATION 

Section 3.14. - Tree conservation; where required. 
3.14.01.  Application to new development or disturbed areas. The requirements of this Development Code shall apply to any activity on real property within the City of Douglasville, including, but not limited to, the following: 
a.  Single-family and two-family lots. Single-family and two-family lots which are fully developed and occupied, or which were and have remained under development since July 1, 1999. 
b.  All new commercial, office, institutional, industrial, and/or manufacturing development and expansion of existing commercial, office, institutional, and/or manufacturing development into undisturbed areas; 
c.  All new residential subdivisions and expansion of existing subdivisions (new units and/or phases); 
d.  All new mixed-use developments and expansion of existing mixed use developments into undisturbed areas; 
e.  All new multifamily developments and expansion of existing multifamily developments into undisturbed areas; and 
f.  All new townhouse developments and expansion of existing townhouse developments into undisturbed areas. 
3.14.02.  Residential subdivisions. Residential subdivisions shall achieve the total tree density required under this article upon completion of infrastructure construction. At a minimum, the subdivider must fully meet the tree density requirements of this article prior to approval of a final plat, or commit to such achievement through performance surety for tree planting. 
3.14.03.  Nonresidential subdivisions. New commercial and industrial subdivisions are subject to a two-staged review process by the Development Official (for the infrastructure and later for each individual lot). For this reason, these subdivisions may base density calculations on the net disturbed site area defined by the limits of clearance and construction. The phase 1 plan shall address the method and timing of ultimate compliance with this article. 
3.14.04.  Nonresidential out-lots. Out-lots and separate parcels of a phased development must collectively meet minimum requirements for site density; however, in no case may an individual out-lot have less than 14 tree units per acre. 
3.14.05.  Additions to existing projects. For additions to existing projects, the density requirements may be met in either of the following two ways: 
a.  Calculate the area of any new land-disturbance and/or improvements and add replacement trees based on that area (existing trees elsewhere on the site may not be counted with this option); or 
b.  Base density requirements on the total site area and count any existing trees on the site, exclusive of zoning buffers and stream buffers. 
3.14.06.  Phased projects and reduced net site areas. Where development is going to occur in phases (by design or by implication), density calculations must be based on a site area defined by an established or estimated phase line. 
Similarly, a reduced net site area may be achieved by using only the area of actual site disturbance (new projects only), provided that a limits of construction line is clearly shown on the plan (existing trees elsewhere on the site may not be counted with this option). 
In both instances, the following criteria are applied regarding existing trees: 
a.  Existing trees to be counted toward meeting the density requirements should be within the phase line or limits of construction. 
b.  If the tree save areas must be established outside these areas, they must be located where future development will not impact them. 
The trees in areas outside the phase line or limits of construction may not be counted toward the density requirement of subsequent phases or new projects. 
3.14.07.  Alternative calculations. Calculations for alternative compliance to tree density requirements shall be made according to the guidelines set forth at section 3.03.06. 
3.14.08.  Exemptions from tree conservation requirements. The tree conservation requirements shall not apply to the following: 
a.  [Horticultural or agricultural.] Horticultural or agricultural operations, as follows. 
(1)  All plant or tree nurseries, Christmas tree farms, and botanical gardens shall be exempt in relation to those trees that are being grown for relocation and continued growth in the ordinary course of business, or for some public purpose. 
(2)  All orchards of trees in active commercial operation shall be exempt for bona fide agricultural purposes. 
(3)  Land clearing or clearing and grubbing activities for clearly agricultural purposes. Clearing or grubbing conducted as part of the land development process may be authorized only in accordance with the issuance of a land-disturbance permit under the requirements and provisions of this article. A development permit may not be issued on any property that has been cleared or grubbed as an exempt agricultural activity within the past 12 months, unless approved by the mayor and council. 
(4)  Timber harvesting (selective cutting or clear cutting) for pulpwood or sawtimber shall be exempt when conducted as a bona fide agricultural activity. Timber harvesting conducted as part of the land development process may be authorized only in accordance with the issuance of a land-disturbance permit under the requirements and provisions of this article. A development permit may not be issued on any property that has had its timber harvested as an exempt agricultural activity within the past two (2) years. 
b.  Removal of disease or infestation. Removal of diseased or infested trees, upon the verification of the Development Official or other qualified forestry professional acceptable to the Development Official, is exempt. 
c.  Imminent hazards to property owners. Removal of trees that have become, or threaten to become, a danger to human life or property, upon the verification of the Development Services Director or other qualified forestry professional acceptable to the Director of Development Services, are exempt. 
d.  Roadway construction. Land clearing for designated roadway projects of the Georgia Department of Transportation and the City of Douglasville is exempt. 
e.  [Exemptions.] The removal of trees from detention ponds and drainage easements is exempt. 
f.  [Companies and agencies exempted.] Public utility companies and government agencies conducting operations on public and utility rights-of-way and easements or on sites for electric power substations and similar facilities, which operations are for the purpose of assuring uninterrupted utility and governmental services and unobstructed passage on public streets, are exempt. 
3.14.09.  Summary of applicability and exemptions. Table 3-4 summarizes the circumstances under which tree conservation requirements apply to specific projects. 
Table 3-3. Summary: Applicability and Exemptions (See Text for Further Details). 

 
1 No land-disturbance or development permit may be issued within two years of agricultural clearing, clearing and grubbing or timber harvesting on a property unless variance pursuant to the Development Code is approved. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, §§ 4—6, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.15. - Trees to be provided or retained. 
3.15.01.  Number of tree units upon completion of development. 
a.  Minimum standard. On each property for which a tree protection plan is required by this article, existing trees may be retained and new trees shall be planted such that the property shall attain or exceed a tree density, standard meeting section 3.03.03. The trees, both existing and new, where feasible shall be reasonably distributed throughout the site, with emphasis on tree groupings to achieve aesthetic results following professional landscaping standards. Trees may be retained or planted for credit within a public right-of-way if granted approval by the development official. 
b.  Tree density standard calculation. The tree density standard shall be calculated by summing the following credits and dividing by the total acreage of the project included within the limits of the permit application. 
(1)  Credit for existing trees to be retained shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in table 3-1 for existing trees. Credit shall be given all trees retained on a property having a diameter at breast height (DBH) of three inches or more, except for those trees retained to create a land use buffer required under section 3.09. 
(2)  Credit for new trees proposed on the site shall be calculated by multiplying the number of trees (by diameter) times the units assigned in the table 3-2 for new trees. Credit shall be given all new trees on a property, except for new trees of less than one inch in caliper and those trees provided to create a land use buffer required under section 3.09. 
(3)  Additional credits shall be granted under the following circumstances: 
(a)  A total tree density credit not to exceed twice the units shown on table 3-1, may be granted by the development official, under the standards set forth in this article, for existing trees to be retained which have greater value as outstanding specimen trees or having historic value or being a rare or unique species. 
(b)  Existing trees to be retained within a 100-year floodplain shall be granted a bonus of 50 percent of the units assigned in table 3-1. 
3.15.02.  Retention of specimen trees. Existing specimen trees (as defined in this development code) shall not be removed from property other than single-family residential property, unless development would cause irreparable damage to the critical root zones. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 27, 28, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-07-06, § 5, 1-16-07; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.16. - Protection of existing trees. 
The following guidelines and standards shall apply to existing trees proposed to be retained for credit toward meeting the minimum required tree density standard on a property: 
3.16.01.  Tree protection area. The root system within the dripline is generally considered to be the critical root zone. To protect these critical root zones, a tree protection area shall be established around each tree or group of trees to be retained. 
a.  The tree protection area shall include, as a minimum, the total area within the dripline plus an additional three feet. 
b.  Layout of the project site utility and grading plans shall avoid disturbance of the tree protection areas. 
c.  All construction activities are prohibited within the tree protection area. Construction site activities such as parking, materials storage, concreted washout, burn-hole placement, etc., shall be arranged so as to prevent disturbances within the tree protection area. 
d.  Once tree protection areas are established and approved, no changes shall be made without first obtaining approval from the Development Official of the change, subject to the standards set forth in this article. 
3.16.02.  Protective barriers. 
a.  Tree protection devices are to be installed as shown on the plan or otherwise completely surrounding the tree protection area. The plan shall indicate whether the tree protection device is to be active or passive. Active protection is required where tree protection areas are located in proximity to construction activity. The locations of all tree protection devices will be verified by the Development Official prior to the issuance of the construction permit for clearing and/or grading. Active tree protection shall consist of chain-link, orange laminated plastic, wooden post and rail fencing or other equivalent restraining material. 
b.  Signage. All tree protection areas shall be designated as such with "Tree Protection Area" signs. These signs are intended to inform subcontractors of the tree protection process. Such signs shall be a minimum of 16 square feet in sign face area and shall state with minimum three inch lettering "Attention Subcontractors. You must observe Tree Protection Area - No Construction or Equipment Encroachment. You are responsible for damages" or similar wording. Signs requiring subcontractor cooperation and compliance with the tree protection standards shall be posted visibly at sight entrances. 
c.  Erosion and sedimentation control. All tree protection areas must be protected from soil erosion and sedimentation intrusion through the use of silt screens or other acceptable measures placed up-slope from the tree protection area. All erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be installed in a manner that will not result in the accumulation of sediment in a tree protection area. 
d.  All tree protection devices and erosion control barriers shall be installed prior to any clearing, grubbing, grading or any land-disturbance activity. The Development Official must inspect the installation of tree protection and erosion and sedimentation control devices prior to the issuance of the development permit. Tree protection must remain in functioning condition throughout all phases of development, but is to be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
3.16.03.  Encroachment. If encroachment into a tree protection area occurs that causes irreparable damage to the trees, the Tree Conservation Plan shall be revised by the permittee to compensate for the loss, and the revised plan must be accepted by the Development Official, subject to the standards set forth in this article. Under no circumstances shall the developer be relieved of responsibility for compliance with the provisions of this article, nor shall plan revision activities estop the department from instituting action for violation of this article. 
3.16.04.  Damage prohibited to specimen trees. No person shall: 
a.  Cut, carve, or otherwise damage or remove any specimen tree on nonresidential property except in accordance with the provisions of this Development Code. 
b.  Attach any wire, nails, advertising posters, or other contrivance harmful to any specimen tree on property other than single-family residential property. 
c.  Allow any gaseous, liquid, or solid substance that is harmful to trees (such as concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides, paint) to come in contact with specimen trees on property other than single-family residential property. 
d.  Set a fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat thereof will injure any portion of any specimen tree on property other than single-family residential property. 
3.16.05.  Prohibited activities. 
a.  Compaction prohibited. All building materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris, or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or aboveground damage shall be kept outside the tree protection area. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable, the tree protection area shall first be cut cleanly, then immediately mulched with a four-inch layer of processed bark or wood chips or in a six-inch layer of straw. 
b.  Grade change prohibited. There shall be no raising or lowering of the ground level within the tree protection area. Stripping of topsoil in the tree protection area shall not be permitted. Where necessary, the use of moderate fill is permitted only with prior installation of an aeration system. Deposition of sediment in the tree protection area shall be prevented by placement of sediment barriers, which shall be backed by two inch by four inch wire mesh in areas of steep slope. 
c.  Ditches prohibited. No person shall excavate any ditch within the tree protection area. Where such encroachment is unavoidable, ditches or trenches shall be located as to minimize root damage. Any such excavation in a tree protection area shall require protective measures designed by a certified arborist and approved by the development official. If roots must be cut, they must be cut cleanly and immediately mulched. 
d.  Paving prohibited. No person shall pave with concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material within the tree protection area. 
3.16.06.  Purpose of tree protection devices. Tree protection devices required by this article ameliorate the effects of activities detrimental to trees including, but not limited to: 
a.  Soils compaction in the tree protection area resulting from heavy equipment, vehicular or excessive pedestrian traffic, or storage of equipment or materials; 
b.  Root disturbance due to cuts, fills or trenching; 
c.  Wounds to exposed roots, trunks or limbs by mechanical equipment; 
d.  Other activities such as chemical storage, cement truck cleaning, fire, or other activities that will damage the critical root zone. 
3.16.07.  Other specifications. 
Clearing. Where clearing has been approved, trees shall be removed in a manner which does not adversely impact the trees to be preserved. Felling trees into tree protection areas or disturbing roots inside the protection areas is prohibited. Roots shall be cut cleanly before tree removal. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.17. - Tree replacement standards. 
New trees proposed to be planted for credit toward meeting the minimum required tree density standards on a property shall comply with the following guidelines and standards: 
3.17.01.  Placement and quality. 
a.  The spacing of new trees must be compatible with the spatial site limitations and with responsible consideration towards species size when mature. 
b.  Species selected for planting must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. When practical, the replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed. Standards for transplanting shall be in compliance with those established by the International Society of Arborculture, as included in the Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual, latest edition or similar publication. Unless otherwise approved by the Development Official pursuant to the standards set forth in this article, trees selected for replanting must be on the tree planting list in Table 3-5. 
c.  Trees selected for planting must be free from injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be of good vigor so as to assure a reasonable expectation of survivability. 
Table 3-5: Approved Species List for Proposed New Trees 

 
3.17.02.  Deferred planting. In the event that new trees proposed to be planted to achieve the tree density standard are not installed upon application for a certificate of occupancy or a final plat approval, then a performance bond or other acceptable surety in an amount equal to 110 percent of the value of the new trees and their installation shall be posted in accordance with the performance bonding requirements and provision of this development code. 
3.17.03.  Warranty for new plant materials. Upon final installation of new trees planted under the requirements of this article, and following acceptance by the Development Official, the owner shall warrant the new trees and provide for replacement of those which do not survive for a period of no less than one year. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
DIVISION 5. - LANDSCAPING PLANS, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE 

Section 3.18. - Site landscaping plans. 
3.18.01.  Site landscaping plans; where required. 
a.  Landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans are required upon application for a development permit or for a building permit for new construction of buildings in any development to which landscaping, screening, buffer or tree conservation requirements apply. 
b.  In cases where approval of the landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans would cause harmful delay to the start of construction, the development official may authorize footing and foundation permits for the project so that construction may proceed. 
c.  Permits for construction beyond the footing and foundation shall not be issued until the landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans have been submitted and approved. 
3.18.02.  Site landscaping plans; criteria. The technical specifications for landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans are found under the "plans and permits" article of this Code. 
3.18.03.  Exemptions from site landscaping plan requirements. 
a.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to structures for which site landscaping plans have previously been submitted and approved. 
b.  Site landscaping plans shall be required for only that phase of development for which the development permit or building permit is being requested. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 29, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.19. - Plant materials; standards. 
3.19.01.  Acceptable plant materials. The following are the minimum plant sizes and conditions to be used in satisfying the requirements of this article. Acceptable plant materials for landscaping, buffers and tree replacement shall be as approved by a registered Landscape Architect. 
a.  New plant materials. 
(1)  Medium shrubs, 18—24 inch balled and burlapped or 2-gallon container. 
(2)  Large shrubs, 24—30 inch balled and burlapped or 5-gallon container. 
(3)  Ground cover, two and one-half inch peat pot. 
(4)  Trees as required to meet the requirements of the tree conservation plan. 
b.  The "American Standard for Nursery Stock," published by the American Association for Nurserymen, may be referred to for the determination of plant standards. 
c.  Existing trees that are to be retained to satisfy the requirements of this Code shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  For evergreen trees, the height shall be at least six feet. 
(2)  Trees shall be free from mechanical injuries, insect infestations and disease. 
(3)  Trees shall be protected from injury to roots, trunks and branches during grading and construction. Protective fencing, tree wells, or retaining walls shall be utilized where necessary to insure tree vigor upon completion of construction. 
3.19.02.  Approval of plant materials. Approval of a proposal to use a specific landscaping or buffer material shall be subject to a determination by a registered Landscape Architect that the proposed material is the most appropriate for: 
a.  The specific location, given surrounding land uses and the type of screening used on nearby properties, and 
b.  The specific topography, soil, existing vegetation, and other factors that may influence the effectiveness of a screen material. 
(Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
Section 3.20. - Installation and maintenance of plant materials. 
3.20.01.  Installation of plant materials. Plant materials, as required by the provisions of this article, shall be installed by the date specified on the approved site landscaping plan. The development official may allow one planting season in a 12-month period in which the installation of plant materials shall be completed. For the purposes of this development code, there shall be two planting seasons, which are from February 15 through May 31, and September 15 through November 30. Buffers, if required, shall be installed before an occupancy permit is granted; except where the weather is not suitable for planting, and escrow provisions are made in accordance with guidelines of the engineering department. 
3.20.02.  Maintenance of required plant materials. 
a.  The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly responsible for the maintenance in good condition of the plant materials used to meet the minimum requirements of this article for landscaping, buffer or tree conservation. The plant materials shall be kept free from refuse and debris. 
b.  Plants that are not in sound growing condition or are dead shall be removed and replaced with a plant of the same species, variety or cultivator, as acceptable to the development official. 
c.  Other landscape materials shall be maintained in proper repair and shall be kept clear of refuse and debris. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 30, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 1, 12-3-07) 
ARTICLE IV. - VEHICLE PARKING AND LOADING 

Section 4.01. - Purpose of article IV. 
This article sets out the requirements for the number of parking spaces that must be provided for development projects, the location of the spaces and the design of the parking lots. Restrictions on certain vehicles and requirements for loading areas are also included. 
Section 4.02. - Vehicle parking; when required. 
a.  At the time of the establishment of any use, or erection of any building, or at the time any principal building is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, seats or floor area, there shall be provided permanent off-street parking spaces improved with an asphalt or concrete surface in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
b.  Such parking spaces may be provided both in an off-street parking lot and as parallel parking along streets that are internal to and part of a development project. 
Section 4.03. - Number of parking spaces to be provided. 
a.  The number of parking spaces to be provided for a particular use or development may be established through administrative approval of an alternate parking plan. Use of an alternate parking plan is encouraged in order to tailor the parking to the particular needs of the use or development and to allow introduction of operational solutions such as ride-sharing programs or remote employee parking lots. 
b.  At the owner's option, parking spaces may be provided in accordance with the guidelines contained in this article. The guidelines establish the minimum number of spaces to be provided. An increase or decrease in the number of spaces can only be allowed through approval of an alternate parking plan. 
c.  Downtown area exempt. Off-street parking is not required for any nonresidential use located in the CBD zoning district. At the owner's option, parking may be provided up to but not exceeding the number of spaces allowed by the guidelines for vehicle parking, below. A larger number requires approval of an alternate parking plan. 
Section 4.04. - Alternate parking plan. 
4.04.01.  Alternate parking plan; contents. A request for approval of an alternate parking plan is to be submitted to the development official, and must be supported by the following information: 
a.  A parking demand study or other data that establishes the number of spaces required for the specific use. Such a study or data may reflect parking for the same use existing at a similar location or for similar uses at other locations. References to published studies or to the guideline standards of this article are acceptable. 
b.  If shared parking is proposed for a mixed use development, the sum of peak parking demands by use category shall be accommodated for day and night hours on weekdays and weekends. The guidelines for shared parking contained in this article may be used in lieu of a separate study. 
c.  If a remote or off-site parking lot is proposed to meet any portion of the parking required, the site and its current zoning classification must be identified, along with the method to transport parking patrons to the use. 
d.  If more parking spaces are proposed than would be allowed under the guidelines for vehicle parking of this article, a landscaping plan shall be submitted that illustrates compliance with the parking lot landscaping requirements of the "landscaping, buffers and tree protection" article of this Code. 
4.04.02.  Reserved. 
4.04.03.  Alternate parking plan; if approved. 
a.  Following approval by the development official the requirements of the approved alternate parking plan shall be recorded by the owner in the office of the clerk to superior court prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development, and shall be included in any sale, lease, or other transfer of right of occupancy affecting any part of the development. 
b.  All tenants of the property or development, whether an owner, lessee, subtenant, purchaser, or other occupant, shall comply with the approved alternate parking plan. 
(Ord. No. O-99-24, §§ 6, 7, 9, 7-6-99; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 32, 33, 4-19-04) 
Section 4.05. - Guidelines for vehicle parking. 
4.05.01.  Guidelines; vehicle parking by land use. In lieu of establishment under an alternate parking plan, the number of parking spaces to be provided for each type of land use shall be determined by the following, rounded to the nearest whole space. Developments containing two or more of the uses listed on the table shall provide the number of spaces required for each use (except as may be reduced under Shared Parking, below). 
Table 4-1. Parking Guidelines by Use. 

 
  
3 Square feet. 
4 Gross floor area—the total area of all floors, measured between the exterior walls of a building. 
5 Gross leasable area—the total area of all floors intended for occupancy and the exclusive use of tenants, specifically excluding public or common areas such as utility rooms, stairwells, enclosed malls and interior hallways. 
4.05.02.  Guidelines; shared parking. The parking spaces provided for separate uses may be combined in one lot but the required spaces assigned to each use may not be assigned to another use, except as follows: 
a.  Shared parking between day and night users. One-half of the parking spaces assigned to a church, theater or assembly hall whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
b.  Mixed use developments. Parking spaces may be shared by more than one use if the development official finds that the total number of spaces will be adequate at the peak hours of the uses they serve. The following ratios may be used in determining the time of day and the day of the week at which the maximum number of spaces will be needed by the uses served by the shared parking facility. 
Table 4-2. Percentage of Required Parking Spaces by Time Period. 

 
c.  Availability of shared spaces. Parking spaces that are proposed to be shared among two or more uses must be clearly available to each use and not appear in any way to be serving a particular use, either through signage dedicating the spaces or through design techniques that would tend to orient use of the spaces to a particular business or building. 
d.  Recordation of shared parking arrangement. Shared parking arrangements must be committed to writing in the form of a covenant or deed restriction running with the land for not less than 20 years, and approved by the owners of each of the affected properties. The approved instrument shall be recorded and a copy of the recorded document must be supplied to the development official. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 34, 35, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-54, § 1, 10-3-05; Ord. No. O-2010-47, § 2, 11-15-10) 
Section 4.06. - Handicap accessible parking spaces. 
4.06.01.  Handicap accessible spaces; required. Handicap accessible spaces shall be provided in each parking lot in the following ratio to the total number of spaces required for the use: 
Table 4-3. Handicap Accessible Spaces Required. 

 
Source: Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines. 
4.06.02.  Method of Computation. Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be counted as part of the total number of parking spaces provided under this article. 
4.06.03.  Design criteria for handicap accessible spaces. 
a.  Handicap accessible parking spaces shall have an adjacent aisle five feet wide, and one in every eight handicapped spaces shall be adjacent to an aisle eight feet wide and the space shall be signed "van accessible." Handicapped parking space aisles shall be clearly demarcated by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface. 

Handicapped Spaces 
b.  Handicap accessible parking spaces shall be located on a surface with a slope not exceeding one vertical in 50 horizontal (1:50). 
4.06.04.  Compliance with federal requirements. In addition to the requirements of this section, all handicapped parking shall comply with the requirements of the federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
Section 4.07. - Dedication to parking use. 
Parking spaces provided to meet the minimum requirements of this article, along with the aisles and driveways necessary to provide access to those spaces, shall not be used for any other purpose than the temporary parking of vehicles except as allowed by section 3.48 of Appendix A—Zoning. Specifically, no such parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, or for the sale, display or storage of equipment, goods, materials or supplies. 
(Ord. No. O-06-51, § 4, 12-4-06) 
Section 4.08. - Proximity of off-street parking spaces to use. 
4.08.01.  Location of parking spaces. Unless otherwise provided under an approved alternate parking plan, all parking spaces required to meet the guideline standards of this article shall be located in proximity to the use the spaces serve, as follows: 
Table 4-4. Location of Parking Spaces. 

 
4.08.02.  Off-site parking. If required parking spaces are not located on the same lot as the particular use, building or establishment they are intended to serve, the following shall apply: 
a.  The parking spaces must be set aside solely for the particular use, building or establishment, or be established as "shared parking" under the provisions for such under this article. 
b.  The parking spaces must be located on a property that has the same zoning classification as the property that the spaces serve, or a less restrictive zoning classification. 
c.  No required parking spaces may be located across any State or US highway from the use they are intended to serve. 
d.  The parking spaces must meet the "location of parking spaces" requirements of this section, or adequate vehicular transportation must be provided that is acceptable to the development official. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 36, 4-19-04) 
Section 4.09. - Design requirements for parking lots. 
The provisions of this section apply to all off-street parking spaces and parking areas, whether the parking meets or exceeds the number of spaces required to serve a particular use or the parking lot is operated as a principal use on a property and not dedicated to serving a particular use. 
4.09.01.  Orientation to street. Except for parcels of land devoted to one-family, two-family or townhouse residential uses, all areas devoted to off-street parking shall be so designed and be of such size that no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain access. 
4.09.02.  Off-street parking spaces. 
a.  No parking spaces shall be accessible from an access driveway within the first 20 feet of the driveway back from the street right-of-way line. 
b.  Every parking space shall provide a useable rectangular area at least nine feet wide by 20 feet long; exceptionally, where the requirement for parking exceeds 50 spaces on a single lot, not more than 20 percent of the required parking spaces may be designated for compact vehicles only, and each shall be a minimum size of eight feet by 16 feet and shall be clearly marked as "compact car only" by a sign adjacent to each space so as to be readable by approaching drivers. 
c.  Access aisles shall not encroach into the rectangular parking space area. Every parking space shall be clearly demarcated by lines painted on or otherwise applied to the parking lot surface. 
4.09.03.  Access and circulation. 
a.  Access aisles in parking lots must be at least 24 feet wide for two-way traffic, and 14 feet wide for one-way traffic. Minimum widths of driveways, excluding parking, shall be 20 feet. Minimum turning radius shall be 32 feet. One-way traffic aisles must be clearly marked with directional arrows on the pavement at each intersection with another aisle. 
b.  Ingress and egress to parking areas shall be by means of paved driveways from the adjoining street. Driveway width, for the purpose of this section, shall include only the pavement and not the curbs and gutters. 
c.  The distance from a parking area access drive to the intersection of two streets, and the distance between driveways at the street, shall be based on the driveway requirements in the "project design standards" article of this Code. 
4.09.04.  Setback requirements. 
a.  Off-street parking for single-family and two-family residential uses shall have no setback requirements. 
b.  Off-street parking for all other uses, including multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional uses, shall be set back from the front property line by at least ten feet, and shall be set back from side and rear property lines as required in the "landscaping, buffers and tree conservation" article of this development code. 
c.  The area between the front property line and the parking area shall be used for landscaping and/or screening as required in the "landscaping, buffers and tree conservation" article of this Code. 
4.09.05.  Lighting of parking areas. Any lights used to illuminate the parking area shall be arranged, located or screened to direct light away from any adjoining residential use. 
4.09.06.  Improvement of parking areas. 
a.  Surfacing and curbing. All off-street parking areas and all access drives shall be improved with a permanent dust-free paved surface. 
b.  Maintenance. Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in proper repair with a dust-free surface. 
c.  Drainage facilities. For any use that will require a parking area to be newly constructed, added to, or altered in such a way as to affect drainage either on or off the site, stormwater drainage plans, including grading plans, shall be submitted to and approved by the engineering department, prior to the issuance of a building permit or occupational license. 
d.  Permit required. Construction of a new parking lot or expansion of an existing parking lot requires issuance of a development permit from the engineering department. A permit is not required for resurfacing an existing parking area A driveway permit is required for customary driveways for single-family and two-family residential dwellings. Permit requirements are found in the "procedures and permits" article of this Code. 
e.  Time limit. All required off-street parking areas shall be ready for use, including the above surfacing requirement, before the occupancy of the use (in the case of a new building or addition) or within 45 days after the issuance of an occupational license (in the case of a change of occupancy in an existing building). An extension of time may be granted by the development official due to adverse weather conditions. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 7, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 37, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-06-15, § 3, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-08-030, §§ 1, 2, 6-2-08) 
Section 4.10. - Restrictions on vehicle parking. 
4.10.01.  Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
a.  In districts zoned for residential use, no person shall park or store any vehicle or trailer over 10,000 pounds gross weight or 24 feet in length except for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle or trailer. The loading or unloading of such vehicle shall be done within a reasonable time, but not to exceed 48 hours in and 15-day period. 
b.  No truck body, trailer, or truck tractor, or part thereof may be parked or stored within the districts herein described unless specifically authorized by this ordinance or a permit is issued by the building official of Douglasville. If such a permit is issued by the building official, it shall be for one year and specific to the vehicle and location specified in the permit. Application shall be made to the building official by the owner of the property where the vehicle is to be parked or stored. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee as set from time to time by the city council. Factors to be considered by the building official in issuing such a permit may include, but not be limited to the following: adequate screening from roadways and adjacent property, availability of rear yard parking, hours of vehicle parking and operation, size and type of vehicle. 
c.  Recreational vehicles, motor homes, campers, boat trailers, and similar vehicles used solely for noncommercial personal recreation use shall not come within this prohibition. Nothing herein shall exempt any vehicle from the requirements of section 82-151 et seq., prohibiting the storing, parking or leaving of dismantled or other such motor vehicles. 
4.10.02.  Inoperable vehicles. Inoperable vehicles must be removed, garaged or stored in accordance with article IV (Abandoned or Dismantled Automobiles) of chapter 82 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
4.10.03.  Construction equipment and construction vehicles. In Districts other than the Industrial zoning district, construction equipment and construction vehicles may not be stored or repaired on the premises (other than in enclosed garages), except as follows: 
a.  When being utilized for construction activities on the premises pursuant to a valid permit issued by the city for construction work necessitating use of such equipment, or when used for permitted work on the public right-of-way, or 
b.  When the equipment is used as an accessory use customarily associated with an allowable primary business use, for example, forklifts used by some businesses to move merchandise, or 
c.  When an intrinsic part of an allowable primary use, such as an equipment rental business. 
Section 4.11. - Truck loading. 
4.11.01.  Off-street loading and unloading space. 
a.  Generally. In addition to the parking requirements of section 22-471, every lot with any building or structure hereafter constructed and used for business, trade, or industry shall provide and maintain space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public right-of-way. Such space shall be in conformance with the following requirements: 
(1)  The loading and unloading area shall have access to a public alley or street, such space shall be so arranged that no vehicle is required to back onto a public street, road or highway in order to leave the premises or using the loading and unloading area. 
(2)  The size of each loading area shall be a minimum of 500 square feet. 
(3)  Loading and unloading shall be done into and from doors, loading docks, loading areas, or other parts of the building which is at least 80 feet from any street or into or from any approved outside storage areas. 
(4)  Such loading and unloading areas shall be attractively screened from all streets or public rights-of-way by any dense planting of evergreens or by an attractive solid wall or fence or combination thereof or as approved by the development official. 
b.  Minimum requirements for specific uses. Parking for the following named use classifications shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use set forth below. 
(1)  Retail business: One space for each 3,000 square feet of floor space or any part thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and industry: One space for each 10,000 square feet of floor space or any part thereof. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals: Sufficient spaces to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 38, 4-19-04) 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), adopted Nov. 3, 2014, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 5.01—5.09, and enacted a new article as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. No. O-04-27, § 2(Exh. A), adopted June 21, 2004. 

Section 5.01. - Title. 
This article will be known as "The City of Douglasville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.02. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
5.02.01. Best management practices (BMPs) : These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
5.02.02. Board: The Board of Natural Resources. 
5.02.03. Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
5.02.04. Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
5.02.05 City: The City of Douglasville, Georgia. 
5.02.06. Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
5.02.07. CPESC: Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
5.02.08. Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
5.02.09. Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
5.02.10. Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
5.02.11. Director: The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
5.02.12. District: The West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
5.02.13. Division : The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
5.02.14. Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority or WSA : The Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority when acting as designee for the City of Douglasville with regard to permitting, inspection or enforcement duties under this article. 
5.02.15. Drainage structure : A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
5.02.16. Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
5.02.17. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan : A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices and the requirements in subsection 5.03.01.E. of this article. 
5.02.18. Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
5.02.19. Final stabilization : All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
5.02.20. Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
5.02.21. Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
5.02.22. Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
5.02.23. Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 5.03.01.E. 
5.02.24. Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
5.02.25. Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
5.02.26. Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
5.02.27. Natural ground surface : The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
5.02.28. Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
5.02.29. NOI: A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
5.02.30. NOT : A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
5.02.31. Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
5.02.32. Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
5.02.33. Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
5.02.34. Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
5.02.35. Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
5.02.36. Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
5.02.37. Properly designed : Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
5.02.38 . Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
5.02.39. Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
5.02.40. Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
5.02.41. Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
5.02.42. Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
5.02.43. State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
5.02.44. State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
5.02.45. Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices : Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
5.02.46. Trout streams : All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
5.02.47. Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
A.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, 
B.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
C.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
5.02.48. Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
5.02.49. Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.03. - Exemptions. 
5.03.01. This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
A.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
B.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
C.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
D.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 5.04 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (B) of subsection 5.04.02 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
E.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
F.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs 5.04.03. O. and P. of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
G.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
H.  Any project involving 10,000 square feet or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 10,000 square feet or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I or J of this section; 
I.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
J.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
K.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.04. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
5.04.01. General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the article and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections 5.04.02 or 5.04.03. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit. 
5.04.02. Minimum Requirements/BMPs. 
A.  Best management practices as set forth in sections B. and C. of this section shall be required or all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the development official or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
B.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
C.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
D.  The development official may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
5.04.03. Additional requirements . The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
A.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
B.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
C.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
D.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
E.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
F.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
G.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
H.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
I.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
J.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
K.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
L.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
M.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
N.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection 5.04.02.B; 
O.  Except as provided in paragraph P. of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the development official determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the development official pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. at. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 5, pt. 6, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the development official as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
1.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
2.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (1) Stream crossings for water lines; or (2) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
P.  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The city may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
1.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
2.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (a) Stream crossings for water lines; or (b) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
5.04.04. Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any City from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection 5.04.02 and 5.04.03. 
5.04.05. The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.05. - Application/permit process. 
5.05.01. Generally. The property owner or operator, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The city shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning code, the development code, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner or the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit; every application shall be accompanied by written proof that the applicant is the owner or operator of the subject property. 
5.05.02. Application requirements. 
A.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD, as applicable. 
B.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the development official and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 5.05.03 of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 5.05.02 and 5.05.03 of this section will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by seven copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. Additional copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans may also be submitted directly to EPD, as specified by the development official. 
C.  The city assesses local permitting fees and also state-mandated fees. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. A fee, in the amount of $40.00 per acre, plus $250.00 processing fee payable to Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority, plus $100.00 payable to the City of Douglasville, shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. In addition to the local permitting fees, state-mandated fees shall also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), and regulations adopted thereunder by EPD, in the amount of $80.00 per disturbed acre, to be divided as follows: $40.00 per acre to the city and $40.00 per acre to the EPD. In the case of a subdivision or other larger common plan of development or sale, "per disturbed acre" includes all acreage to be disturbed in the entire development. Fees for the city shall be submitted to the city including primary and secondary permittees. Fees for the state shall be submitted to the state on EPD forms available at http://www.gaepd.org. However, any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division. 
D.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by paragraphs 5.04.03. O. and P. has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district enter into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
E.  (1)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. 
(2)  The city or WSA may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. The development official may release a portion of the letter of credit, for the land-disturbing amount, after final stabilization is complete and all permanent vegetation and stabilization measures are in place. If the permit holder believes it is not in violation of this article such that the surety should not be drawn against, the permit holder may appeal any notice to comply to the city's mayor and council as provided in section 10.02 and section 5.08. Appeal shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of any notice to comply with the development official, stating the basis for the appeal. The mayor and city council shall consider the appeal at the next scheduled public meeting. Except in emergency situations, the surety shall not be drawn against until the appeal is considered. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
5.05.03. Plan Requirements . 
A.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 5.04.02 and 5.04.03 of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
5.05.04. Permits. 
A.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
B.  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by paragraphs 5.04.03 O. and P. are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subparagraph 5.05.02 E. (2) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
C.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
D.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
E.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
F.  The city may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). The development official may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.06. - Inspection and enforcement. 
5.06.01. The city and Douglasville-Douglas County Water and Sewer Authority (WSA) will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city and WSA shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
5.06.02. The city and WSA shall have the power to conduct such investigations as they may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
5.06.03. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, WSA, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
5.06.04. The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
5.06.05. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.07. - Penalties and incentives. 
5.07.01. Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
5.07.02. Stop-work orders. 
A.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the city shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
B.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
C.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
D.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the city or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
5.07.03. Bond forfeiture . If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 5.05. The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
5.07.04. Monetary penalties . Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in the City Charter to the contrary, the Douglasville Municipal Court shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.08. - Administrative appeal/judicial review. 
5.08.01. Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 30 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal submitted to the development official. 
5.08.02. Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Douglas County. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.09. - Education and certification. 
5.09.01. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
5.09.02. For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
5.09.03. Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
5.09.04. If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
Section 5.10. - Validity and liability. 
5.10.01. Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
5.10.11. Liability. 
A.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
B.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
C.  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-53, § 1(Exh. A), 11-3-14) 
ARTICLE VI. - SOIL CONSERVATION AND TIMBER HARVESTING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-01-2, § 1, adopted January 11, 2001, amended §§ 6.01—6.06 in their entirety. Formerly said sections pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control. Further, said ordinance set out provisions included as §§ 6.07—6.09, 6.21—6.28 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. O-03-10, § 8, adopted April 7, 2003, changed the title of article VI from "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control" to "Soil Conservation and Timber Harvesting." 

DIVISION 2. - TIMBER HARVESTING OR CUTTING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, adopted April 7, 2003, repealed division 2 of article VI in its entirety and added new provisions as division 2 as herein set out. Former division 2, §§ 6.21—6.28, pertained to similar subject matter and derived unamended from the original development code. 

Section 6.21. - Notice of timber harvesting. 
All persons or firms harvesting standing timber, whether for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles or wood chips for delivery to any woodyard or processing plant, or for any "agriculture" purpose as defined by Official Code of Georgia Annotated subsection 1-3-3(4.1), shall provide notice to the development official prior to cutting any such timber. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 39, 4-19-04) 
Section 6.22. - Requirements of notice. 
Notice shall be provided for each separate tract to be harvested and shall include the following: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03) 
Section 6.23. - Submission of notice. 
Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via telefacsimile or by mail. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03) 
Section 6.24. - Bond or letter of credit. 
Prior to cutting any such timber, the owner of such property or such persons or firms harvesting standing timber shall deliver to the development official a bond or letter of credit the amount of $5,000.00 protecting the city against any damage caused by such person or firm. If a bond is given for this purpose, it shall be a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state. If a letter of credit is given for this purpose, it shall be a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 7-1-4. For purposes of this division, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. The notice required by this division shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations during any time period while the required bond or letter of credit is not valid and on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 40, 4-19-04) 
Section 6.25. - Effective period for notice. 
Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within the city upon receipt of the same by the development official and upon compliance with the requirements of section 6.24 and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the development official within three business days after such change. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 40, 4-19-04) 
Section 6.26. - Penalties. 
Violation of the notice requirements of any ordinance or resolution adopted pursuant to this Code section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 40, 4-19-04) 
Section 6.27. - Notification to county. 
Upon receipt of any notice required by this division regarding timber harvesting operations to be conducted in whole or in part within the city, the development official shall transmit a copy of such notice to Douglas County Board of Commissioners or their designated agent. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 40, 4-19-04) 
Section 6.28. - Driveway permit not required. 
No driveway permit shall be required solely for purposes of timber harvesting. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 9, 4-7-03) 
ARTICLE VII. - LAND DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 

Section 7.01. - Purpose of article VII. 
This article contains the requirements that apply to carrying out the land development process, including site grading and the installation of streets, drainage facilities and public utilities; and building construction. 
Section 7.02. - Overview—Project construction. 
7.02.01.  Development activity. 
a.  Preconstruction activity. Following the approval of plans but prior to issuance of any permit authorizing clearing and grading of a site, areas required to be undisturbed, such as natural buffers or stream greenways, must be designated by survey stakes, flags, ribbon, or other appropriate markings and shall be inspected and approved by the development official prior to the commencement of any clearing or grading activities. 
b.  Grading. 
(1)  Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
(2)  Required erosion and sedimentation control measures and stormwater drainage facilities are to be installed in accordance with the approved plans as development progresses. 
7.02.02.  Development phase inspections. Requests for inspections shall be made by the owner or contractor to the city engineer at least 24 hours prior to when the inspection is needed. Inspections shall be made and passed prior to continuation of further activity or proceeding into new phases. Inspections are required of each of the following phases, as applicable to the actual work to be performed under the development permit: 
a.  Prior to clearing or clearing and grubbing of the property or any portion included under the development permit, inspection of erosion and sedimentation control measures and protective devices for undisturbed areas. Inspection of erosion and sedimentation control measures will be conducted on a continuing basis. 
b.  Upon completion of street grading, inspection and approval shall be required prior to trenching or continuation with subgrade preparation. 
c.  Upon installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other stormwater facilities. 
d.  Street curbing and gutter (if provided). Inspection shall be requested after the forms or string line have been set. Street width and vertical and horizontal alignment may be spot checked. 
e.  Sub-grade of streets. After compaction and receipt of test reports by the city. The sub-grade may be roll tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of the engineering director. 
f.  Street base. After receipt of test reports by the development official, the base may be string-lined for depth and crown. The street base may be roll-tested with an 18-ton tandem dump truck and shall pass to the satisfaction of development official. 
g.  Paving. An engineering department inspector shall be on site during the paving process to check consistency, depth, and workmanship, as applicable. For asphalt paving, the temperature of the material will be monitored and the street may be cored after completion to check thickness and density. Satisfactory test results of the cores shall be delivered to the development official prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or certificate of occupancy. 
7.02.03.  As-built surveys. 
a.  Upon completion of the development activity as authorized by the development permit and prior to final development inspection of public and private improvements, the owner shall submit to the development official for review and approval a complete set of record drawings showing "as-built" conditions prepared by a registered land surveyor. These drawings shall show the location, vertical and horizontal alignment, and finished elevations of: 
(1)  Drainage system pipes and channels. 
(2)  Stormwater detention facilities. 
(3)  Sanitary sewer system (if any). 
(4)  Water system. 
(5)  Streets, including street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
b.  The as-built surveys shall be certified and sealed by the registered land surveyor, subject to the tolerances of accuracy indicated in the survey certification. Any electronic copies of as-built surveys shall be submitted in a form compatible with AutoCAD Release 13 - AutoCAD 2000. 
7.02.04.  Final development inspection. 
a.  Following submission and review of the as-built surveys, the development official shall conduct a final development inspection of the project. 
b.  The owner shall be responsible for correcting any deficiencies identified in the final development inspection prior to approval of a final subdivision plat. 
7.02.05.  Performance and maintenance bonds. 
a.  Prior to approval of a final subdivision plat or issuance of a land disturbance permit, a building permit or a certificate of occupancy, the owner shall submit a performance bond to the development official insuring completion of all public improvements shown on the as-built surveys, all common area improvements required by this ordinance, and all amenities required by applicable zoning. The amount of the performance bond shall be set by the development official at 110 percent of the estimated construction cost for all required improvements. The development official shall not release or allow expiration of the maintenance bond until such time as the owner has posted with the development official a maintenance bond for all public improvements shown on the as-built surveys. The owner remains responsible for maintenance of all such public improvements for two years from the date of issuance of the final certificate of occupancy or final subdivision plat approval, as applicable. 
b.  The amount of the bonds are based on the actual cost of construction of the improvements, as more fully described in other sections of this development code. Copies of contractor agreements or actual invoices paid, or as otherwise determined by the development official, shall evidence the cost of construction. 
c.  Where the performance bond or maintenance bond for any platted subdivision has expired without replacement prior to completion of all construction or development, the development official may withhold issuance of any permits or certificates of occupancy until such time as new bonds are posted, or until the mayor and council enter into a development agreement waiving the posting of such bond or bonds. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 10, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 41—45, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-2016-3, § 1 , 2-1-16) 
Section 7.03. - Site clearing and grading. 
7.03.01.  Development permit required. 
a.  Clearing and grading shall not proceed until issuance of an approved development permit by the development official. See the "plans and permits" article of this development code for details. 
b.  Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. 
c.  Prior to final plat approval, all clearing and grading in rear yards shall be prohibited except as necessary for installation of utilities. 
7.03.02.  Erosion and sedimentation control measures. Required erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed in accordance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to any major development activity and as development progresses. 
7.03.03.  Demarcation of areas to remain undisturbed. Any area that is required to remain undisturbed, such as a natural buffer or tree protection area (as provided under the "landscaping, buffers and tree conservation" article of this development code) or greenway (see "greenways" under the "land development activities" article of this development code) shall be identified with protective fencing, staking or ribbon surrounding such area. 
7.03.04.  Stormwater drainage facilities. Required stormwater drainage facilities are to be installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan as development progresses. 
7.03.05.  Earthen embankments. Earthen embankments shall be placed in uniform layers not to exceed a compacted thickness of six inches per layer and shall be compacted to a density of 95 percent of the maximum laboratory dry weight per cubic foot as determined by AASHTO Method T-99 in all areas where structures, parking lots and drives, streets, and utilities are to be placed. All other embankments are to be compacted to at least 90 percent. Floodproofing shall be accomplished prior to placement of embankments to detect soft spots. 
7.03.06.  Slopes. 
a.  The maximum slope for all fill or cut slopes shall be as follows: 
Table 7-1. Maximum Cut or Fill Slopes. 

 
b.  The depth of cut referenced in the table shall be construed to be the maximum cut or fill occurring in any one section of cut or fill. The slope on cut or fill shall be uniform throughout for each section of cut or fill. When a cut is made in rock that requires blasting, slope may be changed to vertical slope upon the written approval of the engineering director. 
(Ord. No. O-03-10, § 11, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 46, 4-19-04) 
Section 7.04. - Installation of stormwater drainage facilities. 
7.04.01.  Applicability and exemptions. 
a.  Stormwater management plan required. All persons proposing development or construction shall prepare a stormwater management plan. No final subdivision plat shall be approved and no development or building permit shall be issued until and unless the stormwater management plan has been reviewed and approved by the director of engineering, except as exempted below. 
b.  Exemptions from storm drainage requirements. The following development activities are exempt from the provisions of this section and the requirement of providing a stormwater management plan: 
(1)  Agricultural land management. 
(2)  Construction of a single-family detached dwelling or an addition or modification to an existing single-family detached dwelling. 
(3)  Developments with a total land area of 0.25 acre or less. 
c.  Location of stormwater detention facilities. No portion of any above-ground stormwater detention facility shall be located in any front yard. 
7.04.02.  Timing of installation. Construction of the stormwater system shall be initiated as part of the grading of the site. Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed prior to the installation of any other site improvements, and may be utilized under proper design as sedimentation basins during development. Installation of all other storm drainage pipes, culverts, headwalls, and ditches, shall be coordinated with the construction of streets and other site improvements, as appropriate. 
7.04.03.  Maintenance responsibilities. 
a.  It shall be the responsibility of the developer to maintain all facilities required by the stormwater management plan during construction and for a two-year maintenance period following approval of the final subdivision plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as applicable. The developer shall be responsible for removing temporary structures or facilities at the completion of the construction. 
b.  The owners of the property shall be responsible for maintaining the permanent facilities identified by the stormwater management plan to remain after construction is complete, following the two-year maintenance period. 
c.  Should an owner or developer, whichever is the responsible party, fail to maintain the stormwater management facilities in a state of service intended by the stormwater management plan, then the development official shall notify the responsible party in writing of the deficiencies and specific minimum maintenance requirements to remedy such deficiencies. 
d.  If the responsible party fails to perform the required maintenance work within a reasonable period of time (30 days maximum) then the owner shall be in violation of the provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 47, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-07-06, § 6, 1-16-07) 
Section 7.05. - Installation of streets and utilities. 
7.05.01.  Grading. 
a.  All streets shall be graded to their full width by the developer so that pavement extensions or sidewalks, where required or if installed in the future, can be constructed on the same level plane. 
b.  Preparation of roadway: Before grading is started the entire area to be paved shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials. In all areas to be graded or filled, the developer shall stockpile the topsoil later to be spread in all disturbed areas not paved. 
c.  Grading shall be done in accordance with the Site Clearing and Grading Section of this article. 
d.  If any sections of the subgrade are composed of unsuitable or unstable material, such material shall be removed to the depth directed by the development official and replaced with suitable, thoroughly compacted material. 
e.  When the street is to be used for construction traffic before the paving work is completed, a layer of No. 5 stone can be laid as a traffic surface if the developer so desires. 
(1)  This material shall not be used as part of the base material. 
(2)  It may be worked into the subgrade; or it shall be removed before the base course is set up for paving. 
(3)  Provision shall be made to drain low points in road construction when the final paving surface is delayed. 
f.  Abutting property shall be suitably sloped to the right-of-way line. 
7.05.02.  Installation of utilities. 
a.  After grading is completed and approved, the curb lines shall be staked by the developer's Registered Land Surveyor. Before any base is applied, all of the underground utilities—water mains, sewer mains, gas mains, or any other underground utilities, and all service connections related thereto—shall be installed completely and provided throughout the length of the street and across the flat section. Service connections for sanitary sewer (if required) and water shall be extended to the right-of-way lines. 
b.  No private improvements, such as private lawn sprinkler systems, yard lighting, and the like, shall be installed within a public right-of-way except by authorization of the engineering director. Such authorization, if issued, shall require the owner to assume all repair costs of the owner's facilities should they become damaged. 
7.05.03.  Street installation. 
a.  Preparation of subgrade. Prior to placement of the street base, the subgrade shall be compacted to 95 percent density. 
b.  Street base, curbing and paving. Street base, curbing and paving shall be installed by the developer in accordance with the requirements and standards of this development code. 
7.05.04.  Testing requirements. It is the responsibility of the developer to insure that all required tests are made and reported to the development official. The cost of all testing and quality control shall be performed at the expense of the developer by qualified testing laboratories. 
Table 7-2. Testing Requirements. 

 
7.05.05.  Protection of shoulders. 
a.  Immediately after grading and filling and re-spreading of topsoil, all areas of disturbed soil shall be fertilized and seeded (or in steep areas sodded or otherwise appropriately treated) with suitable vegetative cover to retard erosion. 
b.  When all construction is completed, all slopes and shoulders shall be cleared of all rubbish and shall have a stand of grass to prevent undue erosion, either by sprigging or seeding. 
7.05.06.  Traffic control devices and street lights. 
a.  Street signs, traffic control signs, and devices such as striping and signalization, shall be provided through payment of fees to the engineering department. The developer may also install traffic control devices after receiving written approval from the engineering director. 
b.  The installation of all street lighting fixtures within the right-of-way must be approved by the engineering director prior to such installation. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 48, 49, 4-19-04) 
Section 7.06. - Building construction. 
7.06.01.  Building permit required. 
a.  Building permits for all structures or interior finishes are issued in accordance with the requirements of chapter 22 of the City Code of Ordinances. A building permit is also required for the movement of any house, structure or building. 
b.  For any structure served by an on-site sewage disposal system, a permit issued by the county health department shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit. Said permit may first require approval by the county health department of a plan showing the location of the sewage disposal system and other on-site improvements, in accordance with their regulations. 
c.  Building permits shall only be issued on lots of record, as defined in this development code. 
7.06.02.  Building inspection. 
a.  Scheduling a building inspection. Inspections shall be scheduled routinely 24 hours before the inspection is needed. Expedited inspections may be performed upon request. 
b.  Required inspections: 
(1)  Foundation. Verify minimum required building setbacks, footing, trenches dug and reinforcing steel in place. 
(2)  Plumbing Connections. Water supply line and sewer lateral in slab foundation. 
(3)  Framing. Completion of all rough-ins and after insulation is installed. 
(4)  Interior walls may not be covered until the following inspections are completed: 
(a)  Mechanical. Rough-ins complete with pressure test on gas line. 
(b)  Electrical. Rough-ins with neutral, ground, and service cable wired. 
(c)  Plumbing. Rough-ins complete and all fixtures installed. 
(5)  Final Inspection. Building is complete and ready to occupy. 
7.06.03.  Construction in flood hazard area. Construction of a structure for which a flood area permit was issued shall be governed by the following: 
a.  Upon placement of the lowest floor, or floodproofing by whatever construction means, or upon placement of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the building official a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, floodproofed elevation, or the elevation of the lowest portion of the horizontal structural members of the lowest floor, whichever is applicable, as built, in relation to mean sea level. 
b.  Certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by such registered land surveyor or professional engineer. When floodproofing is utilized for a particular building, the certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by the professional engineer or architect. 
c.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certification shall be at the development permit holder's risk. 
d.  The building official shall review the floor elevation survey data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the development permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the survey or failure to make the corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
7.06.04.  Certificate of occupancy required. A certificate of occupancy must be issued prior to the occupancy or use of any new or newly renovated building or structure, in accordance with the "plans and permits" article of this development code. 
(Ord. No. O-99-31, § 1, 9-7-99) 
ARTICLE VIII. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT/FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-09-043, § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 2009, amended App. B, Art. VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former App. B, Art. VIII, §§ 8.01—8.05.04, pertained to flood damage prevention, and derived from Ord. No. O-04-14, § 52, 4-19-04. 

Section 8.01. - General provisions. 
8.01.01.  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article VIII is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
a.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
b.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
c.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
d.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
e.  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; and, 
f.  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
8.01.02.  Applicability. This article VIII shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the City of Douglasville. 
8.01.03.  Designation of administrator. The development official or his designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article VIII. 
8.01.04.  Basis for area of special flood hazard—Flood area maps and studies. For the purposes of this article VIII, the following are adopted by reference: 
a.  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated August 18, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. For those land areas acquired by the City of Douglasville through annexation, the current effective FIS and data for Douglas County, dated August 18, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto are hereby adopted by reference. 
b.  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Douglasville; or 
(2)  Any base flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology and approved by the City of Douglasville. 
c.  Other studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future conditions floodplain and floodprone areas include: 
(1)  Any flood or flood related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the City of Douglasville; or 
(2)  Any future conditions flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the State of Georgia which has been prepared by FEMA approved methodology approved by the City of Douglasville. 
d.  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the office of the Douglasville Development Official. 
8.01.05.  Compatibility with other regulations. This article VIII is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article VIII imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
8.01.06.  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article VIII shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this ordinance. 
8.01.07.  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this article VIII is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article VIII does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article VIII shall not create liability on the part of the City of Douglasville or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article VIII or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-09-043, § 1, 8-17-09) 
Section 8.02. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
8.02.1.  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this article VIII prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically excluded by this article VIII, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the City of Douglasville a permit application on a form provided by the City of Douglasville for that purpose. No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article VIII. 
8.02.02.  Floodplain management plan requirements. An application for a permit authorized by this ordinance with any area of special flood hazard located on the site will be required to include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
a.  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
(1)  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
(2)  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
(3)  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
(4)  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
(5)  Proposed grading plan; 
(6)  Base flood elevations and future conditions flood elevations; 
(7)  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future conditions floodplain; 
(8)  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
(9)  Certification of the above by a registered professional engineer or surveyor. 
b.  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 8.04.02.b.; 
(4)  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 8.04.01.e. 
(5)  Design plans certified by a registered professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
c.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
d.  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
e.  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development; and 
f.  All appropriate certifications required under this article VIII. 
The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
8.02.03.  Construction stage submittal requirements. For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the development official a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for nonresidential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The development official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
8.02.04.  Duties and responsibilities of the development official. Duties of the development official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this article VIII have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
b.  Require that copies of all necessary permits from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, be provided and maintained on file; 
c.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the development official shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of sections 8.03 and 8.04; 
d.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures; 
e.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
f.  When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the development official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect; 
g.  Notify affected adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
h.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g., where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the development official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article VIII. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; and, 
i.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article VIII shall be maintained in the office of the development official and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-09-043, § 1, 8-17-09) 
Section 8.03. - Standards for development. 
8.03.01.  Definition of Floodplain Boundaries. 
a.  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
b.  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the City of Douglasville. If future conditions elevation data is not available from the City of Douglasville, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Douglasville. 
8.03.02.  Definition of floodway boundaries. The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the City of Douglasville. If floodway data is not available from the City of Douglasville, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the City of Douglasville. 
8.03.03.  General standards. 
a.  No development shall be allowed within the future conditions floodplain that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
b.  Any development within the future conditions floodplain allowed under (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future condition flood elevation for the future conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (predevelopment) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of subsection 8.03.04; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from floodwaters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the City of Douglasville using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
8.03.04.  Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of subsection 8.04.04. apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently registered Professional Engineer in the State of Georgia and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the City of Douglasville prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
a.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
b.  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA approved methodology approved by the City of Douglasville. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future conditions flood profiles; 
c.  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
d.  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future conditions floodplain encroachments. 
8.03.05.  Floodway encroachments. Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in [subsection] b. below. 
b.  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and, 
c.  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the City of Douglasville until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA and no-rise certification is approved by the City of Douglasville. 
8.03.06.  Maintenance requirements. The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The City of Douglasville may direct the property owner (at no cost to the City of Douglasville) to restore the flood carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the City of Douglasville. 
(Ord. No. O-09-043, § 1, 8-17-09) 
Section 8.04. - Provisions for flood damage reduction. 
8.04.01.  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
a.  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of subsections 8.03.03., 8.03.04. and 8.03.05. have been met; 
b.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
c.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
d.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
e.  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished and flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(1)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(a)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(b)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
(c)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(2)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article VIII, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and, 
(3)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
f.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
g.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
h.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
i.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
j.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; and, 
k.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this article VIII, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
l.  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
8.04.02.  Building standards for structures and buildings within the future conditions floodplain. The following provisions, in addition to those in subsection 8.04.01. shall apply: 
a.  Residential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 8.03.03., 8.03.04. and 8.03.05. have been met. If all of the requirements of subsections 8.03.03., 8.03.04. and 8.03.05. have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8.04.01.e. 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8.04.01.e. 
b.  Nonresidential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 8.03.03., 8.03.04. and 8.03.05. have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of subsections 8.03.03., 8.03.04. and 8.03.05. may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the development official. 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the development official to be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the development official. 
c.  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar nonhabitable structures and facilities) which are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 8.04.01.e. and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
d.  Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(2)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for residential buildings—Substantial improvements (subsection 8.04.02.a.(2)), including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
e.  Standards for manufactured homes. 
(1)  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future conditions floodplain unless all requirements of subsections 8.03.03., 8.03.04. and 8.03.05. have been met. 
(2)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
(a)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
(b)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(3)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 8.04.01.g. 
8.04.03.  Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future conditions floodplain. 
a.  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
b.  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
8.04.04.  Building standards for residential single—Lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the development official shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article VIII. If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
b.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with subsection 8.04.01.e. 
8.04.05.  Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
a.  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 8.04.01.e. 
b.  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and 
c.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
8.04.06.  Standards for subdivisions. 
a.  All subdivision proposals shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future conditions flood elevation data; 
b.  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; 
c.  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 8.02.02. 
d.  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
e.  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters, and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; and 
f.  All subdivision proposals shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the City of Douglasville to reduce potential exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. O-09-043, § 1, 8-17-09) 
ARTICLE IX. - PLANS AND PERMITS 

Section 9.01. - Purpose of article IX. 
This article describes the approval and permitting process for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects and the procedures for amendments to the text of this development code. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01) 
Section 9.02. - Overview—land development. 
The following presents a summary of the plans and procedures involved in the land development approval and construction regulation process. 
9.02.01.  Subdivisions with public improvements. The division of land into two or more lots that will require the construction or extension of public streets, water or other public facilities (other than the direct connection of buildings to existing facilities) shall be conducted as follows: 
a.  Development plan approval is granted by the mayor and city council, upon review and formal acceptance of a development plan. This approval is valid for six months from the date of approval and will expire at the end of this time period unless one of the following approvals are secured prior to its expiration: 
1.  A land-disturbance permit is granted; 
2.  A development permit is granted; 
3.  A driveway permit is granted; 
4.  A building permit is granted; or 
5.  A certificate of project approval is issued. 
Further, if no development activity occurs on the site pursuant to one of the above referenced permits or approvals during the 12 months immediately following issuance, or if development begins but then ceases for a period of 12 months, then the development plan approval shall expire. 
b.  The preliminary plat shall conform to the design and layout shown in the approved development plan. Any significant deviation from the approved development plan shall be cause for rejection of the preliminary plat. 
c.  A development permit is issued by the engineering department based on review and approval of a preliminary subdivision plat and the subsequent approval of the civil design and construction plans for construction of the subdivision. 
d.  Receipt and approval by the engineering department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of public improvements is required in order to allow filing of a final plat. 
e.  Approval of a final subdivision plat by the mayor and council will authorize recordation of the plat with the clerk of superior court. 
f.  After recordation of the final plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
g.  No sooner than one year after recordation or 75 percent of build out, all public improvements shall be completed and will be inspected by the city for permanent dedication. 
9.02.02.  Subdivisions not requiring public improvements. The division of land into two or more lots, each of which will be adequately served by existing public streets, water and other public facilities, shall be conducted as follows: 
a.  Approval of a final subdivision plat by the mayor and council will authorize recordation of the plat with the clerk of superior court. 
b.  After recordation of the final plat, the lots may be sold and building permits on the lots may be obtained. 
9.02.03.  Multi-family and nonresidential projects. 
a.  A development permit is issued by the engineering department based on review and approval of a site plan and civil design and construction plans for construction of the project. 
b.  The site plan shall conform to the design and layout shown in the approved development plan. Any significant deviation from the approved development plan shall be cause for rejection of the site plan. 
c.  A Building Permit is issued by the building official based on review and approval of architectural plans. Buildings falling under the authority of the state fire marshal shall be approved by the fire department prior to issuance of the building permit. 
d.  Receipt by the engineering department of accurate surveys of the as-built condition of all public improvements is required in order to authorize permanent water and service. 
e.  Permanent electric power and occupancy of the building is authorized by the building official based on final inspection and issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-05-03, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. O-2017-41 , § 4, 7-3-17; Ord. No. O-2017-49 , § 1, 8-7-17; Ord. No. O-2018-1 , § 2, 1-8-18) 
Section 9.03. - Project approval. 
Preliminary plat for subdivision activity or a site plan for development of a multi-family or nonresidential project shall be approved by the engineering department prior to the issuance of a development permit or initiation of any land-disturbing or construction activities in order to assure compliance with all zoning requirements and conditions of zoning approval. 
9.03.01.  Development plan approval required. No preliminary plat or site plan shall be approved by the development official until the mayor and city council have approved a development plan. Every development plan shall show the following: 
a.  Name and address of the property owner. 
b.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
c.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
d.  Proposed use of the property, if known. 
e.  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
f.  Location sketch of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
g.  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
h.  Manmade features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
i.  The proposed project layout including the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, individual parking spaces and driveways. 
j.  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
k.  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
l.  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
m.  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
n.  A rendering or elevation or photographs representative of similar structures, such that facade materials can be determined, printed on paper no smaller than standard letter size. 
9.03.02.  Responsibility for project approval. 
a.  The development official is responsible for administering the review and approval process for preliminary subdivision plats and site plans. 
b.  The mayor and city council shall approve all development plans of residential and nonresidential projects. 
c.  A preliminary plat or site plan may be prepared by a professional engineer, a registered land surveyor, or a landscape architect. 
9.03.03.  Procedure for project approval. 
a.  An application for project approval may be processed independently or in conjunction with an application for issuance of a development permit. 
b.  An application for project approval shall be submitted to the engineering department. The application shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the person requesting review. 
(2)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the engineering department, requesting review for project approval. 
(3)  Seven copies of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan showing the entire ownership drawn to the specifications of this section. 
(4)  Payment of the applicable application and review fees as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
c.  The engineering department will review the application for completeness within five days of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  Following receipt of the application, the engineering department will indicate on the drawing or in writing all comments related to compliance with this development code. 
e.  The owner is responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments. 
f.  The engineering department shall not approve any preliminary subdivision plat or site plan that shows a lot or situation that would clearly require a variance in order to be reasonably usable, whether due to the presence of flood plain, unusual configuration, zoning compliance, or lack of public utilities, without explicit grant of a variance. 
g.  When the engineering department has determined that the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan is in compliance with the requirements, purpose and intent of this development code, it will be approved. The development official will sign and date the certificate of project approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan. One copy of the approved drawing will be transmitted to the applicant and one copy will be retained by the engineering department. 
h.  The certificate of project approval will remain in effect for a period of one consecutive year after which time it will become null and void and a new certificate may be required if no permit has been issued or no development activity has begun. 
9.03.04.  General standards for project approval. 
a.  The proposed name of the development and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other development or street in the city or Douglas County. If shown to the contrary, the mayor and council may refuse to accept such development or street names. The development may use letter designations in place of proposed street names at the option of the applicant. 
b.  The preliminary plat or site plan shall be prepared on a boundary survey of the entire tract to be eventually subdivided or developed showing the location of the boundaries and dimensions of the tract to be developed. 
c.  The preliminary subdivision plat or site plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a standard engineering scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. Sheet size may not exceed 48 inches by 36 inches nor be less than eight and one-half inches by 11 inches; however, the development official may approve other sheet sizes and graphic scales as appropriate. 
d.  In subdivisions of over 100 acres, preliminary plat specifications may be modified to exclude information relating to contours, and ground elevations, if in the judgment of the development official, presentation of detailed data relating thereto is not necessary to evaluate the entire subdivision proposal. In such cases, however, a long-range development schedule for the entire development and a preliminary plat in accordance with the specifications for the sections of the subdivision not excepted shall be submitted. It is the intent of this provision that in all cases sufficient information shall be provided for an adequate evaluation of the public service needs in the area. 
9.03.05.  Preliminary plat or site plan requirements. The preliminary plat or site plan must contain the following: 
a.  Proposed name of development and its acreage. 
b.  Name and address of the property owner and subdivider or developer. 
c.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
e.  Proposed use of the property. 
f.  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
g.  Location sketch map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. US. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
h.  Name and boundary of former approved subdivision if any or all of the land in the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan has been previously subdivided, showing boundaries of the lots to be resubdivided. 
i.  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
j.  Rezoning or special use application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
k.  Zoning variances obtained on the property by application number, date of approval, and conditions of approval, as applicable. 
l.  Natural features. Natural features within the property, shall be indicated, including: 
(1)  Ground elevations on the tract based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic information shall be shown. Contour lines shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on a datum plane as approved by the engineering department. 
(2)  Drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings and wetlands. 
(3)  On all watercourses leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all watercourses entering the tract, the direction and acreage of the drainage area above the point of entry shall be noted. 
(4)  A notation clearly stating the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood in relation to mean sea level as approved and accepted by the engineering department. Any lands below this elevation shall be designated on the plat by a heavy contour line, depicting the one hundred-year flood level. 
m.  Manmade features. Manmade features within and adjacent to the property, including street right-of-way and pavement widths, names of existing streets, all easements, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location and dimensions of bridges, utility lines and structures, existing buildings to remain, culverts and other features. 
n.  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For subdivisions, lot lines and street right-of-way lines, with proposed street names or letter designations and right-of-way widths, along with the front principal building setback line and the dimension of its length on each lot (i.e., the lot width) and land to be reserved for public uses. 
(2)  For multi-family and nonresidential development site plans, the outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, driveways, curb cuts, and designated fire lanes. 
o.  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
p.  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. For those properties that will not be served by a public sanitary sewerage system, location and results of percolation tests as required and approved by the county health department are to be shown. 
q.  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
r.  The location and width of all sidewalks. 
s.  Such additional information as may be reasonably required to permit an adequate evaluation of the development activity proposed in the application. 
(Ord. No. O-00-7, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. O-00-81, § 4, 8-21-00; Ord. No. O-00-105, § 4, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 53—55, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-05-59, § 1, 11-7-05; Ord. No. O-06-15, § 4, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-2010-47, § 3, 11-15-10; Ord. No. O-2017-41 , § 5, 7-3-17; Ord. No. O-2018-1 , §§ 3, 4, 1-8-18) 
Section 9.04. - Civil design and construction plans. 
9.04.01.  General requirements. 
a.  Persons seeking to undertake development activity shall not commence or proceed until civil design and construction plans are approved and a development permit is issued by the engineering department. The process for approval of a development permit is presented in the following section, below. 
b.  The civil design and construction plans for a project shall conform in all respects with the requirements of this development code, and shall include each of the plans in this section as appropriate to the project. These include: 
(1)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan; 
(2)  Grading plan; 
(3)  Stormwater management plan; 
(4)  Street improvement plan; and 
(5)  Landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans. 
(6)  Public utility plans. 
c.  All civil design and construction plans and supporting studies shall be prepared by or under the supervision of a professional engineer registered in the state, except that the landscaping, buffer and tree conservation plans are to be prepared by or under the supervision of a professional landscape architect. 
9.04.02.  Erosion and sedimentation control plan. See the "soil erosion and sedimentation control" article of this development code for plan requirements. 
9.04.03.  Grading plan. 
a.  Grading plans shall identify existing and proposed topographic contour lines at two-foot intervals. 
b.  Grading plans shall outline any area that is required to remain undisturbed, such as a natural buffer or tree protection area (as provided under the "landscaping, buffers and tree conservation" article of this development code) or greenway (see "greenways" under the "land development activities" article of this development code) and shall identify and describe the protective fencing, staking or ribbon to be placed surrounding such area. 
c.  If the property contains any area of special flood hazard (the 100-year flood plain), grading plans in and around the flood plain shall be designed in conformance to all requirements relating to flood damage prevention under the "project design standards" article of this development code. 
9.04.04.  Stormwater management plan. The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The developer shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage, construction, and development shall be conducted in strict accordance with the plan. The minimum information submitted for support of a stormwater management plan shall be as follows: 
a.  Site plan. Provide a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet with the following characteristics and information: 
(1)  Graphic scale, north arrow, and date. The north arrow shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. 
(2)  Vicinity map showing the site location relative to surrounding landmarks, highway intersections, rivers and streams. 
(3)  Topography showing existing and proposed elevations in accordance with the following: 
(a)  For sites smaller than one and one-tenth acres in size, show the direction of drainage and spot elevations at all breaks in grade and along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
(b)  For sites of one and one-tenth acres and larger, show channels or scales at selected points not more than 100 feet apart. 
(c)  For sites of one and one-tenth acres and larger with slopes of more than two percent, show contours with an interval of not more than two feet. 
(d)  Elevations shall be based on the datum plane established by the United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey. 
(4)  Delineation of property lines and deed record names of adjacent property owners. 
(5)  Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines, either on or adjacent to the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or rights-of-way and show the location of towers and poles. 
(6)  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of sewers shall be shown. 
(7)  Location of existing buildings and other improvements. 
(8)  Proposed conditions: 
(a)  Layout of proposed streets, roads, alleys, drives, paved areas and public crosswalks, with widths and road names or designations. 
(b)  Storm sewer system improvements with grade, pipe size and location of outlet. 
(c)  Location of proposed buildings and other improvements. 
b.  The location and size of all proposed drainage improvements shall be designed in accordance with and meet all standards relating to stormwater drainage under the "project design standards" article of this development code. The stormwater management plan shall include: 
(1)  Location and profiles of all storm drainage pipes and slopes of receiving channels. Hydraulic grade lines to be shown on all pipes that cross streets and on all detention basin outfalls. 
(2)  Storm sewer profile sheets shall include: 
(a)  Existing ground profile. 
(b)  Finished ground profile. 
(c)  Slope of pipe. 
(d)  Pipe size and material. 
(e)  Scales (horizontal and vertical). 
(f)  Structure type and number (C.B. No. 1, D.A. No. 2, etc.). 
(g)  Drainage area and flow of structure. 
(3)  Stormwater detention facility design and construction details. 
(4)  Location and typical construction details of all inlets and catch basins, headwalls and other drainage structures. 
(5)  The 100-year ponding limits above each street cross drain. 
c.  The stormwater management plan must also include: 
(1)  The hydrologic and hydraulic analysis required for the system design under the "project design standards" article of this development code. 
(2)  When required by the development official, provide a soils investigation for all sites proposed as ponds or impoundments or for stormwater detention. 
(3)  Provide a reconstruction schedule for both temporary and permanent facilities. Reference the schedule to other development activities such as clearing, rough grading, construction, final grading and vegetation establishment. 
(4)  Provide a plan for maintenance of the stormwater facilities. Describe specific actions and a recommended schedule of maintenance required to maintain the facilities at a satisfactory level of service. 
(5)  Provide a cost estimate for construction of the stormwater management facilities. Provide a separate estimate of the annual cost for maintenance of the proposed facilities. 
9.04.05.  Street improvement plan. 
a.  Street plan and profile sheets of all proposed streets shall be required, shown complete in both plan view and profile at the same horizontal scale. Profiles shall be drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, pavement and right-of-way width, curvature, and required drainage facilities. Typical street sections shall be provided for street widenings. 
b.  The following shall be included on each plan and profile sheet: 
(1)  Plan: 
(a)  Street width (back of curb to back of curb); 
(b)  Curve data (including P.I.'s, P.C.'s and P.T.'s); 
(c)  Drainage structures; 
(d)  Centerline stationing; 
(e)  Lot numbers; 
(f)  R.O.W. dimensions; 
(g)  Street names; 
(h)  North arrow and scale. 
(2)  Profile: 
(a)  Existing ground profile; 
(b)  Finished street profile; 
(c)  Finished grade elevations every 50 feet; 
(d)  Percent of grade; 
(e)  Vertical curves; 
(f)  Storm drains in the street; 
(g)  Sanitary sewer lines in the street (may be shown on separate sheet); 
(h)  Vertical and horizontal scales. 
c.  Where sanitary sewer or stormwater sewers are to be installed within a street, the grade, size, location and bedding class of pipe, and the location and invert elevation of manholes shall be indicated on the street profile. 
d.  Center line profiles covering streets that are extensions of existing streets shall include elevations at 50-foot intervals for such distance as may be adequate to provide continuity consistent with the standards required by this development code for street improvements, but no less than 200 feet. 
e.  All plan elevations shall be coordinated and sited into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or Georgia Department of Transportation bench marks where feasible or into reference monuments established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
f.  A street striping plan, showing striping in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition as published by the Federal Highway Administration, shall be prepared for any street newly constructed or widened to four or more lanes. 
9.04.06.  Landscaping, buffer, tree conservation, and land-disturbance plans. 
a.  Landscaping, buffer, tree conservation, and land-disturbance plans; in general. 
(1)  All proposed landscaping as required by the "landscaping, buffers, tree conservation, and land-disturbance plans" article of this Code, and trees to be retained or planted as required by the tree conservation provisions of the same article, shall be illustrated. 
(2)  The plans may be consolidated on one sheet or drawn separately. Each plan is to include: 
(a)  Project name, land district, land lot and parcel number, north arrow and scale. 
(b)  Developer's name, address, and telephone number. 
(c)  The name, address and telephone number of the professional landscape architect or urban forester responsible for preparation of the plan and the seal or statement of professional qualifications of said person, (which may be attached separately). 
b.  Site landscaping plan. A site landscaping plan shall be prepared whenever any frontage landscaping strip, side or rear yard landscaping area, parking lot landscaping or street-side landscaping is required by this development code or conditions of zoning approval. The site landscaping plan is to show: 
(1)  Scale at one inch = 20 feet to 50 feet. 
(2)  North reference. 
(3)  The location and size of all utilities on the site. 
(4)  The location of all existing and proposed parking areas, sidewalks and other paved surfaces. 
(5)  The location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures. 
(6)  The boundaries of each required landscape strip or area. 
(7)  A planting plan showing the location, size and common name of proposed plant materials. 
(8)  The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this Code for landscaping. 
c.  Buffer plan. A buffer plan shall be prepared for any structural buffer required in accordance with the specifications and standards contained in this development code. Plans shall not be required for natural buffers, which are to be shown on the grading plan, but must be delineated on the buffer plan sheet. The buffer plan shall show: 
(1)  The boundaries of each required buffer area. 
(2)  All grading and construction details for earthen berms, walls and fences that are proposed as part of the visual screen. 
(3)  A planting plan showing the location, size and type of proposed plant materials. 
(4)  The location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this Code for buffers. 
(5)  Typical cross-sections of the buffer illustrating the improvements proposed and typical location of vegetation. At least one cross-section shall be provided for each buffer. 
d.  Tree conservation plan. A Tree Conservation Plan must be submitted along with the other required documents for the issuance of a land-disturbance, construction, or other applicable permit by the Development Official. Tree Conservation Plans must be prepared by a professional Landscape Architect, Urban Forester, Arborist, Registered Land Surveyor, or Professional Engineer in accordance with the Plans and Permits Article of this Development Code. 
The Tree Conservation Plan must be shown on a copy of the preliminary plat or site plan, drawn to the same scale as the other plan documents prepared for a land-disturbance permit on the property, and shall cover the same area. 
The Tree Conservation Plan shall comply with the Community Planting and Establishment Guidelines of the Georgia Forestry Commission, current edition, as applicable. 
The tree conservation plan shall show the following: 
(1)  The extent of the development site or disturbed area. 
(2)  Specimen trees. 
(a)  All specimen trees (as defined in this development code) that are proposed to be removed. 
(b)  All specimen trees that will remain on the development site and be protected during construction. 
(3)  Utility lines. 
(a)  Locations of proposed on-site underground utility lines. 
(b)  Locations of other on and off-site utility lines. Indicate areas where trees cannot be planted because of interference with (1) existing or proposed utilities on public rights-of-way or on utility rights-of-way or easements and (2) existing utilities on adjoining properties. 
(4)  Delineation of all minimum yard areas, buffers, and landscape areas as required by this development code, the zoning ordinance or conditions of zoning approval. 
(5)  Total acreage of the site and total acreage. 
(6)  Delineation of all areas located within the 100-year floodplain. 
(7)  Existing trees to be retained in tree protection areas: Trunk location and size (to the nearest in diameter at four and one-half feet above the ground) of individual trees proposed to remain for credit toward meeting the minimum tree density standard on the property. Groups of three or more trees whose dripline combine into a single tree protection area may be outlined as a group and their number, by diameter, shown on a summary table. If the number and size of all existing trees to remain on the site exceeds the required tree density standard for the entire site, only those trees required to meet the minimum tree density standard must be shown. All tree protection areas are to be outlined and labeled. 
(8)  Tree protection measures: 
(a)  A detail or description of the protective tree fencing or staking and the location of such measures, which at a minimum shall follow the dripline of all trees to be retained along the adjoining areas of clearing, grading, or other construction activity. 
(b)  Measures to be taken to avoid soil sedimentation intrusion into tree protection areas and the location of such devices. 
(c)  Proposed location of temporary construction activities such as equipment or worker parking, material storage, burnholes, equipment washdown areas and entrance pads. 
(d)  Proposed type and location of any tree save area signs or other pertinent signage. 
(9)  If new trees are proposed to be planted in order for the property to achieve the required tree density standard, the new trees shall be shown and their spacing and diameter identified, to the extent needed to achieve the minimum requirements. Trees grouped together in tree planting areas may be listed on the summary table by total number in the grouping, by size. 
(10)  A summary table of the number of existing trees to remain and new trees to be planted, by diameter to the nearest inch shall be shown along with calculations showing the tree density achieved for the site. Additional credits shall be noted where applicable. Groupings of trees in tree protection areas and areas for new tree planting may be keyed to the summary table by area rather than having each tree individually labeled on the plan. 
9.04.07.  Public utility plans. 
a.  Water system plan. If connection to a public water system is proposed or required, the domestic water supply plan shall depict all water system improvements, water mains, fire hydrants, valves and other appurtenances, and other information as may be required by the development official, including: 
(1)  Size and material of water main construction. 
(2)  Location of all valves, fire hydrants, fittings, thrust blocks, etc. 
(3)  Location of all service lines. 
(4)  Street R.O.W.'s with street names. 
(5)  Lots and lot numbers. 
(6)  Existing mains being tied into and nearest existing fire hydrant or distance to nearest existing fire hydrant. 
(7)  Easements if off of R.O.W. 
(8)  Location and layout of any recycled water system for a commercial conveyor car wash. 
b.  Sewage disposal plan. 
(1)  If a connection to a public system is proposed, sewage disposal plans are to include: Sanitary sewerage plans, including profiles of all mains and outfalls, lift station and force main details, typical manhole construction details, and other information as may be required by the development official, such as: 
(a)  Existing ground profile. 
(b)  Finished ground profile. 
(c)  Slope of pipe. 
(d)  Pipe size and material. 
(e)  Scales (horizontal and vertical). 
(f)  Plan view of the line. 
(g)  Manhole designations. 
(h)  Invert elevations in and out of each manhole. 
(2)  For projects approved to be served by on-site sewage disposal systems, location of septic tank, extent of drain field and attendant structures, location and results of percolation tests, and other information shall be shown as required by the county health department. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 56, 57, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 2, 12-3-07; Ord. No. O-2012-35, § 3, 7-16-12) 
Section 9.05. - Development permit. 
9.05.01.  Responsibility for development actions. 
a.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity, including grading, clearing and grubbing, tree clearance, land development or project construction without first obtaining a development permit from the engineering department to perform such activity. 
b.  Any person proposing development shall first submit to the engineering department an application for a development permit, including all civil design and construction drawings required by this development code. The application must be authorized by the property owner. 
c.  The engineering department is responsible for administering the review and approval process for issuance of development permits. The engineering department shall forward a copy of the development permit application, including the civil design and constructions drawings for the project, to other departments, the Soil and Water Conservation Commission District, the Georgia Department of Transportation or others as appropriate, for their review and comment. The engineering department shall provide all comments to the applicant for resolution, and shall issue the development permit when all requirements of this development code are met. 
d.  Approval of plans by the engineering department shall not imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for the application of the principles of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture or any other profession, from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
e.  The mayor and city council shall approve all development plans for nonresidential projects. 
f.  The completion of inspections and authorization for work continuation shall not transfer responsibility for the quality of the work performed or materials used from the owner, nor imply or transfer acceptance of responsibility for project design or engineering from the professional, corporation or individual under whose hand or supervision the plans were prepared. 
g.  No development permit shall be interpreted to relieve any owner of the responsibility of maintaining full compliance with all applicable codes, ordinances and other regulations. Any development permit issued in error or in contradiction to the provisions of this development code shall be considered to have been null and void upon its issuance. 
h.  Liability. 
(1)  The approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan or other plans under the provisions of this development code, the issuance of a development permit, or the compliance with any other provisions of this development code shall not relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the mayor and council or the Soil and Water Conservation District for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that any activity for which a development permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of, a violation of the standards provided for in this development code or the terms of the development permit. 
9.05.02.  Development activities authorized. A development permit shall be issued to authorize all activities associated with development activity regulated by this Code, subsequent to the issuance of a soil disturbance permit, including, but not limited to, the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, stormwater drainage facilities, sidewalks, or other structures permanently placed on or in the property except for buildings, signs, or other structures requiring the issuance of a building permit. 
9.05.03.  Process for approval of development permit. An application for a development permit may proceed simultaneously with an application for a preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, but may not be issued prior to project approval of such plat or plan by the engineering department. 
a.  The application for a development permit shall be submitted to the engineering department and must include the following: 
(1)  Application on the form furnished by the engineering department, requesting review for issuance of a development permit. 
(2)  Six copies of: 
(a)  The preliminary plat or site plan requesting or reflecting project approval 
(b)  The civil design and construction drawings prepared in conformance with the specifications and standards in this development code. 
(3)  Payment of any development permit fee, as established from time to time by the mayor and council. 
b.  The application will be checked for completeness within 14 days of its submission. Incomplete applications, as determined in the sole discretion of the development official, will be returned to the applicant. 
c.  Upon acceptance of a development permit application, the engineering department shall refer the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan to the Soil and Water Conservation District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. No development permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances and bonding, if required, have been obtained. 
d.  The applicant may be required by the engineering department to secure development approval from other agencies if they are affected by the development. Development approval may be required from but not limited to: 
(1)  County health department 
(2)  Soil and Water Conservation District 
(3)  Georgia Department of Transportation 
(4)  Georgia Department of Natural Resources 
(5)  US Army Corps of Engineers 
(6)  US Environmental Protection Agency 
e.  Upon receipt of comments from other departments and agencies, the engineering department will indicate on a copy of the civil design and construction drawings or in writing all comments related to compliance with this development code, conditions of zoning approval, and other regulations or ordinances, as appropriate. 
f.  The engineering department will forward its comments to the applicant. 
g.  The applicant will be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements and for the satisfaction of all of the comments received. The owner will also be responsible for obtaining approval from all other agencies affected by the project. 
h.  Civil design and construction plans rejected three successive times without completing review due to failure to comply with city standards or good engineering practice as determined by the development official shall be ineligible for resubmittal for a period of not less than 90 days. 
i.  No development permit will be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax commissioner's office certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
9.05.04.  Required performance surety. 
a.  Stormwater performance surety. Upon approval of the stormwater management plan, but before the issuance of a building permit or land development permit approval, the applicant shall be required to post a performance bond, cash escrow, or other acceptable form of performance security. 
(1)  The amount of the surety shall not be less than the total estimated construction cost of the facilities required by the stormwater management plan. 
(2)  The performance bond or other securities shall not be released until the following requirements have been met. The director of engineering department shall: 
(a)  Perform a final inspection of the facilities and determine that they have been constructed in compliance with the stormwater management plan. 
(b)  Determine that all provisions of the stormwater management plan have been faithfully executed. 
(3)  A provision may be made for partial release of the amount of the bond pro rata upon completion and acceptance of various stages of development as specifically delineated, described and scheduled in the stormwater management plan. The applicant shall notify the engineering department upon completion of each stage that is ready for inspection. 
b.  Erosion and sedimentation performance surety. See the "soil erosion and sedimentation control" article of this development code. 
9.05.05.  Issuance of development permit. 
a.  Following satisfaction of all comments, receipt of approvals from all affected agencies and receipt of all required bonds, the engineering department shall issue a development permit authorizing development activities to begin based on the approved civil design and construction drawings. 
b.  No development permit shall be issued unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the Soil and Water Conservation District, project approval has been granted by the mayor and council, and the engineering department has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with all requirements of this development code. If the development permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
c.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate development permit shall be required for each phase. 
d.  Approved civil design and construction plans. Three sets of reviewed plans shall be retained by the city for record purposes. All plans on the project site for the purpose of construction by contractors, subcontractors or the developer must be plans that are the plans most recently approved by the city as part of the current development permit. No construction other than clearing or rough grading may take place prior to review of the construction plans and then only if the developer has an approved erosion control plan. 
e.  Deviation from plans. Upon completion of review of the civil design and construction plans, no deviations from the reviewed plans shall be allowed without a resubmittal of the plans indicating the necessary changes with a letter of explanation as to why the changes were necessary, along with any resubmittal fee as may be set by the mayor and council from time to time. 
f.  A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him or her as to all or any portion of the property affected by the approved plan regarding the conditions contained in the permit. Transfer of title to any permitted property, prior to termination of the permit, shall not act to release the original title and permit holder from liability for compliance with the terms of this chapter, unless and until such time as: 
(1)  A new permit has been issued to the successor in title; or 
(2)  The permit has been transferred to the successor in title as follows: 
(a)  The successor in title has submitted a request to the issuing authority in writing that the permit be transferred to him or her; and 
(b)  The successor in title has complied with the bonding requirements of this section; and 
(c)  The city has approved transfer of the permit in writing. Any transfer of a permit under the authority of this subparagraph shall bind the successor permit holder to the same plan, requirements, variances, and permit conditions as the former permit holder. All successors in title to permitted properties shall request in writing a transfer of the permit or shall apply for a new permit contemporaneously with their receipt of title to the permitted property, or within 20 days thereafter; failure of a successor in title to comply with this requirement, whether or not the permit of the former title holder has been terminated, shall subject the successor in title to any and all penalties prescribed by this development code. 
g.  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the owner. 
h.  Subsequent to issuance of a permit, and after all land-disturbing activity has ceased and the property has been stabilized to a permanent and continuous state of compliance with this chapter, the city shall inspect the property and shall terminate the permit and release the requirements for bond and/or letter of credit required by this section. The city shall make such inspections routinely in conjunction with inspections for release of paving bonds and issuance of certificates of occupancy where there is or has been construction in progress on the permitted property. For other permitted properties, inspections shall be made pursuant to request of the permit holder after payment of any required inspection fees. 
i.  The development permit may be suspended, revoked or modified, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this development code. 
9.05.06.  Expiration of development permit. 
a.  A development permit shall expire if the development activity described in the permit is not begun within six months from the date of issuance. 
b.  Any development permit that has expired may be renewed by the engineering department within six months of expiration. If a development permit has expired for more than six months, the applicant shall be required to apply for a new development permit under the development permit approval process of this development code. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 58, 59, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-2017-41 , § 7, 7-3-17; Ord. No. O-2018-1 , § 5, 1-8-18) 
Section 9.06. - Driveway permit. 
a.  No driveway connecting to a public street or a public right-of-way or public property shall be repaired or installed without first having approval from the engineering department. If the driveway connects to a State or U.S. numbered highway, approval of the Georgia Dept. of Transportation shall be required prior to city approval. 
b.  Applications may be made to the engineering department for local streets, or to the Georgia Department of Transportation on State and U.S. numbered highways and other streets over which DOT maintains access control. 
c.  A permit shall expire for work not started within 90 days or completed within six months after issuance of a permit, and a new permit shall be required before beginning or completing the work. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01) 
Section 9.07. - Final subdivision plat. 
9.07.01.  Responsibility. 
a.  Development official shall be responsible for coordination of the approval process for a final subdivision plat. 
b.  The final subdivision plat shall be certified and sealed by a land surveyor registered in the state. 
c.  The owner is responsible for compliance with all requirements of this development code. Approval of a final subdivision plat and acceptance of the public improvements and dedications therein shall not relieve the owner of this responsibility. 
9.07.02.  Procedures for final plat approval. 
a.  Prior to submission of an application for final subdivision plat approval, either: 
(1)  All public improvements shall have been properly installed and completed in accordance with all requirements and standards of this development code (other than traffic signs, street name signs, street striping, and signalization) and as-built surveys of the improvements shall have been approved by the development official as required in the "land development activities" article of this Code; or, 
(2)  A guarantee in lieu of completed improvements shall have been received by the engineering department and approved by the mayor and council as provided under the "project design standards" article of this development code. 
b.  An application for a final subdivision plat approval shall be made to the development official. The application shall include: 
(1)  The name and address of the person to whom the notice of approval shall be sent. 
(2)  A properly completed application form, as furnished by the development official, requesting final subdivision plat review. 
(3)  Seven copies of the final subdivision plat drawing prepared in conformance with the specifications in this section, the original of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on cloth or film. 
(4)  Payment of all applicable final subdivision plat filing and recording fees, as established by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(5)  Payment for materials and installation of traffic signs and street name signs. Payment of the cost of street striping or signalization, if required and not completed by the owner, shall also be included in the application. 
(6)  A maintenance bond providing adequate surety for the maintenance of all public improvements required by this development code in the subdivision for a period of 24 months following the date of approval of the final plat. 
(a)  Upon submission of the final plat, the subdivider must have proof in writing that a maintenance bond, cash deposit or letter of credit in an amount of no less than $300.00 per lot, has been provided, payable to the city to repave and repair all roads, storm sewers, and appurtenances in said subdivision. If a letter of credit is provided, the same shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and drawn upon a duly licensed bank or savings and loan association with an office in Douglas County, Georgia. The amount of the bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit shall be set by the building official and development official after taking into account the width of the road, the paving process used, and any other reasonable standards. The duration of aforementioned bond, cash deposit, or letter of credit shall be for the latter of: (i) 24 months from the date of final plat approval by the mayor and council; or (ii) until the contemplated structures or buildings on at least 80 percent of the lots in the subdivision are completed or "built out," as determined by the building official. 
(b)  All repaving, and repair to all roads, storm sewers, and appurtenances in said subdivision that shall be completed within 24 months of final plat approval by mayor and council or when the contemplated structures or buildings on at least 80 percent of the lots in a subdivision are completed or "built out," as determined by the building official, whichever occurs sooner. 
(7)  A copy of documents showing incorporation of a mandatory property owner's association for all parcels in the subdivision, and showing recorded subdivision covenants providing for private payment responsibility for the next twenty years for utility service and maintenance for any streetlights required by this ordinance, and lien capability upon any parcel for failure to pay. 
(8)  Photographs showing completion and installation of all amenities required by the Zoning Ordinance or by zoning special stipulations applicable to the subject property, such as recreational facilities or pedestrian trails; exceptionally, developments of more than 25 acres may be final platted in multiple phases, and proof of completion and installation of zoning amenities may be submitted not later than final platting for more than half the acreage of the total development. 
(9)  For any application which includes combination of lots, a copy of a single recorded deed showing the applicant(s) as owner(s) of the subject lots. 
c.  The engineering department shall review the application for completeness at the time of submission. Incomplete applications will be returned to the applicant. 
d.  Within two weeks following receipt of the application, the engineering department shall indicate on the drawing or in writing all comments related to compliance with this development code. 
e.  The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all codes, regulations and zoning requirements, and for the satisfaction of all the noted and written comments of the engineering department. Resubmission of all revised drawings shall be made to the development official. 
f.  When all of the requirements of this development code, and any conditions of zoning approval, have been met, the plat shall be submitted to the development official, and upon approval by the mayor and council, the mayor shall sign and date the certificate of final plat approval stamped or printed on a reproducible copy of the final subdivision plat. 
g.  Once the final subdivision plat has been so certified, an electronic copy in a form compatible with AutoCAD Release 13 - AutoCAD 2000 shall be submitted to the engineering department, and the plat shall be recorded by the engineering department with the clerk of superior court. 
h.  Subsequent to the recording of the final plat, one copy with all certificates endorsed thereon shall be retained with the records of the engineering department. The map book, volume and page numbers where the plat is recorded shall also be indicated on the copy. 
9.07.03.  General standards for final plats. 
a.  The final subdivision plat shall be drawn on an appropriate material and sheet size, and using minimum line weights and letter heights as required by Georgia law for the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67), and as acceptable to the clerk of superior court. 
b.  The final subdivision plat shall substantially conform to the preliminary subdivision plat and may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary subdivision plat that the owner proposes to record at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the requirements of this development code. 
9.07.04.  Final plat requirements. The final subdivision plat shall contain the following information: 
a.  All data required by Georgia law pertaining to the recordation of maps and plats (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67). 
b.  Name of the subdivision. 
c.  Street names including both the name and the suffix, such as "street," "avenue," etc. 
d.  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. 
e.  Name of the former subdivision if any or all of the property has been previously subdivided. 
f.  Location sketch map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets, railroads or others. Sketches may be drawn in freehand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
g.  Lot lines with dimensions to the 1/100 foot, necessary internal angles, arcs, and chords and tangent or radii of rounded corners. 
h.  Building front setback lines with dimensions as to length across each lot and distance from the street right-of-way. 
i.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
j.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements, including drainage and slope easements, if required, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use. 
k.  A statement of the protective covenants, if they are brief enough to be put directly on the plat; otherwise, a statement that the subdivision is subject to protective covenants and stating the book number and folio number at which the covenants are recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court. 
l.  The extent of any area of special flood hazard, as defined in this development code. A notation clearly stating the water surface elevation of the 100-year flood in relation to mean sea level as approved and accepted by the engineering department. Any lands below this elevation shall be designated on the plat by a heavy contour line, depicting the one hundred-year flood level. 
m.  The width and the former widths, if pertinent, of all rights-of-way and easements adjacent to or crossing the property or adjacent to any point of reference. 
n.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection and standard curve data of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
o.  All land lot lines, land district lines, land section lines, and city and county boundaries intersecting or adjacent to the surveyed property shall be indicated by lines drawn upon the plat with appropriate words and figures. 
p.  All plats shall show the state plane coordinates of at least two permanent monuments thereon, when a United States Coastal and Geodetic Survey monument is within 500 feet of any point on the property platted, or any point of reference shown thereon. 
9.07.05.  Surveyor and owner certificates. Each final subdivision plat shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped on the plat. The original certificates on the reproducible copy of the final plat shall be signed and dated in blue ink. 
a.  Surveyor's certificate, to read and be completed as follows: 

 
b.  Surveyor's seal. The reproducible final subdivision plat drawing shall bear the original signature, in blue ink, of the registered land surveyor placed across the surveyor's seal in order to be valid and recordable. 
c.  Owner's certificate, to read and be completed as follows, and signed in blue ink on the original drawing: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE 
State of Georgia 
County of Douglas 
The undersigned certifies that he or she is the owner of the land shown on this plat and that the plat and the public improvements contained therein or associated therewith meet all applicable requirements and standards of the Douglasville Development Code. The owner further acknowledges this plat and allotment to be his free act and deed, and dedicates to the public forever all areas shown or indicated on this plat as streets, easements or other public use areas, and all water system and other public improvements as depicted on the as-built surveys for this subdivision, approved on (date). 
Owner's name: ___________ 
Owner's address: _____ 
Date ___________ 
(Owner's signature) ___________ 
9.07.06.  Certification by health department. Certification by the County health department that the proposed septic systems installed or proposed to be installed fully meet the requirements of the health department's regulations. The county health department certification statement shall include written notice that each lot not on public sewer must have a septic tank permit prior to the start of construction. For developments with public sewerage and public water systems this certification may be omitted. 
9.07.07.  Certificate of final subdivision plat approval. The following shall be stamped or printed on the final subdivision plat for execution upon its approval by the city. 

 
9.07.08.  Acceptance of public improvements. 
a.  If construction of any required public improvements was deferred at the time of final plat approval, said work must be completed during the one-year maintenance period for the subdivision. 
b.  Prior to expiration of the maintenance period, a final acceptance inspection of the public improvements shall be conducted by the engineering department. 
c.  The owner must correct all defects or deficiencies in materials or workmanship and make such repairs as necessary to approximate the as-built condition of the improvements. 
d.  Upon certification by the development official that the public improvements depicted on the as-built surveys are in conformance with the specifications of this development code and are in good repair, the city manager shall release the maintenance bond and accept the public improvements into perpetual maintenance. 
9.07.09.  Revisions to recorded final plats. 
a.  Procedure for revising final plat. 
(1)  When it becomes necessary to revise a recorded final plat due to some error, required adjustment, or desired adjustment, the developer shall confer with the development official and other city departments as necessary to verify if the proposed revision will comply with the requirements of the zoning ordinance and this development code. 
(2)  If it is established that the revision is feasible, the developer shall have the necessary corrections made on the original mylar of the final plat. The subdivision name, date and book and page number of the original recording shall be noted on the new plat. 
(3)  The revised plat shall be filed with the development official, along with any filing fee as may be established by the mayor and council from time to time. The development official shall forward this plat to the proper city departments that would be involved in checking and certifying the revision. 
(4)  Upon receipt of certification by the proper authorities in the various city departments involved, the revised plat shall be signed by the mayor. 
(5)  The approved revised plat will be recorded by the engineering department and returned to the developer. 
(6)  Any revised plat that does not receive approval shall be returned to the developer with written notification stating the reason for denial attached thereto. The developer may appeal may denial to the board of adjustments and appeals. 
b.  New drawing required. If the original final plat is not available, it will be necessary to prepare a new mylar tracing of that portion of the subdivision being revised showing all requirements listed for a final subdivision plat under this section. 
c.  Explanation of revision. Revisions and a notation explaining these revisions shall be clearly and legibly shown in ink on the revised plat. 
d.  Certificate of final subdivision plat revision. The revised plat shall show the following wording in ink: 
CERTIFICATE OF FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT REVISION 
This revised subdivision plat is hereby approved as to the revisions shown on it, subject to any applicable Protective Covenants and continuation of that portion of the owner's two-year maintenance and guarantee period that has not expired since initial approval and recording of this final subdivision plat. 
Date ________ 
  (Signature of the Mayor of Douglasville, Georgia)   
e.  Protective covenants. All changes shall be bound by the protective covenants on the original final plat and a statement to that effect shall be noted in ink on the revised plat unless noted otherwise. 
f.  Additional information. Other data that may be required such as a final engineering design report on proposed revisions and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as may be required by city officials in the enforcement of this development code. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-03-10, § 12, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 60—63, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-04-19, § 1, 6-7-04; Ord. No. O-2015-41, § 1 , 9-8-15) 
Section 9.08. - Building permitting. 
9.08.01.  Procedures to obtain a building permit. A building permit issued by the building official is required in advance of the initiation of construction, erection, moving or alteration of any building or structure in accordance with the provisions of chapter 22 of the City Code of Ordinances. A building permit shall be issued only on a legal lot of record. No building permit shall be issued for a lot in a proposed subdivision before filing for recordation of the final plat, except for a single permit issued for the entire tract proposed for subdivision. All structures shall comply with the requirements of this development code, whether or not a building permit is required. 
9.08.02.  Procedure for approval. The building official is responsible for administering and enforcing the building codes of the city. 
a.  Prior to issuance of a building permit the owner shall have received a development permit if required by this development code. 
b.  Except for single-family residential dwellings in an approved subdivision for which the final plat has been filed for recordation, zoning verification shall be obtained from the zoning department. The following shall be attached to the zoning verification application: 
(1)  For a single-family detached or two-family dwelling, a plat or other indication of the location of the lot. 
(2)  For a multi-family or non-residential building, the site plan for which project approval, was granted by the mayor and council. 
9.08.03.  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  It is unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any part of a building, structure, or premises, until a certificate of occupancy has been issued stating that the building or structure or premises conforms to the requirements of the building codes and this development code. 
b.  A certificate of occupancy is required for any of the following: 
(1)  Occupancy and use of a building or structure constructed or enlarged. 
(2)  Change in use of existing buildings to uses of a different classification. 
(3)  Any change in use of a nonconforming use, lot or building. 
c.  Permanent electric power may not be supplied to any structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued and the power company contacted by the building official. 
d.  A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be maintained by the building official and a copy shall be furnished upon request to any person. 
(Ord. No. O-99-20, §§ 3, 4, 7-20-99; Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 64, 4-19-04) 
Sec. 9.09. - Roadway project improvement fees for failed-bond residential developments; development agreements. 
9.09.01. Definitions . The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
a.  Public improvements: Improvements required by this ordinance and to be located within the public right of way, including roadways shown on a plat approval as dedicated to the city, sidewalks adjacent to public roadways, street lights, and roadway curb and gutter. 
b.  Residential development: A platted subdivision of property which is zoned entirely or primarily for residential use. 
c.  Roadway project improvement: A site improvement to a constructed but substandard roadway contained within a specifically identified residential development that is necessary to bring the roadway into compliance with the standards set forth in this ordinance; such an improvement is intended for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the residential development alone and is not designed to provide service to the community at large. 
d.  Roadway: The constructed publicly dedicated roadway shown within the approved final plat for a residential development or a single phase of such a development recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court of Douglas County. 
e.  System improvement: An improvement designed to provide service to the community at large, in contrast to a roadway project improvement. 
f.  Vacant lot: For purposes of this section, a lot within a platted and developed residential development, or within a single phase of a platted and developed residential development, where streets have been installed but not topped, and upon which no residential structure has been constructed on the lot or for which no certificate of occupancy has been issued by the building official. 
9.09.02. Applicability . This section shall apply to those residential developments and phases of residential developments meeting the following criteria: 
a.  A final plat for the development or phase of the development has been lawfully recorded; and 
b.  The performance bonds, maintenance bonds or other security instruments posted or which should have been posted for the streets in the residential development or phase of residential development have failed to provide sufficient funds to the city for proper completion of the roadways. 
This section shall not apply to any residential development, phase of residential development or vacant lot which is the subject of a development agreement with the city providing for roadway construction or roadway topping. 
9.09.03. Roadway project improvement fee . 
a.  Where the city's building official determines that a residential development or phase of a residential development meets the criteria set forth in this section, the building official shall condition issuance of a building permit and certificate of occupancy for the remaining vacant lots within the residential development or phase of residential development upon payment of a roadway project improvement fee. 
b.  The amount of any roadway project improvement fee shall be $10,000.00 per lot. 
9.09.04. Expenditure of roadway project improvement fees. 
a.  Roadway project improvement fees shall be used solely to pay for expenses incurred by the city in bringing the roadways and unbuilt required public improvements of the specific residential development or phase of development for which they were assessed into compliance with this ordinance. No such fees may be utilized for system improvements. 
b.  Roadway project improvement fees shall be accounted for and categorized separately for each individual residential development or phase of development for which they were assessed. 
c.  Upon collection of sufficient roadway project improvement fees to bring the roadways and public improvements within a residential development or phase of development into compliance with this ordinance, the city may commence construction of the roadway improvements and public improvements; however, this provision does not preclude the city from commencing such construction at an earlier date. 
9.09.05. Development agreements. As an alternative to imposing a roadway project improvement fee, for any vacant lot the mayor and city council may authorize a development agreement with a lot owner: 
a.  Waiving or modifying the requirements of this ordinance for posting of performance bonds and maintenance bonds; 
b.  Modifying the timing for installation of public improvements and amenities; or 
c.  Committing the city to take actions not required by this ordinance. 
No development agreement may include terms waiving or modifying any zoning requirement nor any requirement of this ordinance for which a variance request could be entertained. No such development agreement shall be approved unless the agreement is reasonably calculated to encourage construction on the subject vacant lot or within the subdivision, or the terms of the development agreement are otherwise substantially advantageous to the city. 
9.05.06. Sidewalks for vacant lots in non-bonded residential subdivisions . For any lot without a sidewalk and subject to a roadway project improvement fee, the responsibility to construct the sidewalk shall be the responsibility of the owner or builder, and the building official shall withhold final inspection and issuance of the certificate of occupancy until such time as the required sidewalk has been completed. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-36, § 1 , 7-18-16) 
Section 9.10. - Developments of regional impact. 
9.10.01.  Types of approvals covered. The provisions of this section apply to any type of governmental action requested by a private party related to a development project, such as project approval, issuance of a development or building permit, or hook-up to a public utility. No permits shall be given until the DRI process is complete. 
9.10.02.  Submission to ARC. Any development of regional impact (DRI) shall be submitted by the city to the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC) when there is an application for a permit or approval to the city. Once the ARC has accepted the completed form and has made an official determination that the project is a DRI, the 45-day review period officially begins. The applicant will be responsible for providing the city with all background information for the DRI application. 
9.10.03.  Final action by the city. Approval of the first request for governmental action by the city shall not be made on a development of regional impact until either: 
a.  A report has been received from the ARC reflecting its findings and recommendations, if any; or, 
b.  Said report is not received within 60 days of submittal of the application to the ARC. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 2, 6-18-01) 
ARTICLE X. - APPEALS 

Section 10.01. - Purpose of article X. 
This article sets out the process to obtain relief from the requirements or interpretation of this development code that may create practical difficulty or particular hardship in its enforcement or application to a specific property or situation. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 3, 6-18-01) 
Section 10.02. - Appeals of an administrative decision. 
10.02.01.  Initiation. 
a.  An appeal of an administrative decision or interpretation may be initiated by any person aggrieved by such action. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of the administrative decision or interpretation by filing such appeal in writing with the development official. 
b.  It is the intention of this development code that all questions arising in connection with the interpretation of this ordinance shall be presented first to the development official, from whom an appeal can then be taken to the city council. 
10.02.02.  Appeals of permit decisions. The holder of or applicant for a development permit or a building permit may appeal any of the following actions taken by an administrative official: 
a.  The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a land-disturbance or development permit by the development official upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or other approved plans. 
b.  The determination that the holder is in violation of development permit or building permit conditions. 
c.  The determination that the holder is in violation of any other provision of this development code. 
10.02.03.  Interpretations by city council. The city council, upon appeal of an aggrieved party or at the request of the development official, is authorized to: 
a.  Interpret the use of words or phrases within the context of the intent of this development code. 
b.  Decide appeals from any order, determination, decision or other interpretation by any person acting under authority of this development code, where a misinterpretation or misapplication of the requirements or other provisions of this ordinance is alleged. 
c.  Interpret such other provisions of this development code as may require clarification or extension in specific or general cases. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 3, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, § 66, 4-19-04) 
Section 10.03. - Variances. 
10.03.01.  Initiation. 
a.  An appeal from the strict application of the provisions of this development code to a property may be initiated by any party aggrieved by such application. 
b.  In no case, however, shall a variance be granted for any of the following: 
(1)  A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
(2)  A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a zoning change enacted by the city council. 
(3)  A variance to any provision of article VIII "after the fact" of violation. 
10.03.02.  Standards for approval of a variance. 
a.  Generally. 
(1)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this development code may be granted only upon a finding that compliance with such provision will result in a hardship to the property or owner that is substantially unwarranted by the protection of the public health, safety or general welfare. 
(2)  Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over other but similar properties. 
b.  Additional considerations for variances to article VIII (floodplain). 
(1)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(2)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this subsection 10.03.02. are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(3)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(4)  In reviewing such requests, the City of Douglasville and the board of adjustments and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of article VIII. 
c.  A variance may be granted only upon a finding that: 
(1)  The variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good. 
(2)  The variance, if granted, would not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity. 
(3)  The variance, if granted, would not diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  The variance, if granted, would not impair the purpose and intent of the development code. 
(5)  For a variance from the provisions of article VIII (floodplain), in addition to the above, that: 
(a)  There is good and sufficient cause; 
(b)  Failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and, 
(c)  The granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance; 
(d)  The variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
10.03.03.  Administrative variances. 
a.  The development official is authorized to grant variances from the terms of this development code, where, in his or her opinion, the intent of the ordinance can be achieved and equal or better performance obtained by granting the variance, and subject to the standards for approval set out by this section. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements to the extent indicated: 
(1)  Width of frontage landscape strip. Variance not to exceed two feet. 
(2)  Width of side and rear yard landscape strip. Variance not to exceed five feet. 
(3)  Distance between buildings on the same lot. Variance not to exceed ten feet. 
b.  An appeal from an adverse decision of the development official may be taken to the board of adjustments and appeals at the request of the applicant. All requests for appeal shall be filed in writing with the development official within 30 days of the decision of the development official. 
10.03.04.  Variances by the board of adjustments and appeals. 
a.  The board of adjustments and appeals is authorized to grant a variance from the requirements of this development code, subject to the standards for approval set out in this section. The authority to grant such variances shall be limited to variances from the following requirements to the extent indicated: 
(1)  Width of frontage landscape strip. Variance not to exceed 35 percent. 
(2)  Width of side and rear yard landscape strip. Variance not to exceed 35 percent. 
(3)  Number of parking spaces. Variance not to exceed 35 percent. 
(4)  Sign regulations. Variance not to exceed 35 percent. 
b.  An appeal from an adverse decision of the board of adjustments and appeals may be taken to the city council at the request of the applicant. Such request must be filed in writing with the development official within 30 days of the decision of the board of adjustments and appeals. 
10.03.05.  Appeals to the city council. The city council is authorized to grant a variance from any requirement, term or provision of this development code, subject to the limitations and standards of this section, and applicable provisions of state law. 
10.03.06.  Additional regulations. 
a.  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as the City of Douglasville and the board of adjustments and appeals shall deem necessary to the consideration of the request. 
b.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Douglasville and the board of adjustments and appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this ordinance. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted from the requirements of article VIII (floodplain) shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. The development official shall maintain the records of all such appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. No. O-99-24, § 8, 7-6-99; Ord. No. O-00-8, § 1, 2-7-00; Ord. No. O-00-85, § 1, 9-18-00; Ord. No. O-01-39, § 3, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 67, 68, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-09-043, § 2, 8-17-09) 
Section 10.04. - Process for granting an appeal. 
10.04.01.  Receipt of appeal. 
a.  Upon receipt of an appeal from an administrative decision or a request for a variance, the development official shall assemble such memos, papers, plans, or other documents as may constitute the record for the appeal or as may provide an understanding of the issues involved. 
b.  An application for an appeal shall include such descriptions, maps or drawings as needed to clearly illustrate or explain the action requested. The development official may request such additional information from the appellant as necessary to provide a full understanding of the applicant's request. 
c.  Once the record has been assembled, the development official shall schedule the appeal or request for variance promptly for a public hearing at a meeting of the board of adjustments and appeals or the city council, as appropriate to the request. 
10.04.02.  Reserved. 
10.04.03.  Reserved. 
10.04.04.  Withdrawal of appeal. Any appellant wishing to withdraw an appeal or request for variance prior to the public hearing shall file a written request for such withdrawal with the development official. The appeal shall thereupon be withdrawn and the request shall have no further effect. 
10.04.05.  Public hearing procedures. 
a.  The public hearing shall be convened at the scheduled time and place by the appropriate body, as advertised. 
b.  The presiding official may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. 
c.  The development official shall submit the assembled record of the appeal or variance. The development official shall provide such information or explanation as appropriate to the circumstances of the appeal or variance. 
d.  Reserved. 
e.  At the public hearing concerning the appeal or variance, the applicant after being sworn in shall be allowed to present evidence. Any parties in support of or in opposition to the appeal or variance shall also be allowed to present sworn testimony. 
f.  For each appeal or variance, the appellant and proponents of the request shall have no less than ten minutes for presentation of data, opinions and evidence at the public hearing, and opponents of the appeal or variance shall likewise have a minimum of ten minutes for presentation. The proponents of each request shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, and the opponents of each request likewise shall have a collective maximum of 20 minutes for their presentations, unless these time limitations are waived at the discretion of the presiding official. 
g.  Hearsay testimony shall not be considered and shall be ruled out of order. 
h.  After the public hearing and any information presented by the development official, action on the appeal shall be considered. 
(1)  A motion to approve or deny an appeal or variance must be approved by an affirmative vote of a majority of the members in order for the motion to be approved. 
(2)  If a motion to approve an appeal or variance fails, the appeal or variance is automatically denied. If a motion to deny an appeal or variance fails, another motion would be in order. 
(3)  Tie votes. 
(a)  In the case of the board of adjustments and appeals, a tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal or variance shall be deemed a denial of the appeal or variance. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(b)  In the case of the city council, the mayor casts his or her vote when a tie vote occurs among the council members. If the mayor abstains or otherwise casts no vote, a tie vote on a motion for approval of an appeal or variance shall be deemed a denial of the appeal or variance, while a tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(4)  If no action is taken on an appeal, it shall be considered tabled and action deferred to the next regular meeting. 
i.  In taking action on an appeal or variance, the board of adjustments and appeals or city council may: 
(1)  Approve, approve with conditions, or deny the request; 
(2)  Table the appeal or variance for consideration at a subsequent meeting; or, 
(3)  Allow withdrawal of the appeal or variance at the request of the applicant. 
10.04.06.  Waiting period for re-filing. If a request specifically for a variance is denied by the city council, another request for a variance affecting the same property shall not be considered by the city council for a period of six months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the city council may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. 
(Ord. No. O-99-27, §§ 1—4, 7-27-99; Ord. No. O-01-39, § 3, 6-18-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 69—72, 4-19-04) 
Section 10.05. - Flood protection variances. 
A flood protection variance affecting an historic structure may be considered by the board of adjustments and appeals in accordance with the provisions of the "flood damage prevention" article of this development code. All other variances from the provisions of this Code regarding flood damage prevention shall be considered by the city council. 
(Ord. No. O-01-39, § 3, 6-18-01) 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 11.01. - Purpose of article XI. 
This article sets out the structure for administering and enforcing this development code, including the creation, powers and duties of the board of adjustment and appeals, and the responsibilities and procedures of the development official in carrying out enforcement activities. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 73, 4-19-04) 
Section 11.02. - Schedules and fees. 
From time to time, the city council may adopt fees for the issuance of permits, the submission of applications, and such other activities and authorizations as regulated by this development code, and may adopt schedules of dates, times and places as appropriate and necessary to regulate the application, review and approval processes required by this development code. 
Section 11.03. - Amendment to the text of this ordinance. 
a.  The city council may amend the text of this development code, including the adoption of a new development code to replace this ordinance in whole, by a majority vote of those present and voting at a regular meeting, in accordance with the procedures for the adoption of ordinances under the City Code of Ordinances and City Charter. 
b.  Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the city council or upon the stated effective date thereof, and shall thereupon apply to every property for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may subsequently be requested. 
c.  Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a development permit or building permit has been issued in conformity with this development code prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred as long as the permit remains valid. 
Section 11.04. - Board of adjustments and appeals. 
11.04.01.  Establishment. 
a.  A board of adjustment and appeals is hereby established. Said board, who is appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor, shall be no fewer than three members, who shall be citizens of the city. 
b.  When a position becomes vacant before the end of a term, the mayor shall appoint a new member for the duration of the term remaining. 
c.  Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for any authorized travel expenses incurred while representing the board. 
11.04.02.  Proceedings of the board of adjustment and appeals. 
a.  The mayor appoints the chair and a vice-chair from among its members, who shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. The vice-chair shall preside at meetings in the absence of the chair. 
b.  The chair or, in their absence, the vice-chair or other member designated to conduct an official meeting, may administer oaths and allow the cross-examination of witnesses. 
c.  The board of adjustment and appeal may adopt such by-laws, rules or procedures as appropriate and not in conflict with this development code. 
d.  The board of adjustment and appeals hall meet in accordance with its schedule of meeting dates, times and places unless there is no business to conduct. Other meetings of the board of adjustments and appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman if there is business to be brought before it, or at such other times as the board of adjustments and appeals may determine. All meetings of the board of adjustment and appeals shall be open to the public. 
e.  Where there is an even number of board members, half shall constitute a quorum. The affirmative vote of at least a quorum of the members of the board of adjustment and appeals shall be necessary to approve any decision or recommendation. 
f.  The city engineer's designee shall serve as secretary to the board of adjustments and appeals. The secretary shall cause minutes of its proceedings to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept, all of which shall be of public record. Minutes and agenda shall be prepared and maintained in accordance with the Open Records Act. 
11.04.03.  Powers and duties of the board of adjustments and appeals. 
a.  The board of adjustment and appeals shall have the duty and responsibility to conduct a meeting and to make a recommendation in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this development code on each application for an appeal from an administrative decision, variances, or an interpretation. 
b.  The board, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify such fact to the Superior Court. 
c.  The board of adjustment and appeals shall also have such other powers, duties or responsibilities as assigned to it by the mayor or as contained in other ordinances adopted by the city. 
d.  In exercising its powers regarding an appeal of an administrative decision, the board of adjustments and appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this development code, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination of the administrative official, and to that end shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit. 
Section 11.05. - Inspection and enforcement. 
11.05.01.  Enforcement officer. 
a.  The development official shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be deemed necessary to assure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this development code, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection. 
b.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, the Soil and Water Conservation District, or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
11.05.02.  Enforcement for floodplain matters. Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of article VIII of this ordinance or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this subsection 11.05.02. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
a.  Notice of violation. If the development official determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this ordinance, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this ordinance without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the board of adjustments and appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
b.  Administrative penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or administrative penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed, in addition to any civil or criminal penalties authorized by this ordinance. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the City of Douglasville shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the City of Douglasville may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following administrative penalties: 
(1)  Stop-work order. The City of Douglasville may issue a stop-work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop-work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City of Douglasville may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City of Douglasville may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City of Douglasville may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
11.05.03.  Enforcement for other matters. Stop-work orders, permit modifications and suspensions. The development official and the building official shall have the authority to issue the following: 
a.  A stop-work order stopping work indefinitely for an entire project; or 
b.  A cease and desist order stopping any activity within the project or to stop work on any portion of the project for a definite or indefinite period; 
c.  Where work on any project is being done contrary to the provisions of this development code, contrary to the provisions of the permit or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, and the permit, if any, shall be suspended or modified. All cease and desist orders issued for a duration of more than three days, and all stop-work orders, shall be issued in writing and shall be delivered to any responsible party present at the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Failure of personal delivery of the notice shall not constitute grounds for termination of the order. Said written notice shall further be mailed by certified mail to the owner within three working days of issuance of the order. Orders may be terminated by the development official or building official upon confirmed satisfaction of the stated conditions for resumption or for other good cause. 
Where in the opinion of the development official or the building official an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
11.05.04.  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. O-99-29, § 2, 9-7-99; Ord. No. O-01-2, §§ 3, 4, 1-11-01; Ord. No. O-04-14, §§ 74, 75, 4-19-04; Ord. No. O-09-043, § 3, 8-17-09) 
Section 11.06. - Administrative and judicial review. 
11.06.01.  Administrative review generally. 
a.  Issuance of any stop-work order shall be issued in writing, or the suspension, revocation, modification, or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the property conditions are not in compliance with: 
(1)  The approved erosion and sedimentation control plan; 
(2)  Permit conditions; or 
(3)  This or any other ordinance; 
shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to written notice of the same. 
b.  Within ten days of the issuance of such notice, the recipient shall have a right to make a written request for and to be heard at a review hearing before the board of adjustments and appeals on a date to be scheduled and held within ten days after the date the written request is received by the development official or the building official. 
11.06.02.  Administrative review hearing. 
a.  At such hearing, the board of adjustments and appeals shall entertain the matter. Upon finding that: 
(1)  the conditions specified granting a permit are reasonably necessary for compliance with this chapter, if such conditions are in issue; or 
(2)  that the property is not in compliance with the approved plan, permit conditions, or this or any other ordinance; 
then the board may confirm or modify the initial action of the issuing authority and shall specify the nonconformity or reason for its decision. In the absence of such a finding, said action shall stand revoked and terminated. 
b.  If the appealing party is still aggrieved after the decision of the board, then he may file a written appeal to the city council within ten days of receiving said adverse decision. Upon appeal to the city council, that body shall apply the same standards for review as those applicable to the board. 
(Ord. No. O-04-14, § 76, 4-19-04) 
Section 11.07. - Violation and penalties. 
11.07.01.  For floodplain. The following provisions shall apply to violations of article VIII (floodplain): 
a.  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the City of Douglasville shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the City of Douglasville has taken one or more of the actions described above, the City of Douglasville may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
b.  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this ordinance, the City of Douglasville may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
11.07.02.  Violations and penalties regarding other matters. 
a.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbance or development activity. If any person commences, or any property owner allows commencement, of any land-disturbing or development activity requiring a land-disturbing or development permit without first obtaining said permit, he shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities at the site of the property. 
b.  Civil penalties. Any person violating any provisions of this Code, permit conditions, or stop-work order shall be liable for civil penalties consistent with this ordinance, the City Code, the City Charter and applicable state laws. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
c.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in any land-disturbing or development activity has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be furnished to such person. The notice shall set forth the requirements necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such requirements must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing or other development activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this Code and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit. The city may call the bond or letter of credit or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to stabilize the site and bring it into compliance. 
d.  Additional remedies. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as are necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, such as injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. O-01-2, § 5, 1-11-01; O-09-043, § 4, 8-17-09) 
ARTICLE XII. - GLOSSARY OF DEFINITIONS[7] 
The following is a glossary of all definitions specifically used in the text of this development code. Refer also to article I regarding the interpretation of figures, words and phrases as used in this Code. 
12.01.01.  Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
12.02.01.  Addition (to an existing building): Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
12.03.01.  Agricultural Activities: The production, keeping, or maintenance, for sale, lease, or personal use, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to: forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef, cattle sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules or goats or any mutations or hybrids thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all of such animals; bees and apiary products; fur animals; trees and forest products; fruits of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries; vegetables; nursery, floral ornamental, and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a soil conservation or forestry management program. 
12.04.01.  Alley or Service Drive: A minor, permanent, public serviceway which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side or properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
12.05.01.  Antenna: Any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
12.05.02.  Appeal: A request for a review of the development official's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
12.06.01.  Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the city for approval of a land-disturbance permit, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the development of their property under the requirements of this development code. 
12.07.01.  Application: A petition for approval of a land-disturbance permit, development permit, building permit, hardship variance, special exception or appeal, or any other authorization for the development of a property under the requirements of this development code. 
12.08.01.  Area of Shallow Flooding: A designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
12.08.02.  Area of Special Flood Hazard: The land subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the base flood elevation (including A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on the FHBM or the FIRM), all floodplain and floodprone areas at or below the future conditions flood elevation, and all other floodprone areas as referenced in subsection 8.01.04. All streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater shall have the area of special flood hazard delineated. 
12.09.01.  Arterial Street: See under "Street Classifications." 
12.10.01.  As-Built Survey Drawings: Drawings specifying the dimensions, location, capacities, and operational capabilities of structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
12.11.01.  Available Head: The depth of water that is present at the entrance to a pipe during a 100-year storm. 
12.12.01.  Base Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
12.12.02.  Base Flood Elevation: For purposes of article VIII only, the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
12.12.03.  Basement: For purposes of article VIII only, that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
12.13.01.  Berm: A mound of earth, or the act of pushing earth into a mound. 
12.14.01.  Reserved. 
12.15.01.  Block: An area of land surrounded by streets. 
12.16.01.  Bond: A bond, letter of credit or approved surety method approved by the city attorney. 
12.17.01.  Breakaway Wall: A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting foundation system. 
12.18.01.  Building: For purposes of article VIII only, any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
12.19.01.  Caliper: The diameter of a tree (usually nursery stock) measured at a point six inches above the ground or top of root ball for up to and including 4-inch caliper trees, and at a point 12 inches above the ground or top of root ball for larger sizes. 
12.20.01.  Canopy Tree: A species of tree that normally reaches a height at maturity in excess of 50 feet and is used primarily for shade, such as red oak, shumark oak, Chinese elm, river birch, white oak, water oak, American elm, trident maple, pin oak, American beech, pecan, southern magnolia, sweetgum and willow oak. 
12.20.02.  Car Wash: 
a.  Conveyor car wash: A commercial car wash where the car moves on a conveyor belt during the wash. The driver of the vehicle can remain in the vehicle or wait outside of the vehicle. 
b.  In-bay automatic car wash: A commercial car wash where the driver pulls into the bay and parks the car; the vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through the tunnel. 
c.  Self-service car wash: A commercial car wash where the customers wash their cars themselves with spray wands and brushes. 
12.21.01.  Cellular Tower or Antenna: See "Transmission Tower." 
12.22.01.  Center Line: That line connecting the succession of midpoints between the identifiable limits of any improvements on the ground or of any easement, or between the banks of any river, creek or stream. 
12.23.01.  City Arborist: The Development Official or his/her designee responsible for the administering the provisions of this Development Code with respect to trees and landscaping. 
12.24.01.  Clearing: The removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
12.25.01.  Collector Street: See under "Street Classifications." 
12.26.01.  Construction: Any building or erection of a structure or preparation of a property for same. 
12.27.01.  Construction Contractor: An establishment engaged in the construction of buildings, engaged in heavy construction (such as streets, bridges or utilities), or specialized in such construction trades as plumbing, heating and air-conditioning, electrical wiring, masonry, roofing or gutters, well drilling, or house painting. 
12.28.01.  Construction Sign: A sign identifying the contractors, engineers, architects or financial institutions involved in the building construction or development of a property. 
12.29.01.  Critical Root Zone: The land area circular in shape and centered on the trunk of a tree, the radius of which circle is determined by the farthest extent of the drip line from the trunk. 
12.30.01.  Crosswalk: A right-of-way or public easement within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded. 
12.31.01.  Cul-de-Sac: A dead-end street that terminates in a permanent turnaround and not intended for future extension. 
12.32.01.  Curb Break or Curb Cut: Any interruption or break in the line of a street curb for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
12.33.01.  Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also know as "excavation." 
12.34.01.  Cutting: The removal of any soil or other solid material from a natural ground surface. 
12.35.01.  Dead-End Street: A street connected to another street at only one end. 
12.36.01.  Dead Plant or Tree: Any living plant material that has lost 33 percent or more of its branches or leaves, shall be considered dead. 
12.37.01.  Deflection Angle: The angle between a deviation in the direction of the center line of a street and the extension of the center line along a straight course from the point from which the center line changed direction. 

12.38.01.  Detention Facility: See "Stormwater Detention Facility." 
12.39.01.  Developed Property: Any lot which contains any building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued and is current. 
12.40.01.  Developer: The person, corporation or other legal entity that undertakes the subdivision of property, the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity, or the construction of streets, utilities, buildings or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property. 
12.41.01.  Development: 
a.  For purposes of article VIII only, any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials; 
b.  For all other purposes of this ordinance: 
(1)  A land development project involving the construction of streets, utilities, buildings, or other improvements required for the habitation or use of property, such as a residential neighborhood, an apartment complex, a store, or a shopping center; 
(2)  Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment; 
(3)  The act of constructing or carrying out a land development project, including the alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
12.42.01.  Development Permit: The authorization necessary to carry out the planned development of land and construction of such site improvements as streets, utilities, drainage structures and parking lots, and which may include authorization to initiate and conduct such land-disturbing activities as clearing, grubbing and grading. See also "Land-disturbance Permit." 
12.43.01.  Development Site: That portion of a tract of land that will be dedicated to a proposed development, including the land containing trees that will be counted toward satisfying the requirements of these provisions. 
12.44.01.  Diameter Breast Height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk (usually a mature tree) measured at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
12.45.01.  Directional Sign: A permanent sign, which is supported by one or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and is not attached to a building and is not mobile or temporary, is not taller than 30 inches in height, and is not attached to a wall, with an area not greater than 480 square inches, located not closer than 12 feet from all rights-of-way and all property lines unless otherwise permitted by the building official. 
12.46.01.  Drainage: A general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping; most commonly applied to surface water. 
12.47.01.  Drainage Structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
12.48.01.  Drainage System: The surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities and the storm sewer system. 
12.49.01.  Drip Line: A line on the ground established by a vertical plane extending from a tree's outermost branch tips down to the ground, i.e., the line enclosing the area directly beneath the tree's crown from which rainfall would drip. 
12.50.01.  Easement: A strip of land on which the property owner has granted to another entity the right to use such land for specific purposes. 
12.51.01.  Elevated Building: A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
12.52.01.  Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
12.53.01.  Erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. 
12.54.01.  Excavation: The mechanical removal of earth material. 
12.54.02.  Existing Construction: Any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 5, 1994. 
12.55.01.  Existing Grade: See under "Grade." 
12.56.01.  Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before May 5, 1994. 
12.57.01.  Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
12.57.02.  FEMA: The Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
12.58.01.  Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
12.59.01.  Filling: The placement of any soil or other solid material, either organic or inorganic, on a natural ground surface or excavation. 
12.60.01.  Finished Grade: See under "Grade." 
12.61.01.  Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
12.62.01.  Flood Hazard Boundary Map or FHBM: An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
12.63.01.  Flood Insurance Rate Map or FIRM: An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
12.64.01.  Flood Insurance Study or FIS: The official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
12.65.01.  Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding. 
12.66.01.  Floodproofing: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
12.67.01.  Flood-Resistant Materials: Building materials capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact with floodwaters without sustaining significant damage. The term "prolonged contact" means at least 72 hours, and the term "significant damage" means any damage requiring more than low-cost cosmetic repair (such as painting). See FEMA Technical Bulletin 2-93, and subsequent revisions thereto. 
12.68.01.  Floodway or Regulatory Floodway: The channel of a stream or other watercourse and the adjacent areas of the floodplain which is necessary to contain and discharge the base flood flow without cumulatively increasing the base flood elevation more than one foot. 
12.69.01.  Floor: The top surface of an enclosed area in a building, including basement, i.e., top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles or storage, or the floor area of an attic used exclusively for storage. 
12.71.01.  Flowering Ornamental Tree: A tree, other than a canopy tree, that produces seasonal flowers and blossoms and is used primarily for aesthetic or ornamental purposes. 
12.72.01.  Functionally Dependent Use: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. 
12.72.02.  Future Conditions Flood: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future conditions hydrology. Also known as the 100-year future conditions flood. 
12.72.03.  Future Conditions Flood Elevation: The flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future conditions flood. 
12.72.04.  Future Conditions Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to flooding by the future conditions flood. 
12.72.05.  Future Conditions Hydrology: The flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on the city's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plan, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
12.73.01.  Gated Community: A subdivision approved as such, which may be served by private streets. 
12.74.01.  Grade: The level of the surface of the ground. 
a.  Existing Grade: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
b.  Finished Grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
c.  Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. If fill has been placed, it refers to the original ground level beneath the fill. 
12.75.01.  Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
12.76.01.  Grading Permit: Authorization necessary but limited to the initiation and conduct of a land-disturbing activity on a property. 
12.77.01.  Greenway: An area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
12.78.01.  Ground Cover: A low growing plant, other than turf grass, which forms a continuous cover over the ground surface. 
12.79.01.  Ground Elevation: See under "Grade." 
12.80.01.  Guy Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
12.81.01.  Handicapped Parking Space: A space laid out and designated by signage in accordance with the requirements of the Federal Americans with Disabilities Act. 
12.82.01.  Hardwood Tree: Any leaf-bearing (not needle-bearing) tree that is not coniferous (cone-bearing). This definition is based on a colloqualism, and does not reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
12.83.01.  Heavily Landscaped Area: An area planted with a combination of shade and flowering trees, deciduous and evergreen shrubs, and flowering perennials such that the entire area is covered with landscape materials. The green space designated to be heavily landscaped shall have no more than 25 percent of its area covered in turf (seed or sod). The remaining 75 percent shall contain shade trees (two-inch caliper minimum), flowering ornamental trees (one-inch caliper minimum), evergreen shrubs (three-gallon minimum), deciduous shrubs (three-gallon minimum), and perennials or nonturf groundcovers (two and one-half-inch pot minimum). All plant materials shall be mulched. 
12.84.01.  Highest Adjacent Grade: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
12.85.01.  Historic Structure: For purposes of article VIII only, any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on the local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
12.86.01.  Impermeable: Something that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by, such as a layer of rock. 
12.87.01.  Impervious Surface: Manmade structures, improvements and surfaces that prevent or significantly limit the infiltration of stormwater. Examples of impervious structures and improvements are: buildings, structures, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, patios and sidewalks. Examples of impervious materials often used to construct such improvements are asphalt, concrete, brick, stone, wood, asphalt shingles, metal, and composite materials. 
12.88.01.  Improvements: The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
12.89.01.  Intersection: 
(1)  The place where two streets cross; 
(2)  The point at which the centerline of a street intersects the center line of another street or railway. 
12.90.01.  Land-Disturbing Activity: Any activity that may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land but not including agricultural practices that are exempt under the "erosion and sedimentation control" article of this development code. 
12.91.01.  Land-disturbance Permit: Any permit other than a building permit issued by the city that authorizes clearing or grading activities or any other land-disturbing activity on a site or portion of a site. Said permit may be a clearing, clearing and grubbing or grading permit as defined and authorized under any regulations of the city. See also "Development Permit." 
12.92.01.  Landscape Materials: Any combination of living plant materials and nonliving materials such as rock, pebbles, wood chips, mulch and pavers, and decorative features, including sculpture, patterned walks, fountains, and pools. 
12.93.01.  Landscape Plan: A component of a development plan on which it is shown: the scale at one inch; the North reference; the location and size of all utilities on the site; the location of all existing and proposed parking areas, sidewalks and other paved surfaces; the location of all existing and proposed buildings and structures; the boundaries of each required landscape strip or area; a planting plan showing the location, size and common name of proposed plant materials; the location, size and common name of all existing plant materials to be retained that contribute to meeting the minimum requirements of this Code for landscaping; and any other information that can reasonably be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the Development Official. 
12.94.01.  Landscaping: 
(1)  An expanse of natural scenery; 
(2)  Lawns, trees, plants, and other natural materials, such as rock and wood chips, and decorative features, including sculpture, patterned walks, fountains, and pools. 
12.95.01.  Lattice Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
12.96.01.  Live Detention: The quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a stormwater detention facility for a specified period of time. 
12.97.02.  Lot: A parcel or tract of land held in single ownership. 
a.  Corner Lot: Any lot bounded by two streets at their intersection. 
b.  Double-Frontage Lot: A lot bounding on two or more streets, but not at their intersection, so that it is not a corner lot. 
c.  Interior Lot: A lot having frontage on only one street. 
12.98.03.  Lot Line: The boundary dividing a given lot from the street or adjacent lots; the boundary defining the limit of ownership of a property. 
a.  Front Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that abuts a street right-of-way line. A lot adjacent to more than one street will have more than one front lot line. 
b.  Rear Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that does not intersect with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
c.  Side Lot Line: Any boundary line of a lot that intersects with a street right-of-way line and is not a front lot line. 
12.98.04.  Lowest Floor: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this ordinance. 
12.99.01.  Major Street: A street, thoroughfare or highway classified as an arterial or collector in the comprehensive plan. 
12.100.01.  Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia: A publication of the same name published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, and as amended or supplemented from time to time. 
12.100.02.  Manufactured Home: For purposes of this ordinance only, a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
12.101.01.  Mean Sea Level: The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of article VIII the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
12.102.01.  Reserved. 
12.103.01.  Monopole Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
12.104.01.  Motel: See "Hotel or Motel." 
12.105.01.  Mulch: Pine straw, pine bark, pebbles, lava rock, or processed cypress trees. By-products of unprocessed grinding operations may not be used for mulching under landscaped plants or trees. 
12.106.01.  National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD): As corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
12.109.01.  Natural Ground Surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
12.110.01.  Reserved. 
12.111.01.  New Construction: Any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 5, 1994, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
12.112.01.  New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: For purposes of article VIII only, a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after May 5, 1994. 
12.113.01.  Non-Safe-Fall Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
12.113.02.  North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988: A vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
12.114.01.  One-Hundred-Year Flood: A 100-year frequency flood that has the probability of occurring once every 100 years and thus has a one percent chance of occurring each year. 
12.115.01.  One-Hundred-Year Flood Plain: A land area adjoining a river, stream, watercourse or lake that has a probability of being flooded up to and including the 100-year flood. 
12.116.01.  Opaque: Impenetrable to view, or so obscuring to view that features, buildings, structures, and uses become visually indistinguishable. 
12.117.01.  Overstory Tree: Any deciduous or evergreen tree that has the potential to grow to a mature height of 40 feet or more (Reference Landscape Plant Materials for Georgia, Cooperative Extension Service, The University of Georgia College of Agriculture, Bulletin No. 625 or any similar publication.) Reference may also be made to the Manual of Woody Landscape Plants (Micheal Dirr, 1983, Castle Books). 
12.118.01.  Owner: 
a.  For purposes of article VIII only, the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site; 
b.  For all other purposes, a person having or controlling a majority fee simple interest in a property, or their authorized representative. 
12.119.01.  Parking Aisle: The traveled way, which is not the public right-of-way, by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. 
12.120.01.  Parking Area: Any public or private area at grade or within a structure used for the express purpose of temporarily parking automobiles and other vehicles otherwise in operation for personal or business use. 
12.121.01.  Parking Bay: Three or more parking spaces adjacent to one another and aligned side-by-side. 
12.122.01.  Permit: For purposes of article VIII only, the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
12.123.01.  Pervious Surfaces: Surfaces capable of being significantly infiltrated by stormwater. 
12.124.01.  Professional Engineer: An engineer licensed and registered to perform the duties of a Professional Engineer (P.E.) by the State of Georgia. 
12.125.01.  Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
12.126.01.  Project Entrance Sign: A sign located at a discernible entrance into a particular subdivision, development, or office or industrial park. 
12.127.01.  Projecting Sign: See "Building Sign." 
12.128.01.  Public Improvement: The construction, enlargement, extension or other construction of a facility intended for dedication to the public, including but not limited to a street, curb and gutter, sidewalk, cross drain, catch basin, traffic control and street name sign, or other roadway appurtenance other than a driveway apron connection; domestic water supply system main, fire hydrant, valve or other appurtenance other than a supply line to a building; or sanitary sewerage main or outfall, lift station, force main, manhole or other appurtenance other than a drain line from a building. 
12.129.01.  Public Utility: A utility owned and operated by a government or public authority. 
a.  Public Sewerage System: A sanitary sewerage system for the collection of water-borne wastes complete with a sewage treatment plant that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
b.  Public Water System: A system for the intake, treatment and distribution of potable water that is owned and operated by a public agency or authority. 
12.130.01.  Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and, 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
12.131.01.  Recycled Water System: A water system for a commercial car wash that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
12.131.02.  Registered Land Surveyor: A land surveyor licensed and registered to perform the duties of a registered land surveyor (R.L.S.) by the State of Georgia. 
12.132.01.  Reserve Strip: A strip or tract of land reserved for the purpose of controlling or limiting access from properties to abutting streets. 
12.133.01.  Restaurant, Family: A Custom Service Restaurant primarily oriented to sit-down service, occasionally with take-out service but no drive-in or drive-through facilities, and having an average turnover rate generally of less than one hour. Family restaurants are usually moderately priced and frequently belong to chains such as Denny's, Pizza Hut and Shoney's. 
12.134.011.  Restaurant, Fast Food: Any establishment, building or structure where food or drink are served for consumption, either on or off the premises, by order from or service to persons either over an interior counter, outside the structure or from an outdoor service window or automobile service window, or by delivery. This definition shall not include otherwise permitted restaurants where outdoor table service is provided to customers in established outdoor dining areas or where take-out service is provided incidental to a family restaurant or a quality restaurant (custom service restaurants). 
12.135.01.  Restaurant, Quality: A Custom Service Restaurant primarily oriented to fine dining and often associated with a particular cuisine. Quality restaurants are characterized by table settings of better silverware, china, glassware and cloth tablecloths, and have average turnover rates generally of one hour or more. 
12.136.01.  Right-of-Way: Land reserved for and immediately available for use as a street or other public purpose. 
12.137.01.  Roadbed: That portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, including the curbs and shoulders. 
12.138.01.  Roadway: The paved portion of a street improved for vehicular travel, measured from back of curb to back of curb, or from edge of pavement to edge of pavement for swale ditch roads. 
12.139.01.  Roadway Drainage Structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
12.140.01.  Runoff: The portion of precipitation on the land that reaches the drainage system. 
12.141.01.  Runoff Rate Coefficient: The numerical factor which, when multiplied with the average slope for a particular site, will give the release rate of water from that site. 
12.142.01.  Safe-Fall Tower: See under "Transmission Tower." 
12.143.01.  Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
12.144.01.  Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
12.145.01.  Shade Tree: A broadleaf hardwood tree having an average height at maturity of at least 20 feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical, or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
12.145.02.  Site: The parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
12.146.01.  Slope: The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
12.147.01.  Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan: An erosion and sediment control plan approved in writing by the Soil and Water Conservation District. 
12.148.01.  Soils: The upper layer of earth that can be dug or plowed; the loose surface material of the earth in which vegetation normally grows. 
12.149.01.  Specimen tree: Any tree which qualifies for special consideration for preservation due to size, type and condition as follows: 
a.  Any tree in fair or better condition which equals or exceeds the following diameter breast height (DBH) sizes: 
(1)  20-inch DBH - Overstory hardwoods such as oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, sweetgums, etc. 
(2)  30-inch DBH - Overstory softwoods such as pines, etc. 
(3)  4-inch DBH - Understory small trees such as dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc. 
b.  A tree in fair or better condition must meet the following minimum standards: 
(1)  A life expectancy of greater than 15 years. 
(2)  A structurally sound trunk, not hollow and having no extensive decay, and less than 20 percent radial trunk dieback. 
(3)  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only). 
(4)  No major insect or pathological problem. 
c.  A lesser-sized tree can be considered a specimen tree if it is a rare or unusual species, or of exceptional or unique quality, subject to approval of the Development Official pursuant to the standards set forth in this article. 
d.  A lesser-sized tree can be considered a specimen tree if it is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a landscape project, subject to approval of the Development Official pursuant to the standards set forth in this article. 
12.150.01.  Specimen tree stand: A contiguous grouping of trees which has been determined to be of high value in the opinion of the City Director of Development Services. Determination is based upon the following criteria: 
a.  A relatively mature, even-aged stand. 
b.  A stand with purity of species composition or of a rare or unusual nature. 
c.  A stand of historical significance. 
d.  A stand with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
12.151.01.  Reserved. 
12.152.01.  Start of Construction: The date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
12.153.01.  State Waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. "State Waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round. 
12.154.01.  Stormwater Detention Facility: A facility that provides storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
12.155.01.  Stream: A natural, free-flowing watercourse with either constant or intermittent flow sufficient to wrest the vegetation and form a defined channel. 
12.156.01.  Street: An improved way for the conveyance of motor driven, rubber-tired vehicles, such as automobiles and trucks. 
12.157.01.  Street Classifications: Streets and roads are shown in the comprehensive plan according to their classification. 
12.158.01.  Street Jog: the incidence where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 

12.159.01.  Structure: For purposes of this ordinance only, a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
12.160.01.  Subdivider: Any person dividing or proposing to divide land under their ownership into two or more tracts or lots, including any agent of the property owner. 
12.161.01.  Subdivision: 
a.  For purposes of article VIII and related definitions only, the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway; 
b.  For all other purposes of this ordinance: 
(1)  The division of a property or tract of land into two or more tracts or lots; 
(2)  A land development project in which two or more lots are created, along with the streets and utilities needed to support construction of buildings on the lots. 
12.162.01.  Substantial Damage: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
12.163.01.  Substantial Improvement: Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by this development code, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
12.164.01.  Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision: Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
12.165.01.  Tangent: the straight-line distance between the ending of one curve of a line (center line of a street) and the beginning of another curve of the same line (center line). 
12.166.01.  Ten-Year, 25-Year and 100-Year Storms: Rainfall events having a probability of occurrence once every 10, 25 or 100 years, respectively, or a ten percent, four percent or one percent chance of occurring each year, respectively. 
12.167.01.  Transmission Tower: A structure constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. The term excludes any tower and antenna under 70 feet in total height and owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, and satellite earth station antenna one meter in diameter or less, any receive-only home television antenna, and any satellite earth station antenna two meters or less in diameter which is located in a commercial or industrial zoning district. 
a.  Guy Tower: A transmission tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
b.  Lattice Tower: A transmission tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
c.  Monopole Tower: A transmission tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
d.  Non-Safe-Fall Tower: Any transmission tower other than a safe-fall tower, including all guy towers and all monopole towers. 
e.  Safe-Fall Tower: A self-supporting transmission tower whose cross-sectional area diminishes with increasing height and which is certified by its manufacturer that any failure will result in a collapse that will fall entirely or substantially within the base of the tower. 
12.168.01.  Tree: Any self-supporting woody perennial plant, usually having a main stem or trunk and many branches, and at maturity normally attaining a trunk diameter greater than three inches at any point and a height of over ten feet. 
12.169.01.  Tree Bank: An account, maintained by the Finance Director of the City of Douglasville, of funds contributed from developers as a form of alternative compliance to the tree density requirements set forth in this article. Funds from the Tree Bank are to be used solely for the purchase and planting of trees on public property. 
12.170.01.  Tree conservation plan: A plan that identifies tree protection areas, existing trees to be retained and proposed trees to be planted on a property to meet minimum requirements, as well as methods of tree conservation to be undertaken on the site and other pertinent information. 
12.171.01.  Tree Density Standard: The minimum number of tree density units per acre that must be achieved on a property after development. 
12.172.01.  Tree diameter: The cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at four and one-half feet above the ground for existing trees or at the ball for newly planted trees. If a tree has more than one trunk, only the largest trunk shall be used to establish the tree diameter for the tree. 
12.173.01.  Tree Protection Area: Any portion of a site wherein are located existing trees which are proposed to be retained in order to comply with the requirements of this article. The tree protection area shall include no less than the total area beneath the tree canopy as defined by the dripline of the tree or group of trees collectively, plus an additional three feet. 
12.174.01.  Tree Save Area: An area designated for the purpose of meeting tree density requirements, saving natural trees, preserving the root system of natural trees and/or preserving natural buffers. 
12.175.01.  Reserved. 
12.176.01.  Understory Tree: Tree that grows beneath the overstory and will generally reach a mature height of under 40 feet. 
12.177.01.  Utilities: All public and private, above or below ground, infrastructure systems providing water, stormwater, sewer, gas, telephone or cable television, and any other service controlled by the Georgia Public Services Commission. 
12.177.02.  Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of the development code which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by the development code. 
12.178.01.  Vegetation: All plant growth, such as trees, shrubs, mosses and grasses. 
12.178.02.  Violation: For purposes of article VIII and related provisions only, the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City of Douglasville's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certificates, or other evidence of compliance required in article VIII is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided to adopt provisions of the Model Floodplain Management/Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. 
12.179.01.  Reserved. 
12.180.01.  Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
12.181.01.  Yard: An area that lies between the principal building on a lot and the nearest lot line. 
a.  Front Yard: A yard situated along any public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
b.  Rear Yard: A yard situated along a rear lot line. 
c.  Side Yard: A yard situated along a side lot line, but not extending into a front or rear yard. 
(Ord. No. O-00-105, § 5, 12-4-00; Ord. No. O-01-2, § 2, 1-11-01; Ord. No. O-01-17, § 2, 3-19-01; Ord. No. O-03-10, §§ 13—15, 4-7-03; Ord. No. O-05-54, § 2, 10-3-05; Ord. No. O-06-15, § 5, 5-15-06; Ord. No. O-07-71, § 3, 12-3-07; O-09-043, §§ 5—33, 8-17-09; Ord. No. O-2012-35, § 5, 7-16-12) 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-00-105, § 5, adopted Dec. 4, 2000, amended article XII in its entirety to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table. 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1977 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1977 Code, as updated through August 20, 1990, which are included herein. Sections of the 1977 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 

 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and resolutions adopted since the 1977 Code, as updated through August 20, 1990, which are included herein. Ordinances and resolutions adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1977 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances and resolutions which precede August 20, 1990, but which were never included in the 1977 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances and resolutions adopted since August 20, 1990, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 