PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES CITY OF DOUGLASVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 

____________ 
Published: 2012 
____________ 

> 
FOREWORD 
MISSION 
Through sound leadership, fiscal accountability and dedicated teamwork, Douglasville will provide exemplary municipal services while maintaining a standard of "excellence" in city government. 
VISION 
Douglasville is a unique blend of small-town charm coupled with metropolitan amenities. We offer the ideal environment for startups and small businesses, and provide high tech centers and fortune 500 companies the infrastructure for growth. The standard for southern living, Douglasville is the place where innovation meets opportunity. Dedicated to employees, pleasant and responsive to the community and committed to enhancing the quality of life for both visitors and residents alike, Douglasville is the premier city in the nation to live, work, play and raise a family. 
CORE VALUES 
Integrity 
Professionalism 
Respect 
Fairness 
Leadership 
Innovation 
Transparency 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Handbook to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Handbook and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Handbook and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Personnel Policies and Procedures Handbook will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Handbook's historical evolution. 

 
Chapter 1 - INTRODUCTIONS 

Section 1-1. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to set forth the policies and procedures to be followed by the City of Douglasville in the administration of its personnel system. These policies and procedures are intended to provide a workable and responsive system of personnel management based upon merit principles and equal employment laws. Contained within this document are provisions governing the appointment, promotion, transfer, layoff, dismissal, discipline and other conditions of employment. The policies and procedures are designed to inform employees and to guide management and supervisors in administering a responsive, consistent and impartial program of personnel administration. This manual contains only general information and guidelines. It is not intended to be comprehensive or to address all the possible applications or exceptions to the general policies and procedures described. For that reason, any questions concerning the application of a policy or practice, should be addressed to the Human Resources Department. 
Section 1-2. - Availability of policies and procedures. 
These policies and procedures shall be readily accessible to each employee at all times through the Human Resources Department. Since it is the responsibility of all employees to be familiar with and operate within these policies and procedures, the Human Resources Department shall at the time of initial employment give each new employee a copy of said policies and procedures. If these policies and procedures are amended by the City of Douglasville, notice of such amendments shall be distributed to each employee to be placed in his or her Handbook. 
Section 1-3. - Reservations. 
Except as provided section 11-16, the benefits, policies and procedures herein are not conditions of employment. Except as provided in section 11-16, the City of Douglasville reserves the right to modify, revoke, suspend, interpret, terminate or change any or all such plans, policies or procedures in whole or in part at any time, with or without prior notice. Neither this handbook nor any other city document confers any contractual right, either expressed or implied, to remain in the city's employment. Nor does it guarantee any fixed terms and conditions of employment. Employment with the City of Douglasville is not for any specific time and may terminate at will, with or without cause and without prior notice, by the city or the employee may resign for any reason at any time. No supervisor or other representative of the City of Douglasville has the authority to enter into any agreement for employment for any specified period of time, or to make any agreement contrary to the above. Employees are employed at will. 
(Ord. No. 2011-45, § 1, 8-6-2012) 
Section 1-4. - Construction of terms. 
Throughout these policies and procedures, masculine pronouns shall include the feminine, and feminine pronouns shall include the masculine, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
Section 1-5. - Authority. 
The Mayor and City Council of Douglasville have read and duly adopted these personnel policies and procedures, pursuant to Chapter 2, Article 5 of the Douglasville City Code. 
Section 1-6. - Establishment. 
These personnel policies have been adopted by the Mayor and City Council of Douglasville to promote the following principles of public employment: 
1.  Recruiting, selecting and advancing employees on the basis of their relative ability, knowledge, and skills, including open consideration of qualified applicants for initial appointment; 
2.  Providing equitable and adequate compensation; 
3.  Training employees, as needed, to assure quality performance; 
4.  Retaining employees on the basis of the adequacy of their performance, correcting employees as a result of inadequate performance, and separating employees whose inadequate performance cannot be corrected; 
5.  Assuring a fair treatment of applications and employees in all aspects of personnel administration without regard to political affiliation, race, color, national origin, sex, religious creed, age or handicap and with proper regard for privacy and constitutional rights as citizens; and 
6.  Assuring that employees are protected against coercion for partisan political purposes and are prohibited from using their official position for personal gain or for the purpose of interfering with or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office. 
Section 1-7. - Administration. 
The Human Resources Director is responsible for administering and interpreting these policies on a day to day basis. If the Human Resources Director discovers that any department head is not operating within these policies and procedures, the Human Resources Director shall prepare a written report detailing said violation(s) of these policies and procedures for the affected department head, his direct supervisor, the City Manager and the Mayor. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 2 , 11-2-2015) 
Chapter 2 - DEFINITIONS 

[Section 2-1. - Definitions.] 
For the purpose of these policies and procedures the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below, unless another meaning is specifically indicated: 
1.  Adjunct appointee means a city employee whose appointment function is secondary to his main job duties; adjunct appointees are appointed by the mayor and council, and may be removed without cause, only with regard to their respective adjunct titles. 
2.  Appeal means the right of an employee to be heard on matters of discrimination; disciplinary actions including demotion, suspension, fine or termination, or interpretations or applications of this section which have adversely affected the employee. 
3.  Appointed employee means a city employee who is appointed by the mayor and council and serves subject to termination without cause, and whose appointment function is his primary job duty. 
4.  Class or pay grade means a group of positions requiring similar levels of skill, effort, responsibilities, and working conditions. 
5.  Continuous service means employment with the city that is uninterrupted except for authorized leaves of absence, suspension or separation of less than six months due to reduction in work force. 
6.  Demotion means a change in the rank of an employee from a position in one class to a position in another class having a lower minimum pay rate or with less discretion or authority regardless of whether the employee's pay is reduced. 
7.  Dismissal means the termination of an employee for just cause; in the case of appointed employees, termination may be with or without just cause. 
8.  Employee means a person hired for a position in the city government for which he is compensated on a full-time or part-time basis. 
9.  Grievance means any dispute concerning the interpretation of these personnel policies and procedures (other than any decision relative to any disciplinary action) that has adversely affected the aggrieved employee or the threat of which has adversely affected the aggrieved employee, or any charge of unlawful discrimination or unlawful harassment based on sex, age, race, color, national origin, religion, disability or other group affiliations protected by federal law. 
10.  Job description means a document providing a job title and a description of the major duties for any job for City employment. 
11.  Job slot means a job opening for one individual within a specified City department; job slots may be vacant or filled. 
12.  Job title means the official name for any job having a job description. 
13.  Organization chart means a document showing the hierarchy of job titles either within City employment as a whole, or within a single City department. 
14.  Pay schedule or pay plan or position classification plan or classification and pay plan means a document assigning job titles to classes and to an appropriate pay grade based on skill, effort, responsibilities, working conditions and similarities of positions. 
15.  Position means a job slot having a job description. 
16.  Probationary employee means an employee still in the first six months of his appointment, promotion, reemployment or reinstatement to any continuous full-time position. Exception: The probationary period for any newly employed certified police officer position shall be 12 months. 
17.  Lay-off means the separation of an employee from regular service due to lack of work, lack of funds, elimination of the position, or for other material changes in duties or organization. 
18.  Merit increase means an increase in pay for an employee based on the employee's job performance. 
19.  Oral reprimand means an oral communication to an employee warning that a problem exists with his job performance and that such problem must be corrected immediately or further action may be taken. Each department head shall keep a record of all oral reprimands given. 
20.  Overtime means time worked that is in excess of the regular work schedule for the position in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act. 
21.  Part-time employee. An employee who works on a continuing basis, but is scheduled to work 28 hours or less per week. 
22.  Performance evaluation means a written method of evaluating each employee's job performance on a periodic basis. 
23.  Promotion means a change in the rank of an employee from a position in one class to a position in another class having a higher minimum pay rate and carrying a greater scope of discretion and responsibility, or reclassification of an employee's position to a pay class having a higher minimum pay rate and carrying a greater scope of discretion and responsibility. 
24.  Provisional appointment means a current employee appointed to an open position without competition on a temporary basis until applications for the position may be taken. The employee may complete for the position with other applicants. 
25.  Regular employee means an employee who has completed the probationary period in a satisfactory manner. 
26.  Regular employment means the work of all positions with the City except those specifically excluded in this personnel ordinance. 
27.  Regular hourly employee means a full-time employee paid at an hourly rate. 
28.  Reprimand means an oral or written communication to an employee warning that a problem exists with his job performance and such problem must be corrected immediately or further action may be taken. 
29.  Resignation means the termination of the employee at the employee's request. 
30.  Retire or retirement means voluntary or involuntary separation from employment for a pension-eligible employee, where the employee elects to begin receiving his pension benefit immediately after separation. 
31.  Salaried employee means a full-time employee paid on a salary basis, rather than on an hourly basis, including, but not limited to the following: City Manager, Police Chief, and Deputy Police Chief. 
32.  Suspension means an enforced leave of absence of an employee with or without pay for either disciplinary purposes or a pending investigation of charges against an employee. 
33.  Temporary or seasonal employee means an employee hired for a temporary or seasonal position with the City whose length if employment does not exceed 12 months. 
34.  Work cycle means the period of days used as a basis to calculate overtime for hourly employees or required work hours for salaried employees; for employees other than hourly certified Police officers, the work cycle is the seven-day period from Monday at midnight to the following Monday at midnight; for certified Police officers, the work cycle is the 14-day period from a designated Monday at midnight to the Monday at midnight 14 days later. 
35.  Work period means a period of continuous compensable time when an hourly employee works his job, including any paid break time, but excluding any unpaid meal time, and excluding any time on paid or unpaid leave; most Regular Hourly Employees have one morning work period and one afternoon work period per day. 
36.  Working days means, for purposes of time limits in the grievance and disciplinary process and for purposes of Section 6-4, the days of Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, except that any such day or days shall be excluded when they fall on one of the holidays specified in Section 11-4 other than the employee birthday. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. O-2013-24, § 1, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. O-2015-8, § 1 , 2-2-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 7 , 9-21-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 2 , 11-2-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-52 , § 3, 11-2-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-54 , § 1, 11-16-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-74 , § 2, 10-2-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Chapter 3 - PAY SCHEDULE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 3, §§ 3-1—3-8, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 3 pertained to position classification plan. 

Section 3-1. - Generally. 
1.  The Pay Schedule is the official or approved system of grouping positions into appropriate classes (pay grades). The Pay Schedule, including the number of job slots within the City and within any City department, and all amendments to the Pay Schedule are approved by the Mayor and Council. 
2.  Job descriptions, job titles and any amendments to either are approved by the Mayor and Council, but amendments to a job description not affecting the job title may also be approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Section 3-2. - Responsibility for administration. 
The Human Resources Director shall be responsible for administering the Pay Schedule. The Human Resources Director may request other officials or employees to assist in this capacity. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Section 3-3. - Allocation of positions; creation of classes. 
The department head shall provide the Human Resources Director with information on any requested new positions. The Human Resources Director and the department head shall complete a job analysis questionnaire and job description covering the duties and responsibilities of the requested new position, and shall recommend allocation of the new position in a class in the Pay Schedule. If a suitable class does not exist, the Human Resources Director shall request establishment of a new class. The Mayor and Council shall act on these requests. As approved by the Mayor and Council, the Human Resources Director shall allocate said new position in a current class or in a new class in the Pay Schedule. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Section 3-4. - Maintenance of the plan. 
1.  Each time a department, division, or position under a department head is substantially reorganized, it shall be the duty of the department head to submit to the Human Resources Director proposed new job descriptions for all affected positions. 
2.  The Human Resources Director may require departments or employees to submit job descriptions on a periodic basis, or at any time the Human Resources Director has reason to believe that there has been a change in the duties and responsibilities of one or more positions. 
3.  Each time a new class is established by the Mayor and Council, the Human Resources Director shall be responsible for incorporating it within the existing Pay Schedule. The class title shall be added to the schematic list of titles. Likewise, an abolished class title shall be deleted from the Pay Schedule by removing the class title from the schematic list of titles. 
4.  Changes in the Pay Schedule shall be approved by the Mayor and Council. 
5.  Periodically, after the adoption of these policies and procedures, the Human Resources Director shall conduct or have conducted a review of the Pay Schedule. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Section 3-5. - Interpretation of job descriptions. 
The job descriptions for positions are descriptive and not restrictive or exhaustive. The use of a particular description as to duties, qualifications or other factors shall not be held to exclude others of similar kind or quality. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Section 3-6. - Official copy of the schedule. 
The Human Resources Director shall be responsible for maintaining an official copy of the Pay Schedule. The official copy shall include a schematic list of class pay grades and job titles. A copy of the official Pay Schedule shall be available for inspection by the public. The Pay Schedule and any amendment thereto, is incorporated herein by reference and shall be considered a part of this section as if fully set out and shall have the same force and effect as these personnel policies and procedures. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-4 , § 1, 1-16-2018) 
Chapter 4 - APPLICATIONS, EXAMINATIONS, CERTIFICATION OF VACANCY 

Section 4-1. - Request for certification of vacancy. 
When a department head determines that a vacancy exists in his department, a written request shall be made to the Human Resources Director to certify that an opening does exist, to advertise the vacancy, to accept applications, to conduct examinations if necessary, and to certify which applicants are eligible under the provisions of this section. If a new class or job description is required for a vacancy, the department head shall make such request so as to allow sufficient time to amend the Position Classification and Pay Plan. At the Finance Committee's budget planning meeting (typically held annually in June), the Human Resources Director shall report any vacancy that has existed for 12 months without being filled. 
Section 4-2. - Method of filling vacancies. 
Vacancies may be filled by promotion, demotion, transfer, re-employment, new hire, and/or competitive examination, in a manner consistent with Section 4-3. 
Section 4-3. - Announcement of vacant positions. 
1.  Applications from current employees. The policy of the City is to fill a regular service vacancy through promotion or voluntary transfer of a current regular service employee, whenever one or more suitable and interested candidates can be found within the existing workforce, and whenever this is in the best interest of the City. The Human Resources Director will first internally advertise the open position for current regular full-time or salaried employees to have the opportunity to apply before advertising the position to the public. The right of qualified current employees to apply and be considered for a vacant position, before applications are accepted from others, is merely the right to be considered more expeditiously than others, and does not include the right to be preferred for hiring in all cases. The City of Douglasville retains the discretion to reject or defer judgment on any or all applications from qualified and unqualified employee applicants, and to open the application process to non-employees, and to part-time and seasonal workers, after receiving full-time employee applications. 
The Human Resources Director shall internally publicize the vacant position by posting announcements on the official bulletin board in each department or in other places and by such other means as the Human Resources Director deems advisable. The posted notice shall include the classification name, department, pay scale, and the final date in-house applications will be accepted, not less than three calendar days from the date of the posting of the announcement. 
2.  Applications from others. A position not filled by promotion or transfer shall be filled by recruitments from outside the regular service and shall be open to the public. The Human Resources Director shall publicize the position by posting announcements on City Hall's Public Bulletin Board, in each department, and publishing an ad in a newspaper of general circulation and in other places and by such other means as the Human Resources Director deems advisable. The notice shall include the classification name, department, pay scale, and the final date applications will be accepted, not less than three calendar days from the date of publishing the announcement. 
Section 4-4. - Application forms. 
Applications shall be made on forms provided by the Human Resources Director. Such forms shall require information covering training, experience, education, and other pertinent information. The applicant shall supply all information requested in the application and shall sign the application personally. The applicant shall clearly indicate on the application the position or positions for which the applicant is applying. Applications will only be accepted for positions in which there is a publicized vacancy. The Human Resources Director shall keep applications on file for the position for which the person has applied for a period not to exceed six months. 
Section 4-5. - Position requirements. 
All regular service positions shall be filled only by persons who meet the requirements listed on the published announcement of the opening. Such requirements may include but shall not be limited to the following factors: experience, education, training and physical condition. If a particular level of education is required per the position's job description, an official transcript must be submitted in addition to the application form. 
Section 4-6. - Rejection of applications; criminal background checks; credit checks. 
A.  Generally. The Human Resources Director upon consultation with the department head may reject an application which is incomplete or which indicates that the applicant is deficient in any or all of the requirements specified in the position announcement. An applicant may also be rejected for the practice or attempted practice of fraud or deception in the completing of his application, or if his past record of employment is determined to be unsatisfactory by the Human Resources Director. Additionally, an applicant may be rejected for failure to pass or submit to a required work fitness physical examination or test. 
B.  Scope. For purposes of this section, "applicant" or "candidate" means: (a) a non-City-employed individual applying to become employed by the City, or (b) a City employee who is not employed in a security cleared position, and is applying or requesting to be promoted or transferred to a security cleared position, even if that individual has previously held a security cleared position as a City employee; or (c) a City employee who is not employed in a finance sensitive position, and is applying or requesting to be promoted or transferred to a finance sensitive position, even if that individual has previously held a finance sensitive position as a City employee. 
C.  Criminal background checks for job applicants. 
1.  "Security cleared positions" means the city manager; the assistant city manager; all department directors; all employees of the following departments: police, human resources, finance, court services, community and downtown development, legal, and City Clerk; all code enforcement officers; all employees who supervise prisoners; all employees who handle cash or financial transfers; and all employees who handle records that include any of the following: social security numbers, financial account numbers, medical records, tax information other than income amounts for city employees or elected officials, criminal histories of individuals, or juvenile court records. 
2.  All candidates for City jobs who complete a City application shall be checked for criminal background, for both felony and misdemeanor convictions, before proceeding to the interview phase, and shall be informed of this fact on the application form. 
3.  "Conviction" excludes: (a) any sentence based on an accepted plea of no lo contendre, (b) any completed sentence successfully served pursuant the First Offender Act, (c) any conviction which has been expunged from public record, and (d) any adjudication for a juvenile offense. Further, these excluded events shall not be used in any way to determine hiring matters. 
4.  Applicants who apply for a security cleared position shall be fingerprinted and checked in the criminal data base for Georgia, for any state of current or prior residence, and in the national crime database. Additionally, the HR department shall search the internet for information indicating that the applicant may have a criminal conviction in any other state or foreign country, and shall obtain a criminal background search in any other databases indicated. At a minimum, the internet search shall include a query on the applicant's name in all commonly used search engines and social media sites. The sole purpose of the social media search shall be to discover any criminal convictions for the applicant. 
5.  For security cleared positions: 
a.  Any applicant having a felony conviction within the applicant's lifetime, or having a DUI conviction or a theft-related misdemeanor conviction within the last seven years before application shall be excluded from consideration for City employment on that basis, prior to interview, and shall be notified by the HR department of that fact; 
b.  For any applicant who has a criminal conviction, but is not excluded under paragraph 5.a., the applicant shall not be excluded from consideration on this basis, but the criminal background information shall be considered as one of the factors to determine the best candidate for the vacant position, and the applicant shall be notified of this fact after the hiring process is complete by HR. 
6.  Applicants who apply for a position other than a security cleared position shall submit to a criminal background check for the last seven years before application and checked in the criminal data base for Georgia, and for any state of current or prior residence, but not in the national crime database. Additionally, the HR department shall search the internet for information indicating that the applicant may have a criminal conviction in any other state or foreign country within the last seven years before application, and shall obtain a criminal background search in any other databases indicated. At a minimum, the internet search shall include a query on the applicant's name in all commonly used search engines and social media sites. The sole purpose of the social media search shall be to discover any criminal convictions for the applicant. 
7.  For positions other than security cleared positions: 
a.  Any applicant having a felony conviction within the last seven years before application shall be excluded from consideration for City employment on that basis, prior to interview, and shall be notified by the HR department of that fact; 
b.  For any applicant who has a criminal conviction, but is not excluded under paragraph 7.a., the applicant shall not be excluded from consideration on this basis. If the applicant proceeds to the interview phase, he shall be interviewed by the hiring department prior to release of his background information by HR to the hiring department. After his interview, but before a successful applicant is chosen, the HR department shall release the criminal background information to the hiring department to be considered as one of the factors to determine the best candidate for the vacant position, and the applicant shall be notified of this fact after the hiring process is complete by HR. 
D.  Credit checks for job applicants. "Finance sensitive positions" means the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager, all employees of the finance department, and all employees who regularly handle City cash, City credit cards, City purchasing cards or City financial transfers. 
For all finance sensitive positions, all applicants shall submit to a pre-interview credit check by a private firm chosen by the City for this purpose, and the credit information obtained shall be made available to the hiring department prior to the applicant's interview. If such credit information is used as a factor in the decision to not hire the individual, the HR department shall so inform the applicant after the interview. 
(Ord. No. O-2019-9 , § 1, 3-4-2019) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2019-9 , § 1, adopted March 4, 2019, amended § 4-6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 4-6 pertained to rejection of applications. 
Section 4-7. - Exempt positions generally. 
The Human Resources Director is authorized to exempt some positions from all or part of the application, certification and appointment provisions of these Policies and Procedures if, in the opinion of the Human Resources Director, it is impractical to follow the terms hereof because of the position's seasonal characteristics, traditionally high turn-over rate, lack of substantial skills and/or abilities or such other circumstances and conditions which make it difficult to maintain adequate employees in a given area due to the nature of the work and/or the delay caused under these regulations. The Human Resources Director shall maintain a list, as a part of these rules and regulations, of those exempted positions and the nature and extent of their exemption. 
Section 4-8. - Types of exempt positions. 
In addition to those positions designated by the Human Resources Director as exempt from all or part of the application, certification and appointment provisions of these policies and procedures, the following types of positions shall be exempt from the application, certification and appointment provisions of these policies and procedures: 
1.  Appointed employees and adjunct appointees. This category includes, but is not limited to the Police Chief, Development Services Director/City Engineer, Community and Downtown Services Director, Director of Parks and Recreation, City Manager, City Clerk, Finance Director, and the Chief Assistant City Attorney. This category also includes adjunct appointees with regard to their appointed titles. 
2.  Provisional appointments. A provisional appointment may be made only in the absence of a qualified applicant when there is a vacancy need. No provisional appointment filled by a current employee shall be continued for more than six months from the date of appointment, unless due to extenuating circumstances the Human Resources Director approves an additional 60 days and the employee agrees to continue in the provisional appointment. 
An employee hired specifically for a provisional appointment shall be told at the time of appointment that the appointment is for a period not to exceed six months and the provisional appointment shall not obtain regular employment status contemplated by the provisions of this chapter while serving in a provisional appointment. 
3.  Temporary employees. Temporary appointments may be made to fill positions that are authorized and established for a specified period of time, when the work of a department requires the services of one or more employees on a seasonal or intermittent basis, or in cases of emergency. Temporary appointments may be made without the use of applicant examination procedures, if, in the opinion of the Human Resources Director it is impractical to use such procedures. The term of such appointments shall not exceed 12 months unless an extension is approved by the Mayor and Council. Temporary employment shall not work to vest any employee with rights to regular employment. Temporary employees shall have no rights to health insurance, life insurance, pension or other benefits conferred by this ordinance or by other local law as a result of their temporary employment. 
4.  Part-time employees. The Human Resources Director may at his discretion, authorize the filling of part-time positions (having 32 hours or less of work per week) without regard to the certification provisions included in this ordinance. Persons employed on a part-time basis shall have no employee rights to health insurance, life insurance, pension or other benefits conferred by this ordinance or by other local law as a result of their part-time employment 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 3, 8-1-2011; Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 8 , 9-21-2015) 
Section 4-9. - Interpretation. 
The Human Resources Director is authorized to make any necessary administrative interpretations concerning certification and appointment matters not inconsistent with these personnel regulations. 
Section 4-10. - Pre-employment examinations. 
1.  After an initial offer of employment has been made, the applicant will be required to obtain a pre-employment work fitness physical examination at the cost of the City of Douglasville with a doctor of the City's choosing. If the applicant fails the pre-employment physical examination, the applicant may be rejected for failure to pass the physical examination. Police Officer applicants shall be additionally required to pass a psychological and polygraph examination. In addition to Police Officer applicants, certain other Police Department applicants for positions other than Police Officer may be required to pass a polygraph examination. 
2.  Re-employment: Any applicant who is being re-hired is required to take a pre-employment physical if the break in service has exceeded six months. 
Section 4-11. - Political or partisan endorsement prohibited. 
No consideration shall be given to political or partisan endorsement for hiring or promotions to positions in the regular service; only merit and fitness shall be considered. 
Chapter 5 - WAGE ADMINISTRATION 

Section 5-1. - Compensation for new employees. 
Generally, new employees shall be paid the minimum rate of pay for the class, subject to the following exceptions, which require the prior written approval of the City Manager. 
1.  If a job candidate to a particular position does not meet the minimum qualifications stated in the job description or if certain classes of work require a formalized training period which is of an unusual duration, and the needs of the City can best be met by placing that person in that training capacity, then the Human Resources Director and City Manager may designate such a position as a "trainee" position below the minimum class rate of pay. 
2.  If a job candidate exceeds the minimum qualifications as stated in the job description and will not accept the appointment at the minimum rate of the class, the job candidate may be hired at a higher rate if circumstances warrant. Each such appointment shall be thoroughly reviewed against objective qualification standards and shall be approved in writing by the City Manager. Consideration shall be given to the current salaries pay rate of employees whose present salaries pay rates are below the proposed salary pay rate of the job candidate. 
3.  Upon the appointment of any new employee, the Human Resources Director shall process a personnel action form with the necessary information to certify employment status, title and pay rate of such employee. 
Section 5-2. - Promotions. 
An employee is promoted when the employee is transferred to a position with a higher minimum pay rate or the employee's position is reclassified to a pay class having a higher minimum pay rate. Promotions may occur within a department or between departments. See Section 5-12 concerning limits on merit increases for newly promoted employees. See Section 5-13 concerning compensation increases due to promotions. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-18, § 1 , 5-4-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-19 , § 1, 4-3-2017) 
Section 5-3. - Intra-departmental transfers. 
The appropriate department head may, at any time, transfer an employee in the regular service under his jurisdiction from one position to another in the same class in the same department and within the same pay range. The Human Resources Director shall be notified of such changes in assignment. The transferred employee shall continue at the same rate of pay as before the transfer and shall be eligible for pay increases provided herein. 
Section 5-4. - Inter-departmental transfers. 
A transfer of an employee from one department to another shall require the approval of both department heads concerned and the Human Resources Director. The transfer must be to an open position within the same class and pay range as the position currently held by the employee. Request for such a transfer shall state how the employee meets the qualification requirements of the position to which the transfer is proposed. The transferred employee shall continue at the same rate of pay as before the transfer and shall be eligible for pay increases provided herein. 
Section 5-5. - Voluntary demotion. 
An employee may be demoted upon his own written request to a vacant position in a lower class, subject to the approval of the Human Resources Director and department head. The Human Resources Director shall determine whether the employee is qualified to perform the duties and responsibilities of the lower classified position. An employee who is voluntarily demoted may have his pay reduced to reflect reduced responsibilities as determined by the Human Resources Director and the department head. The pay rate shall not exceed the maximum rate for his new class, except as provided for in Sections 5-11 and 5-12. 
Section 5-6. - Demotions due to disciplinary action. 
When an employee is demoted to a lower classification position due to disciplinary action taken by the City, the employee shall be paid at a rate within the approved range for the lower classified position. The new rate of pay within the lower classification shall be set by the Human Resources Director, the City Manager and the department head taking into consideration the circumstances surrounding and the reasons for the demotion. 
Section 5-7. - Demotion by reallocation of classification. 
When an employee's position is reallocated (by reason other than general service-wide reductions) to a lower classification and the employee's present pay rate is above the maximum for the lower classification, the employee shall be permitted to remain at the present pay rate, as long as the employee remains continuously employed by the City and the employee's job performance remains satisfactory, but the employee shall not be entitled to a pay increase. 
Section 5-8. - Reinstated employees. 
A reinstated employee shall be paid at a pay rate within the approved pay range for the position to which the employee is reinstated. The rate of pay shall be set by the Human Resources Director and the City Manager, after consultation with the appropriate department head. 
Section 5-9. - Part-time and temporary employment. 
The rate of pay for part-time and temporary employment in a position shall be equivalent to the rate of pay for regular full-time employment in the same or substantially the same positions. Part-time and temporary employees shall have no employee rights to health insurance, life insurance, pension or other benefits conferred by this ordinance or by other local law as a result of their part-time or temporary employment. 
(Ord. No. 2011-29, § 4, 8-1-2011) 
Section 5-10. - Overtime. 
1.  Identification. Overtime is work beyond the scheduled work cycle as provided by the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act. Leave time used by an employee shall not be included in calculating the number of hours worked for purposes of determining overtime compensation. Excluded leave time means, without limitation, holiday leave, annual (vacation) leave, compensatory time leave, sick leave, donated sick leave, advanced sick leave, bereavement leave, leave of absence without pay, time on suspension, family and medical leave, civil leave, worker's compensation leave, military leave, trading days, and absence without leave. 
2.  Eligibility. All Regular Hourly Employees shall be eligible to be compensated for overtime. 
3.  Qualification for overtime. An hourly employee, other than an hourly certified Police officer, qualifies for overtime pay when he works more than 40 hours during the seven-day work cycle from Monday at midnight to the following Monday at midnight. An hourly certified Police officer qualifies for overtime when he works more than 86 hours during a 14-day work cycle. Salaried employees do not qualify for overtime, but may earn additional income from designated special assignments. 
4.  Approval of overtime. No employee shall work overtime without approval by that employee's immediate supervisor. Except for emergency or unusual situations, authorized overtime shall be approved by the supervisor in advance. Except as provided in Section 11-1(2), when the supervisor verifies the compensation time record for any employee who worked overtime, the supervisor shall note in writing in the time record why the overtime was justified or needed by the City for that pay period, or in the alternative shall note that the overtime was unauthorized. Payment for overtime worked shall not, alone, constitute supervisor authorization for the employee to have incurred the overtime. 
5.  Compensation. When a Regular Hourly Employee works overtime, the employee shall be paid for overtime in his next payroll check; compensatory time shall not be awarded for any work on or after July 28, 2014. 
6.  Accumulation of compensatory time. When a Regular Hourly Employee has been compensated for overtime hours worked by receiving compensatory time leave, said time is held until used by the employee, or until employment terminates. 
7.  Payment for compensatory time leave. When an employee's employment with the City is terminated for any reason, he shall be entitled to be paid for any unused compensatory time leave. Whenever an employee has accumulated compensatory time and wishes to be paid for all or any part of said time, the City shall pay the employee, within 21 calendar days after receiving the employee's written request. For each hour of such compensatory time cashed, each hourly employee shall be paid at the regular base hourly rate he is earning at the time of termination or request, and each salaried employee shall be paid at the rate of 0.00048 times their annual salary at the time of termination or request. Whenever the employee owes a debt to the City for Work Matching Training at the time his employment terminates or whenever he requests to be paid for accrued compensatory time, the balance of that debt may be set off against any compensatory time as provided in Chapter 9. 
8.  Use of compensatory time. Use of compensatory time leave will be scheduled at the discretion of each department head. 
9.  Record of compensatory time. Detailed records of the accumulation and usage of compensatory time shall be maintained by the Human Resources Department. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-6, § 1, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. O-2013-22, § 1, 4-1-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-14, § 1, 7-21-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-8, § 2 , 2-2-2015) 
Section 5-11. - Cost of living pay increases. 
All pay increases shall become effective when approved by resolution of the Mayor and City Council. It shall be in the sole discretion of the Mayor and Council to award or not to award a general service-wide cost of living increase and to set the rate of increase if one is approved. Such an increase shall be considered periodically and if awarded by the Mayor and Council, it shall become effective as specified by the Mayor and Council. 
All regular full-time and part-time employees shall receive the cost of living pay increases, notwithstanding whether or not an employee otherwise is receiving the maximum pay rate for his class in the classification plan. 
Section 5-12. - Merit pay increases. 
Employees may be considered eligible for a merit pay increase only if the employee has completed 12 months of continuous employment with the City, the employee is not at the maximum pay rate within his class, and the employee has not had a promotion within the last 12 months. The Mayor and City Council will decide the maximum amount of the pay rate increases, which could be granted for the upcoming year to the appointed employees resulting from their performance evaluations. The City Manager will perform an annual performance evaluation of each appointed employee under his supervision, with a report on said evaluations to be made to the Mayor and City Council. The Mayor shall provide an annual evaluation of the City Manager, with a report of said evaluation to be made to the City Council. Non-appointed employees shall be evaluated by their supervisors. All personnel records, tardiness, absenteeism, job performance, job productivity, length of service and other relevant factors shall be considered, with major emphasis to be placed on the objective job performance evaluation. 
Such increases may be considered periodically, and may be considered for certain classes of employees only. If merit pay increases are awarded by the Mayor and Council, the increases shall become effective for the specified employees at a time chosen by the City Manager. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-34, § 1 , 8-3-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-56, § 1 , 12-5-2016; Ord. No. O-2017-19 , § 1, 4-3-2017) 
Section 5-13. - Other compensation increases. 
1.  Discretionary increases. In the sole discretion of the Mayor and Council, raises in compensation may be granted from time to time to individual employees. Any such increase shall not exceed the maximum for the pay range for employee's job description. 
2.  Designated duty increases. Certain optional and continuing designated duties for fulltime employees require additional training or entail additional physical risk for the employee, or additional duties for a salaried employee; therefore, it is appropriate to pay additional compensation to the employees performing any of these tasks. Under ordinary circumstances, no employee shall be approved for designated duty during his initial probationary period. 
a.  Flat pay. A properly authorized employee who initially undertakes any of the designated duties named in this section, in addition to the fulltime duties stated in his job description where applicable, shall receive a pay increase which will become effective upon accepting the duty assignment. The increase will be paid during such time as the employee continues to perform the designated duty. For employees who began a designated duty prior to February 5, 2019, once the employee has performed the designated duty for at least four consecutive years, the employee's pay increase for the same shall become vested and shall not be forfeited due to the employee ceasing to perform the designated duty. For employees who begin a designated duty on or after February 5, 2019, once the employee has ceased to perform the designated duty, the employee's pay increase for the same shall cease. A single employee may be compensated simultaneously for multiple designated duties, but no employee shall receive more than one pay increase for the same designated duty, should any vested employee separate from a designated duty and then later return to the same designated duty or assignment. 
The exhaustive list of flat pay designated duties are: Police SWAT unit snipers and entry team officers to be paid an increase at the rate of $96.00 every two weeks, Police School Resource Officers to be paid an increase at the rate of $58.00 every two weeks, Police Motorcycle officers to be paid an increase at the rate of $58.00 every two weeks, FIND unit officers to be paid an increase at the rate of $58.00 every two weeks, and honor guard members to be paid an increase at the rate of $38.00 every two weeks. SWAT candidates shall serve a probationary period of one year before acceptance as a SWAT team member and before any increase shall begin to accrue or be paid. Any increase or decrease in pay for designated duties shall begin on the first full pay period after processing of the PAF form authorizing the change. 
b.  Additional hours. Police employees who work as canine officers shall be paid for an additional 12 hours per pay period for off-duty time spent feeding, grooming, bonding with and caring for their assigned canine. Once the employee has ceased to serve as a canine officer, the designated duty pay increase for that duty shall cease. 
3.  Promotions to a position in a higher class. 
a.  Promotion to an open position. Where an employee is to be promoted to a vacant position in a higher class with a higher pay range, the department head may promote an employee to the open position with the approval of the City Manager, and without approval of the Mayor and Council. If the new position is a salaried position, then the new rate of pay shall be at least the minimum amount for the class of the new position, and the pay rate may be higher upon approval of the department head and the City Manager. If the new position is an hourly position, then the new rate of pay shall be the higher of the minimum amount for the class of the new position or 103 percent of the base pay, excluding bonuses and overtime pay, of the current position. The promotion and setting of the pay rate shall be established by processing a personnel action form to the Human Resources Department. 
b.  Creation of a position with an existing job description. Where an employee is to be promoted to a position with an existing job description in a higher class for which there is no current vacancy, the new position must first be approved by the mayor and council. Thereafter, the new rate of pay for that individual shall be set. If the new position is a salaried position, then the new rate of pay shall be at least the minimum amount for the class of the new position, and the pay rate may be higher upon approval of the department head and the City Manager. If the new position is an hourly position, then the new rate of pay shall be the higher of the minimum amount for the class of the new position or 103 percent of the base pay, excluding bonuses and overtime pay, of the current position. The promotion and setting of the pay rate shall be established by processing a personnel action form to the Human Resources Department. 
c.  Exception for promotion to City Manager. As an exception to subparagraphs a. and b. above, whenever any employee is promoted to the position of City Manager, the new salary for that individual shall be set by the Mayor and City Council. The promotion and setting of the pay rate shall be formalized by processing a personnel action form to the Human Resources Department. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-18, § 3 , 5-4-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-22, § 1 , 6-15-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-34, § 2 , 8-3-2015; Ord. No. O-2019-8 , § 1, 2-4-2019) 
Section 5-14. - Payroll changes. 
For every properly authorized change of pay rate or employee status change, the Human Resources Director shall process a personnel action form. 
For every properly authorized change of pay rate or employee status change, the Human Resources Department shall process a personnel action form signed by the department head and the City Manager. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-18, § 3 , 5-4-2015) 
Section 5-15. - Payroll adjustments. 
1.  Adjustments other than hours discrepancies. Except as provided in subsection 2, each department head shall be responsible for immediately notifying the Human Resources Director of any occurrences or actions taken which require any adjustment in the wages of any employee under the supervision of such department head, and for obtaining the approval of the City Manager. Upon receipt of such notice, the Human Resources Director shall make such payroll adjustments for such employee as may be required. Payroll adjustments for voluntary deductions approved by the employee do not require a personnel action form. 
Whenever a director learns that any employee in his department is within six weeks of separating from City employment, the department head shall notify the Human Resources Director of the anticipated date and type of separation, and shall inform the Director of: 
a.  all equipment in the possession of the subject employee which must be returned, and its approximate fair market value; and 
b.  any unpaid sums owed to the City by the employee for work-matching training, for unreimbursed training and travel expenses paid for by the City but not attended by the employee, for damage to City property by the employee, and for other sums owed to the City by the employee. 
Thereafter, the Director shall give written notice to the employee of any sum owed to the City and any equipment which must be returned. All final paychecks to employees shall be on paper. The Director shall deduct from a separating employee's pay all amounts owed to the City. 
2.  Hours discrepancies . Each employee shall review his payroll report for accuracy prior to the normal payroll deadline which occurs on alternate Mondays, three days prior to the normal payday on alternate Thursdays. Salaried employees shall promptly notify the Human Resources Director of any inaccuracies concerning use of leave time, so that these may be corrected. For each payroll report, hourly employees shall: 
a.  Prior to the payroll deadline, sign their approval or electronically approve the report for accuracy; or 
b.  Prior to the payroll deadline, decline to sign the payroll report initial payroll report, and notify the Human Resources Director of any corrections that are needed; thereafter, if the corrected payroll report is conformed to the employee's request, the hourly employee shall sign his approval or electronically approve the corrected payroll report within three working day of its presentation to him; or 
c.  Within ten working days after the payroll deadline, the employee shall file a written grievance with the Human Resources Department contesting the accuracy of the payroll report; provided however, no employee shall file multiple or consecutive grievances alleging substantially the same issue with regard to his pay, after the issue has been decided on a final basis in accordance with the grievance procedure of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-18, § 3 , 5-4-2015; Ord. No. O-2018-11 , § 1, 3-19-2018; Ord. No. O-2018-53 , § 1, 12-3-2018) 
Section 5-16. - Recovery of wages improperly paid. 
Employees, officials, and others may be held liable for the return of wages improperly or illegally paid in accordance with the provisions of the Personnel Ordinance, these regulations and pertinent City and State statutes concerning improperly and/or illegal expenditures of public funds. 
Section 5-17. - Voluntary deductions. 
Upon the written request of any employee, the Human Resources Director may provide for automatic payroll deductions for such employee, in such amount as the employee shall specify, for the purpose of contributing to personal savings plans, pensions or other personal financial investment plans in which the City in its sole discretion decides to participate. 
Section 5-18. - Pay plan in effect. 
The Pay Plan included in the "Proposed Pay Schedule" for the City of Douglasville, and adopted by resolution of the Mayor and Council, shall remain in effect as adopted and modified in accordance with procedures set out herein. 
Section 5-19. - Modification and amendments to pay plan. 
The Human Resources Director, when deemed necessary or as requested by the Mayor and Council, shall cause the Pay Plan to be examined at least every other fiscal year. Based on such review the Human Resources Director shall make any recommendations for amendments, as deemed advisable. When approved by resolution of the Mayor and Council, such amended Pay Plan shall constitute the City's pay schedule for the classes of positions for regular employees. 
Section 5-20. - Bonus pay. 
In the sole discretion of the Mayor and Council, bonus compensation may be awarded from time to time, seasonally or in accordance with programs established and approved by resolution of the Mayor and Council. Bonuses, if any, are not a condition of employment; the City reserves the right to modify, revoke, suspend interpret, terminate or change any or all bonus resolutions, plans, policies or procedures in whole or in part at any time, with or without prior notice. 
Chapter 6 - PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES 

Section 6-1. - Objective. 
The probationary period shall be an integral part of the selection process and shall be utilized for closely observing the employee's performance, to allow effective adjustment to a new position and for releasing a new employee or demoting a promoted employee whose work is not satisfactory in the new position. 
Section 6-2. - Conflict with other provisions. 
Whenever the provisions of this chapter are in conflict with other provisions of these policies and procedures regarding probationary employees, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. 
Section 6-3. - Duration. 
Except for non-certified Police Officers, the probationary period shall be regarded as the initial six months of employment with the city and the initial six months in a new position when a current employee is promoted. This probationary period may be extended upon written notice to the employee from his immediate supervisor detailing the reasons for such extension. 
The probationary period for new hires in the Police Department for positions requiring P.O.S.T. certification shall be 12 months. This probationary period for certified Police Officers shall not be extended. The probationary period for employees promoted within the Police Department shall remain six months, unless the employee is being promoted from a non-certified position to a P.O.S.T. certified position. 
Section 6-4. - Dismissal during probationary period. 
1.  If at any time during the probationary period a new employee's work is unsatisfactory or the employee's work habits and dependability do not merit continued employment then he or she may be dismissed and he will not be entitled to appeal such dismissal to the City Manager. Upon such removal, a written report shall be sent to the Human Resources Director and to the employee stating the reasons for the removal. 
2.  If an employee has committed an offense that is considered cause for disciplinary action under the provisions of these regulations, he may be dismissed without prior notice and shall not be entitled to appeal such dismissal to the City Manager. Upon such removal, a written report shall be sent to the Human Resources Director and to the employee stating the reasons for the removal. 
3.  If an employee is found to have been appointed through fraud or error, the employee shall be removed within five calendar days of notification to the department head of the problem. 
4.  If at any time during employment with the City of Douglasville it is determined that an employee does not have the necessary educational degree or certification required for the position classification requirements, the employee may be dismissed. 
5.  A department head may, subject to the approval of the Human Resources Director, demote an employee to a lower class position during the probationary period. 
6.  A promoted appointee may be demoted back to a position in the previous pay classification during the probationary period for unsatisfactory work. The reasons for such dismissal or demotion shall be filed with the Human Resources Director and shall be placed in the employee's file within three working days of such dismissal or demotion. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 9, 9-21-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 4 , 11-2-2015) 
Section 6-5. - Probationary period evaluations. 
Within ten days of the expiration of the probationary appointment, the immediate supervisor of the employee shall complete an evaluation of the probationary employee and such evaluation shall be filed with the Human Resources Director. At the completion of a promotional employee's probationary period, his department head shall notify the Human Resources Director in writing if the employee has satisfactorily completed the probationary period. Failure to send such reports to the Human Resources Director within ten working days of the completion of the probationary period shall be construed as satisfactory completion of the probationary period. 
Chapter 7 - EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS 

Section 7-1. - Evaluations; objective. 
The Human Resources Director shall prepare or cause to be prepared a system for evaluating the work performance of all full-time and part-time regular employees. The purpose of the employee performance evaluation shall be primarily to inform employees of how well they are performing their work and how they can improve their work performance. The performance evaluation may also be used as a factor in determining order of lay-off, as a basis for training, promotion, demotion, transfer or dismissal, and for such other purposes as set forth in these regulations. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-55, § 1 , 12-5-2016) 
Section 7-2. - Periodic evaluations. 
Employees in the probationary period of employment or following a promotion shall be evaluated at the completion of six months of service in the new position. Thereafter, employees shall be evaluated periodically. No employee shall be eligible for any merit pay increase until the performance evaluation form has been completely processed. 
Section 7-3. - Evaluation; processing. 
Evaluations shall be prepared by the immediate supervisor of each employee and reviewed by the appropriate department head and Human Resources Director. Appointed employees who serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and City Council, other than the City Manager, shall be evaluated by the City Manager, with a report on said evaluations to be made to the Mayor and City Council. The City Manager shall be evaluated by the Mayor, with a report of said evaluation to the City Council. 
An employee who has served in a supervisory position and is leaving that position may be required to submit performance evaluations on all employees under his supervision who have not been evaluated during the previous six months. 
Section 7-4. - Review with employee. 
The evaluator shall discuss each performance evaluation with the employee being evaluated, except for evaluations prepared at the time of separation of an employee from service with the City. If an employee disagrees with any statement in an evaluation, he may submit within ten working days following the conference with the evaluator, a written statement to the Human Resources Director, which shall be attached to the evaluation form. The Human Resources Director shall forward a copy of any written employee statements to the evaluator. Upon written request from the employee to the Human Resources Director, an official copy of the employee performance evaluation form shall be given to the employee. 
Section 7-5. - Changes in evaluation. 
If for any reason an evaluator shall request an alteration of the performance evaluation form after it has been officially submitted to the Human Resources Director, such request shall be in writing and shall set forth fully the reasons for the request. The amended evaluation, when approved by the Human Resources Director, shall become the official performance evaluation. The employee shall be notified of any such changes that occur after the employee review conference and shall be given an opportunity within ten working days to file any written statements as to the amended evaluation. 
Chapter 8 - DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS/PERSONNEL APPEALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Except as otherwise provided for in the General Statutes of the State of Georgia, the following provisions shall govern disciplinary actions affecting employees. 

Section 8-1. - Intent. 
Effective supervision and good employee relations should reduce instances necessitating disciplinary action. The establishment of rules and regulations and the imposition of disciplinary action for the violation thereof are to insure the rights of all employees and for the cooperation by all employees of the City. The severity of the disciplinary action imposed should be related to the gravity of the offense, the employee's disciplinary record, and disciplinary action taken in similar cases. Any disciplinary action shall be for just cause (except as relating to actions of the Mayor and Council against appointed employees). The City shall not allow unlawful discrimination against any employee because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, age, national origin, physical handicap, or political affiliation. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45; § 10, 9-21-2015) 
Section 8-2. - Appointed employees. 
Appointed employees may be disciplined by the City Manager or by the Mayor and Council as provided in City Charter Section 3.10. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45; § 10 , 9-21-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 10 , adopted Sept. 21, 2015, amended § 8-2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-2 pertained to annually appointed employees. 
Section 8-3. - Conduct subject to disciplinary action. 
The following actions may constitute just cause for disciplinary action referred to in this chapter, but the imposition of disciplinary action shall not be limited to the offenses set forth: 
1.  Commission of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, involving conduct occurring on City property or within a City vehicle, or involving conduct occurring while on the job for the City, or directly affecting the employee's ability to perform his job; provided however, no employee shall be disciplined for any crime committed prior to beginning employment with the City. 
2.  Excessive absenteeism. 
3.  Absence without leave or failure to report after the expiration of an authorized leave. (Refer to Section 8-4 on Absence Without Leave.) 
4.  Excessive tardiness. (Refer to Section 8-5, Tardiness.) 
5.  Abuse of sick leave. 
6.  Insubordination or serious breach of proper discipline. 
7.  Inefficiency or incompetence. 
8.  Abuse or theft of City property. 
9.  The borrowing of City equipment for personal use without prior official permission. 
10.  The loss of job requirements, such as the loss of a necessary license or certification, which prevents the adequate performance of assigned duties. 
11.  The willful making of false statements to supervisors, officials, the public, boards or other individuals during the performance of duties. 
12.  The violation of City ordinances, administrative regulations or departmental rules. 
13.  The consumption, sale, or possession of alcoholic beverages and/or illegal substances while at work. 
14.  Under the influence of intoxicants on the job. 
15.  The discovery of a false statement on job application. 
16.  Acceptance of gratuities in conflict with the policy outlined in Section 18-2 of this section. 
17.  The refusal, when so directed, to be examined by a licensed physician designated by the City. 
18.  Political activity during working hours or in violation of City Code Chapter 2, Article V, Division 1, Section 2-176. 
19.  Engaging in lewd conduct or use of profane language toward the public, supervisory personnel, or fellow employees. 
20.  Refusal to submit to urinalysis, polygraph, intoximeter, blood test, examination by a licensed professional, when a department head has determined that individual cause exists for such a test to be given to a particular employee. 
21.  Violation of the City's Alcohol and Controlled Substance Policy. 
22.  Violation of the City's Unlawful Harassment Policy. 
23.  Violation of Section 17-8 regarding conflicts of interest. 
24.  Violation of the City's adopted Purchasing Policy. 
25.  Violation of the City's Policy on Signing Contracts. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-24, § 2, 4-15-2013; Ord. No. O-2015-45; § 10 , 9-21-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-55 , § 1, 8-21-2017) 
Section 8-4. - Absence without leave. 
Failure to report for duty, including any failure immediately following the expiration of authorized leave, will be grounds for discipline. Failure to report for three consecutive workdays shall be grounds for termination, even though the employee may have had no previous disciplinary incidents. 
Section 8-5. - Tardiness. 
An hourly employee who is late in reporting for work without a reasonable excuse is tardy. Reasonableness of any excuse shall be determined by the employee's supervisor in his sound discretion. A supervisor may require any reasonable excuse for lateness to work to be submitted in writing and signed by the employee. Lateness in reporting for work without a reasonable excuse (tardiness) shall be punished as follows: 
a.  Oral reprimand for tardiness. Tardiness shall be punished by discipline not more severe than an oral reprimand for any violation when the employee has had no other tardies within the last 60 days, and no other disciplinary incident during the last six months for which the employee has received discipline more severe than an oral reprimand. 
b.  Written reprimand for tardiness . The following instances of tardiness shall be punished by discipline not more severe than a written reprimand: 
i.  A second tardy violation within any 60-day period, if the employee has had no other disciplinary incident during the last six months for which the employee has received discipline more severe than an oral reprimand; or 
ii.  A single tardy violation within six months after a disciplinary incident for which the employee has received discipline more severe than an oral reprimand. 
c.  Other discipline for tardiness . Discipline more severe than a written reprimand, including but not limited to suspension or termination, may be given for tardy violations other than those described above, including but not limited to the following conduct: 
i.  A third or subsequent tardy within any 60-day period; or 
ii.  A second or subsequent tardy, both (or all) within six months after a disciplinary incident for which the employee has received discipline more severe than an oral reprimand. 
Other employee tardiness and repeated disregard for established work schedules shall be punished in a progressively severe manner within the sound discretion of the employee's supervisor, taking into account the number of tardy incidents, the length of the time period over which the tardy incidents have occurred, and the general disciplinary history of the employee. 
Section 8-6. - Types of disciplinary actions. 
A department head, subject to the appeal rights of the employee stated herein, shall have the following alternatives for disciplinary action for non-appointed employees, and the City Manager and the Mayor and Council shall have these alternatives for disciplinary action for appointed employees: 
1.  Reprimands. 
a.  Oral reprimands. An oral reprimand is a progressive discipline measure that may be issued for an incident, action or behavior that does not warrant more severe disciplinary action. In the oral reprimand, the supervisor will verbally explain to the employee that he is being reprimanded, describe the problem, and indicate what must be done to correct the problem. 
b.  Written reprimands. Where the incident, action or behavior of the employee is such as not to warrant an initially more severe type of disciplinary action, in the determination of the supervisor, a written reprimand may be issued. The written reprimand may be issued for but not limited to the following offenses: following an oral reprimand upon the failure of an employee to correct a problem, unauthorized absence from duty for less than three days, abuse of sick leave privileges, frequent unexcused tardiness, inattention to duty, insubordination, improper conduct, loss or destruction of City property. Written reprimands shall be issued by the department head to the affected employee and a copy given to the Human Resources Director to be placed in the employee's personnel file. The department head shall discuss the reprimand with the employee and provide in the written reprimand a description of the offense committed, action necessary to correct problem, and provide the employee with an opportunity to provide a written response to be placed with the reprimand in the employee's personnel file. 
2.  Suspension. A department head may, for disciplinary purposes, suspend an employee with or without pay for a length of time as he considers appropriate, not to exceed 20 working days. A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for such suspension and the length of such suspension shall be furnished to the affected employee and a copy of same shall be sent to the Human Resources Director and filed in the personnel file of such employee within three working days of the effective date of such action. 
3.  Demotion. With the prior approval of the Human Resources Director, a department head may reduce the salary of an employee within the range provided in the Pay Plan or demote the employee for cause to a lower grade. A written statement of the reasons for such action shall be furnished to the affected employee and a copy of same forwarded to the Human Resources Director to be placed in the employee's personnel file at least five working days prior to the effective date. 
4.  Dismissals. A department head may dismiss an employee for just cause, which may include, but is not limited to, dismissals for delinquency, misconduct, inefficiency, and inability to perform the work of the position satisfactorily. The department head shall discuss with the employee the reason for the offense for which dismissal is contemplated and provide the affected employee an opportunity to explain his actions. If the department head is not satisfied with the explanation given, the employee may be dismissed. A written statement specifically setting forth the reasons for such dismissal shall be furnished by the department head to the affected employee and a copy of same shall be sent to the Human Resources Director and filed in the personnel file of such employee within three working days of the effective date of such action. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45; § 11 , 9-21-2015) 
Section 8-7. - Notification of proposed discipline to non-appointed employees and the right to appeal. 
No non-appointed employee shall be subjected to discipline unless the employee has been found to have willfully or negligently violated: (a) some policy of this section, (b) the lawful work-related instructions of his superior, or (c) some reasonable customary work practice or standard of work within his department or division. Every employee subjected to discipline shall have the right to receive prior written notice of the cause for such proposed disciplinary action from his supervisor or the department head, and shall have the right to be heard in response, prior to imposition of any discipline. Any written notice submitted to a non-appointed employee who is being subjected to disciplinary action more severe than a verbal reprimand shall set forth the right of the employee to appeal such action in the manner set forth in Section 8-8. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 5 , 11-2-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 5 , adopted Nov. 2, 2015, amended § 8-7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-7, pertained to notification of right to appeal. 
Section 8-8. - Disciplinary appeals for non-appointed employees. 
1.  Any non-appointed employee receiving discipline other than a mere verbal reprimand, has the right to appeal such matter directly to the department head over his department. If the department head is the individual who issued the disciplines to be appealed, then the employee's appeal shall serve as a request for reconsideration, and shall not be considered futile and shall not be dispensed with on such basis. Any appeal to the department head shall be initiated by the employee's filing of a written notice of appeal to the department head with the Human Resources Director; all notices of appeals from employee discipline shall be filed with the Human Resources Director not later than five working days after the employee's receipt of written notice of imposition of the discipline; failure to file an appeal within the five-day limit shall constitute waiver of the employee's appeal rights. The exclusive methods for delivering a written appeal to the Human Resources Director at any stage of any appeal under this section shall be: 
a.  An e-mail correctly addressed and sent to the Human Resources Director by 5:00 p.m. on the fifth working day; or 
b.  A written letter delivered by anyone in person to the Human Resources Director at his office or to any employee of the Human Resources Department at his desk by 5:00 p.m. on the fifth working day; or 
c.  By certified mail correctly addressed to the Human Resources Director and post marked not later than the fifth working day. 
A decision on such matter shall be made by the department head and furnished in writing to the Human Resources Director and to the employee within seven working days after the date of filing of the employee's appeal. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the department head, within five working days of receiving a written notice of the decision the employee may request an appeal to the City Manager by submitting a written request to the Human Resources Director. Failure to file an appeal within the five-day time limit shall constitute waiver of the employee's right to further appeal. 
2.  The employee's case for appeal from the decision of the department head shall be heard by the City Manager, who shall meet with the employee and the department head, separately or together, to discuss the disciplinary matter. Although the employee may have an attorney present at his meeting with the City Manager, the City Manager is not required to allow the attorney to speak or participate in the discussion. If the employee declines to meet with the City Manager when requested to do so, the right to such meeting shall be considered forfeited by the employee, and the City Manager may decide the appeal without meeting with the employee. The City Manager's meeting with the department head may be conducted by telephone. All such appeal meetings with the City Manager shall be conducted informally, and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. 
The appeals process is not intended to guarantee the employee the right to confront any evidence against him, the right to present witnesses, nor the right to due process, but is intended merely to assure that there is some factual basis to support any discipline against an employee. 
The City Manager shall give the employee a written decision on any disciplinary or grievance matter within 16 working days of the filing date for the employee's written appeal to the City Manager. The City Manager's decision shall make findings on the following issues: 
a.  The conduct complained of in the notice is (or is not) a valid basis for discipline pursuant to this section as stated in Section 8-7; 
If the city manager fails to find that the conduct complained of in the notice is a valid basis for discipline pursuant to this section as stated in Section 8-7, the notice shall stand dismissed, the discipline previously imposed shall be reversed, and no further finding shall be required for the appeal. 
b.  Based on information provided to or known to the city manager, it is (or is not) more likely than not that the employee committed the prohibited conduct stated in the notice; and 
If the city manager fails to find that it is more likely than not that the employee committed the prohibited conduct stated in the notice, then the notice shall stand dismissed, the discipline previously imposed shall be reversed, and no further finding shall be required for the appeal. 
c.  The discipline imposed or confirmed by the department head is appropriate and shall stand; or the discipline imposed is too harsh or too lenient and shall be modified to be as stated in the city manager's decision; or that no discipline is appropriate and none shall be imposed, and the discipline previously imposed shall be reversed; or that the employee and the city manager have reached an agreement for alternative resolution of the matter which shall be reduced to writing, signed by both parties, and become a condition of the employee's continued employment. 
3.  The employee shall be promptly notified in writing by the Human Resources Director of the final determination of the City Manager with respect to the disciplinary appeal. The decision of the City Manager shall be final. 
4.  The failure of the employee to follow the steps outlined above may result in the dismissal of the appeal at any step. Should the employee file a written dismissal of any appeal previously requested, the appeal may not be later revived. 
5.  No punitive, discriminatory or adverse action shall be taken against any employee on account of the filing of a grievance or an appeal. 
6.  All time limits prescribed in this Section 8-8, other than those for filing of appeals by the employee, are merely directory, and a failure of City staff (other than the employee) to meet them shall not work to entitle the employee to any advantage concerning the merits of the appeal decision. Upon request and for good cause, the City Manager may extend the time for processing any appeal in advance of any processing deadline, until and including the time for issuance of his own decision in the matter. 
7.  Appointed personnel are not covered by the grievance and appeal provisions of this Section 8-8 and have no right of appeal from discipline. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 5 , 11-2-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-74 , § 3, 10-2-2017) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 5 , adopted Nov. 2, 2015, amended § 8-8 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-8, pertained to personnel appeals board and derived from Ord. No. O-2014-36, § 1, adopted July 2, 2014. 
Section 8-9. - Grievances. 
1.  Any employee may file with the Human Resources Director a written grievance alleging: (a) misinterpretation or misapplication of these personnel policies and procedures (other than any decision relative to any disciplinary action) that has adversely affected the aggrieved employee or the threat of which has adversely affected the aggrieved employee, or (b) any charge of unlawful discrimination or unlawful harassment in his employment based on sex, age, race, color, national origin, religion, disability or other group affiliations protected by federal law. 
Within seven business days after the filing of any purported grievance, the Chief Assistant City Attorney shall make a written determination, as to whether the filed materials allege unlawful discrimination or unlawful harassment. The decision of the Chief Assistant City Attorney in this regard shall be final and not appealable. Grievances alleging unlawful discrimination or unlawful harassment shall be handled as provided in Chapter 17 of this ordinance. All other grievances shall be handled as provided in paragraphs 2. and 3. of this section. 
2.  Other written grievances shall state with specificity each and every issue for which the employee seeks redress and the remedy proposed by the employee, and shall provide the relevant section number and any paragraph number of this section. If the subject matter of the grievance fails to allege facts or issues regarding interpretation or application of this section, the Chief Assistant City Attorney may dismiss the grievance without need for further proceedings; any such dismissal is not appealable. The decision of the Chief Assistant City Attorney to dismiss or to certify to proceed shall be made and communicated in writing by the Human Resources Director to the employee not later than 16 business days after filing of the grievance. 
3.  If the Chief Assistant City Attorney certifies the grievance as alleging misinterpretation or misapplication of these personnel policies and procedures (other than any decision relative to any disciplinary action) that has adversely affected the aggrieved employee or the threat of which has adversely affected the aggrieved employee, then the Human Resources Director shall consider the grievance on the merits, and communicate to the employee written decision regarding the proper interpretation and application of the subject matter for the grievance. Such written decision of the Human Resources Director shall be communicated in writing to the employee not later than 16 business days after certification of the grievance by the Chief Assistant City Attorney. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Human Resources Director, within five working days of receiving a written notice of the decision, the employee may request an appeal to the City Manager by submitting a written request to the Human Resources Director. Failure to file an appeal within the five-day time limit shall constitute waiver of the employee's right to further appeal. 
4.  On appeal of a certified grievance, the City Manager shall meet with the appealing employee; the City Manager may additionally meet with the Human Resources Director, and any other department head or employee, separately or together, to discuss the matter and gain an understanding of the relevant issue(s). Within 16 business days after filing of the appeal, the City Manager shall issue a written decision addressing the issues, and may implement an equitable, so long as such remedy does not contradict established law or exceed the lawful authority of the City Manager. Additionally, the City Manager may seek the authority of the Mayor and City Council to provide a more comprehensive solution in his sole discretion. The decision of the City Manager on appeal of a grievance decision is final and not appealable. 
5.  The employee shall be promptly notified in writing by the Human Resources Director of the final determination of the City Manager with respect to the grievance. 
6.  The failure of the employee to follow the steps outlined above may result in the dismissal of the grievance at any step. Should the employee file a written dismissal of any grievance previously filed, the grievance may not be later revived. 
7.  No punitive, discriminatory or adverse action shall be taken against any employee on account of the filing of a grievance or an appeal. 
8.  All time limits prescribed in this Section 8-9, other than those for filing of appeals by the employee, are merely directory, and a failure of City staff (other than the employee) to meet them shall not work to entitle the employee to any advantage concerning the merits of the appealed decision. Upon request and for good cause, the City Manager may extend the time for processing any appeal in advance of any processing deadline, until and including the time for issuance of his own decision in the matter. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 5 , 11-2-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 5 , adopted Nov. 2, 2015, amended § 8-9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-9, pertained to appeals process and derived from Ord. No. O-2013-42, § 1, adopted Oct. 7, 2013. 
Section 8-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-52, § 5, adopted Nov. 2, 2015, repealed § 8-10, which pertained to discipline of appointed personnel and derived from Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 12 , Sept. 21, 2015. 
Section 8-11. - Post-termination hearings for appointed employees. 
1.  Any appointed employee who is dismissed, discharged or otherwise involuntarily separated from employment may, within five working days after receipt of notice of separation, request a public post-termination hearing before the Mayor and Council for the purpose of correcting any false or defamatory impression that the employee believes has been created in connection with such separation. Such request for hearing shall be made in writing and delivered to the Human Resources Director. 
2.  Any post-termination hearing shall be heard at a regular or special meeting of the Mayor and Council within 45 days of request on a date set by the Human Resources Director, who shall notify the appointed employee of the date thereof at least ten days in advance. Failure of appointed employees to follow the procedures outlined in this section may result in dismissal of the hearing request. 
3.  Hearings shall be conducted informally and technical rules of evidence shall not apply. The City Attorney or his representative may present evidence and argument at any post-termination hearing in support of the separation, but such evidence or argument is not required. At such hearing, the appointed employee shall have an opportunity to: 
a.  Present argument and evidence to clear his name or refute any charges against him; and 
b.  Confront and cross-examine any witnesses presented at the hearing in support of the separation. 
4.  At the conclusion of the hearing, it is not incumbent upon the Mayor and Council to make any decision or announcement in connection therewith, the hearing being a matter for informational purposes only. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 12 , 9-21-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 12 , adopted Sept. 21, 2015, amended § 8-11 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 8-11, pertained to post-termination hearings for appointed personnel. 
Chapter 9 - TRAINING AND OTHER UPGRADING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted Dec. 4, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 9, §§ 9-1—9-9, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 9 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. O-2013-22, § 2, adopted April 1, 2013. 

Section 9-1. - Employee development. 
It shall be the responsibility of the Human Resources Director to cooperate with the department heads, employees and others to foster and promote training programs for the City and in-service training of employees for the purposes of improving the quality of employee services rendered to the City and to aid employees in equipping themselves for advancement. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2017) 
Section 9-2. - Administration of employee development program. 
The Human Resources Director shall: 
1.  Recommend to department heads, as appropriate, standards for training programs and recommend programs that meet such standards; 
2.  See that training is carried out as approved and have prepared certificates or other forms of recognition for employees who satisfactorily complete approved courses and programs; 
3.  Assist department heads in developing and conducting training to meet specific needs of their departments and in developing and utilizing other techniques for improving employee efficiency; 
4.  Develop and conduct supervisory and management training and other types of training and employee development programs common to all departments; 
5.  Assist department heads in establishing standards of performance and procedures for evaluating employee efficiency; 
6.  Make available information concerning job requirements and training opportunities in order to assist employees in increasing their efficiency in their present positions and in preparing themselves for promotions to higher positions in the City service; 
7.  Keep a record of all approved training programs and courses and a record of employees who successfully complete such courses and programs. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2017) 
Section 9-3. - In-service training. 
In-service training is education conducted primarily for employees of the City of Douglasville. The Human Resources Director shall cooperate with department heads, employees and others to promote measures directed toward more sanitary, safe and healthful working conditions; toward affording better facilities for recreation; toward greater security and economic advantage, including the development of group insurance and credit union facilities; and toward any other means of bettering the conditions and improving the morale of City employees. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2017) 
Section 9-4. - Outside employee training classified. 
Outside employee training, for which the City pays any costs and is conducted by and for individuals other than City employees, is classified and defined as follows: 
a.  Required Training means any course or class of courses that an employee is required to attend in order to maintain an educational certificate, license, or professional degree, if the certificate, license (excluding driver's license class 1 and 2), or professional degree is a requirement of the position, regardless of cost. City payment for required training shall include registration, tuition, materials, travel, lodging, parking, and per diem expenses for meals at rates established by the mayor and council from time to time, plus pay for attendance time and transportation time; 
b.  Optional Training means any course other than Required Training, where the course of training is not conducted by a college or university for college course credit for any, and where the City's cost is $3,000.00 or less, and where the course of training relates substantially to the employee's current duties. City payment for optional training shall include registration, tuition, materials, travel, lodging, parking, and per diem expenses for meals at rates established by the mayor and council from time to time, plus pay for attendance time and such transportation time as required by law, plus pay for attendance time and transportation time. 
c.  Work Matching Training means any course other than Required Training, where the City's cost will be or is more than $3,000.00. Work Matching Training, if funded by the City, shall be either the City's general Tuition Assistance Program or the Police Department Tuition Payment Program. The Police Department Tuition Program shall include all requirements and limitations specified in this Chapter 9 for Work Matching Training, plus others specified in the Police Department Standard Operating Procedure. Costs for Work Matching Training shall include registration, tuition, materials, travel, lodging, parking, and per diem expenses for meals at rates established by the mayor and council from time to time; costs for Work Matching Training do not include employee pay, fringes or other non-training benefits of City employment. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2017) 
Section 9-5. - Request for required training. 
All employee Required Training shall be initiated by the completion of a written Travel Expense Report to the department head (or to the City Manager if the employee is requesting training), detailing the location, institution, estimated cost to the City. If approved by the department head, the request shall be submitted to the City Manager for approval; no department shall incur costs for Required Training without prior approval of the City Manager. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2017) 
Section 9-6. - Optional training. 
To promote employee participation in outside educational opportunities, the City may pay the tuition and associated costs for training for courses which will enhance the employee's job performance. For Optional Training, the employee has no obligation to pay any monetary portion of the costs paid by the City, and participation in Optional Training does obligate the employee to work for the City for any length of time after beginning the training. Prior to attending any Optional Training, the employee shall complete a Travel Expense Report estimating costs for the training. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2017) 
Section 9-7. - Work matching training; tuition assistance program. 
1.  For Work Matching Training courses begun prior to November 1, 2017, the following regulations shall apply: 
a.  Generally. Where the City pays any sum for Work Matching Training, the employee shall be obligated to repay that sum, including the first $3,000.00, after initiation of the training, up to $12,000. Repayment shall be in work matching, or in cash, or in some combination of work matching and cash. Work matching shall satisfy the debt at the rate of $2,000.00 per yearly quarter ($2,000.00 for every three months worked). No employee shall be required to take Work Matching Training in order to maintain his current position. 
b.  Cost repayment. Prior to attending any Work Matching Training, the employee shall complete a Travel Expense Report estimating costs for the training, and the employee shall sign an agreement with the City, agreeing to repay the cost of training to the City in accordance with this Chapter, and including an estimate of such costs. Once the Work Matching Training is complete and the total for costs is known and final, the employee shall complete and submit a final Travel Expense Report, showing actual costs for training. City Finance Department shall review the final Travel Expense Report and notify the employee of the exact sum owed. After signing of the agreement for repayment of the City's costs for Work Matching Training, the employee shall repay the City for the City's actual costs of training as provided in subsection 1. Such payment of costs actually incurred by the City shall be due even if the employee fails to complete the course, unless such failure is exclusively the fault of the City. 
c.  Repayment by set-off. Where any employee is separated from fulltime City employment due to resignation or dismissal due to the fault of the employee, while still owing a debt for Work Matching Training, the balance of the debt up to $12,000.00 shall be satisfied by withholding available funds otherwise payable to the employee from the City, at or within 30 days before the separation, for wages and any leave earned after completion of the Work Matching Training. However, the employee shall be paid, without set-off, not less than minimum wage for any hours actually worked. Where the debt for Work Matching Training is due at separation but cannot be satisfied through withholding by the City, then the employee shall pay the balance of the debt prior to separation. 
d.  Multiple sessions of Work Matching Training. Debt for multiple sessions of Work Matching Training shall be incurred consecutively and not concurrently, and when satisfied through work matching it shall be satisfied consecutively and not concurrently; no one time period of work shall be used to satisfy multiple sessions of training debt concurrently. No employee shall carry more than $12,000.00 of Work Matching Training debt at any point in time. 
2.  For Work Matching Training and Tuition Assistance Program courses begun on or after November 1, 2017, the following regulations shall apply: 
a.  Generally. The Tuition Assistance Program (herein called "Tuition Assistance" or "the Program") is a voluntary arrangement of the City with City employees to reimburse to an employee some or all of the net costs for completed training paid for by the employee. 
An application for Tuition Assistance must be submitted by the employee within 30 days after the beginning the course, for the course to be eligible. There are other eligibility requirements for the employee and for the training courses taken, and many other limitations as provided in this section. Additionally, approval of reimbursement is limited by the timing of the employee's application for approval and the amount of funds budgeted by the City's Mayor and Council for this purpose from time to time, if any. The Program is administered by the Human Resources Director. 
b.  Eligibility of applicant. Only full-time employees who have been employed continuously by the City in a regular full-time capacity for the 12 months immediately preceding the beginning of any training course for which tuition assistance is sought, are eligible to receive tuition assistance. No employee who has received educational assistance funded through the Police Department may receive tuition assistance through the general Tuition Assistance Program for the same course or any other course completed during the same fiscal year. 
c.  Eligibility of course, expenses. An application for Tuition Assistance must be submitted by the employee, identifying the course and the education institution, within 30 days after the beginning of the course, for the course to be eligible. The Tuition Assistance Program may cover costs for education course tuition and related books, software, electronic applications, lab fees and other required materials; the Program does not cover transportation expenses, parking, lodging, meals, computer hardware, student health care fees, generic paper products, athletic gear or other personal expenses. Only courses which are provided by Georgia Board of Regents accredited colleges, universities, and state technical schools are eligible for the Program. Eligible courses may include those taught for on-campus attendance, or on-line internet courses, or hybrid courses. The subject matter of eligible courses must relate directly to one of the following: 
(i)  The employee's current job duties with the City; 
(ii)  The core curriculum for a degree at any education institution accredited by the Georgia Board of Regents; or 
(iii)  The job duties for any current approved job description with City as employer. 
d.  Duplication prohibited. Under no circumstance will the City provide Program reimbursement for the same or an equivalent course for the same employee twice. No employee may apply for, receive or retain Tuition Assistance funds from the City for expenses also paid for by another funding source (other than the employee or the employee's family) which normally does not require repayment, such as a scholarship, grant, gift or other tuition assistance program; receipt of a repayable student loan does not disqualify the employee from receiving Tuition Assistance. Employees applying for the Program shall make reasonable efforts to apply for any available HOPE grant or HOPE scholarship before applying for the Program. 
e.  Availability and amount of funds. The Tuition Assistance Program is funded on an annual basis as a part of the City's general fund budget adoption, and the total number of application approvals is limited by the amount of funds appropriated for the Program. Tuition Assistance to any one individual is limited to a maximum of $2,000.00 for courses and reimbursable expenses completed in a single fiscal year (July 1 through June 30). 
f.  Compatibility with work hours. Employees may not attend classes during regular working hours unless a written exemption is authorized by that employee's department head to accommodate attendance at a class not available during off-duty hours. Employees authorized to work an alternate schedule which enables them to attend classes during regular working hours will remain accountable for the completion of all assigned work. Paid time off for attendance at or commuting to Program classes shall not be counted as time worked for purposes of computing overtime or compensatory time. Employees are urged to seek any needed concessions for scheduling from their department heads before registering for any class. 
g.  Application process. Employees may apply for Tuition Assistance up to 30 days after the subject class has begun. To apply, an employee should complete and submit to the Human Resource Department: 
(i)  an application form from the Human Resources Department'; and 
(ii)  any needed written approval from the employee's department head to work an alternate schedule; and 
(iii)  a written itemized estimate of all anticipated reimbursable costs. 
Within 30 days after completion of the course, the employee shall submit to the Human Resources Department: 
(i)  all receipts for reimbursement; 
(ii)  any transcripts or other proof of completion of the course from the educational institution and the grade awarded. 
h.  Approval. No application shall be approved until the course has been completed and all written submission have been made. No application shall be approved for a course if the applicant's grade was less than a C- for a standard graded course, or if the grade was less than a "low pass" for a pass/ fail course. Eligible applications meeting the requirements of this section shall be approved, regardless of other merit factors. Approved applications shall be paid in full (reimbursed) on a first-come-first-serve basis, based on the date of complete submission of applications, until the sooner of the expiration of the fiscal year or exhaustion of the Program's budgeted funds. 
i.  Tax treatment, payment. Tuition Assistance awarded will be treated for tax purposes according to applicable IRS guidelines. Applicants are referred to IRS Publication 15-B: Employer's Tax Guide to Fringe Benefits under the topic: Educational Assistance. Any reimbursement payment to the employee will be paid through the City's payroll system. 
j.  Work matching; recoupment. Any employee who receives Tuition Assistance funds must work for the City fulltime for not less than one year following the completion of the coursework, to fully vest entitlement to the funds paid. If an employee voluntarily leaves the City of Douglasville employment within one year of completion of a course for which the employee received Tuition assistance funds, the employee will be required to pay 100 percent of the last reimbursement received through deduction from the final paycheck or direct reimbursement to the City in the form of cash, check, money order, or a combination of these options. 
k.  City's right to change. The City reserves the right to amend, limit, suspend, terminate or significantly alter the Tuition Assistance Program at any time, at the discretion of the mayor and council. The Tuition Assistance Program may be defunded, discontinued or modified at any time without notice; the Program does not constitute a contract with any City employee or employees, and is not a term of employment for any individual. Initial approval of any training course does not obligate the City of Douglasville to approval of other courses in that field of study. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-94 , § 1(Exh. A), 12-4-2017) 
Chapter 10 - RECORDS AND REPORTS 

Section 10-1. - Personnel transactions. 
1.  All appointments, separations, and other personnel transactions shall be recorded on forms provided by the Human Resources Director. A personnel file folder shall be prepared and maintained for each employee and shall contain the original or a copy of all pertinent documents. 
2.  All medical and beneficiary related information will be maintained in a separate file in the Human Resources Department. 
3.  Each employee is responsible for communicating in a timely manner changes in his demographic data by notifying the Human Resources or Payroll Departments or his Department Head. 
Section 10-2. - Public inspection, confidentiality. 
Information relative to employees and former employees shall be available for public inspection at reasonable times and in accordance with such procedures as the Human Resources Director shall prescribe and in compliance with such requirements mandated by federal or state law. To the extent that disclosure is not required by law, all personnel records of employees covered under these regulations and all other records and materials relating to the administration of the regular service personnel system shall be considered confidential. Confidential information, which is obtained in the course of official duties, shall not be released by an employee or elected official, unless mandated by Federal or state law. 
Section 10-3. - Destruction of records. 
Employee service records shall be kept in accordance with state and federal regulations after termination of employment. Such lists may be kept in their original form or in any other duplicate form as the Human Resources Director deems appropriate. All other records, including correspondence, applications, and examinations may be destroyed as allowed by federal and state law. 
Section 10-4. - Attendance records. 
Regular attendance reports shall be prepared and submitted by each department head to the Finance Department for timely processing of the payroll. Each department head shall be responsible for recording the attendance of all employees in his department and the Finance Department shall keep the permanent attendance records including vacation, sick leave, overtime, etc. 
Section 10-5. - Maintenance of leave records. 
The Finance Department shall maintain the official record of any and all accrued leave time for each employee. Each department director shall be responsible for providing all leave information to the payroll clerk in the Finance Department in a routine, consistent, and timely manner. 
Chapter 11 - HOURS OF WORK, LEAVE AND OTHER BENEFITS 

Section 11-1. - Hours of work. 
1.  Regular work schedule. 
a.  Except as provided in subsection 2, each Regular Hourly Employee shall have an established regular 40-hour work schedule for the workweek or work cycle, established by the department director. Insofar as possible, the schedule shall be uniform within occupational groups and shall be determined in accordance with the needs of the City and the reasonable needs of the public doing business with various City departments. To the extent possible, each hourly employee shall utilize the time clock provided by the City to record his work hours by personally "punching" the time clock at the beginning and at the end of each work period; payroll personnel are authorized to correct the time records for mistakes, occasional failures of employees to utilize the time clock, recording of work periods which begin or end off-site or at locations where a time clock is not accessible, and for other such meritorious non-routine reasons. 
b.  On occasions, a Regular Hourly Employee may be required or authorized to deviate from his or her regular work schedule, for temporary special exceptions such as off-site training and temporary special projects, with the result of working different hours or additional hours on a particular day or days. Whenever an employee works additional hours as requested, his or her supervisor shall adjust that employee's work schedule during the remainder of the work week or work cycle, to prevent work in excess of the total number of hours included in that employee's regular work schedule for the workweek or work cycle. Any additional hours of work shall be allowed only at the direction of the employee's supervisor. Employees are strictly prohibited from doing work outside the authorized shift; supervisors shall make affirmative efforts to enforce this regulation, employees may be disciplined for violation, and access to the work place may be barred during off-shift hours to prevent work during unauthorized times and days. City departments differ in their needs for overtime work and the need for overtime work within a department may vary as to season; department directors may institute differing policies for authorizing overtime to effectively manage their departments' workloads and budgets. 
c.  Except when taking any work break, employees are expected to devote their work time diligently and productively to the business of the City of Douglasville, consistent with the job descriptions and the essential functions of their positions. Employees may attend civic or community meetings related to their work during their normal work hours only with the permission of their supervisors. While on duty, employees may participate in organized game events or organized athletic events for purposes of charity fundraising only if the City Manager has approved in writing such participation, either for all employees or for selected employees. 
2.  Standing exception for certain hourly positions. 
a.  Specified Regular Hourly employees in the Police Department have a 42-hour workweek, and work 14 shifts of 12 hours each within a 28-day work cycle; these are Patrolmen, Patrol Sergeants, and Receptionists/Data Entry Operators. Due to the emergent nature of Police Department work, Police supervisors may give limited blanket approval for employees to incur overtime, to the extent allowed by the Police Department budget, and Police supervisors are not required to note the reasons for overtime authorization within the compensation time record. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  Employees of the Sanitation division of the Maintenance and Sanitation Department shall work a schedule of hours which fluctuates day to day, depending on workload and route completion times. Unless otherwise specified by the director, each work day shall begin at a standard time and shall conclude when the director or his designee dismisses the employee based on completion of work. Employees may be required to work more or less than eight hours in any one day. Whenever compensable time during the one-week work cycle meets or exceeds 40 hours, the employee shall be paid for all compensable time; whenever compensable time during the one-week work cycle is less than 40 hours, the employee shall be paid for 40 hours of work without reduction for early dismissal. Sanitation supervisors are not required to note the reasons for overtime authorization within the compensation time record for Sanitation workers. 
d.  [Reserved.] 
3.  Working hours for salaried employees. Salaried employees are not required to work a specific hourly schedule on a daily basis, nor to record their work time on the City's time clock system. But salaried employees must work at least: (a) 40 hours (less any holiday time, used leave time or other legally required allowance) during each seven-day work cycle for all salaried employees other than certified Police officers, or (b) 80 hours (less any holiday time, used leave time or other legally required allowance) during each 14-day work cycle for certified Police officers. Consistent with 29 CFR 541.710(a), salaried employees shall have their pay deducted for any absence from work where: (a) permission to use leave was not sought, or was sought and denied, or (b) accrued leave was exhausted, or (c) the salaried employee chose to use leave without pay. Generally, except when absent on leave or at training or on an alternative work assignment, salaried employees shall attend scheduled meetings where their attendance is routinely required, and shall work hours reasonably calculated to optimize their management of employees who report to them, to interact personally with coworkers as needed, to be available to outside parties and the public during normal business hours, and to perform the duties of their job description. Every salaried employee shall keep his supervisor reasonably informed of his intended work schedule for any day when the same is expected to differ from the schedule kept by hourly employees of the same department. 
4.  Special assignments. From time to time, department heads may authorize special assignment tasks to be completed by employees within their departments or by employees from another department, for work outside the normal working hours of the employee who performs it. No employee may take leave for the purpose of working a special assignment during his normal work hours. Each such special assignment shall be optional work for any qualified employee, and shall require no more than 72 consecutive hours to complete. Each special assignment shall be recorded in written departmental records, and written notice shall be given to the Human Resources Director, prior to performance of any special assignment work; in no instance shall any hour of work time be deemed "special assignment" work after that hour of work has been completed. Whenever an hourly employee works a special assignment, he shall be paid at the hourly rate of pay for his permanent position with the City, and shall be paid at the overtime rate to the extent his total hours worked exceed the overtime threshold established by section 5-10 and the Fair Labor Standards Act. Salaried department heads may earn additional pay for special assignments only when expressly authorized in writing by the City Manager. Salaried employees other than department heads may earn additional pay for special assignments only with the approval of their department heads. Salaried employees shall be compensated for special assignments at an hourly rate equal to 0.00048 times their annual salary. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-6, § 2, 1-22-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-9, § 1(Exh. A) , 1-21-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-41, § 2 , 7-21-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-8, §§ 3—5 , 2-2-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-18, § 4 , 5-4-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-74 , § 4, 10-2-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-8 , § 2, 3-5-2018) 
Section 11-2. - Lunch period. 
Lunch periods will be determined by each department head according to the requirements of the department. Lunch periods may vary from 30 minutes to one hour; depending on the type of work and department. Lunch periods shall be scheduled in such a manner that city offices remain open throughout the entire business day. Employees are expected to utilize their lunch period during the time designated by their supervisor. 
Section 11-3. - Employee work breaks. 
Supervisors shall allow hourly employees such breaks from work as are necessary to allow employees to attend to their reasonable physical needs, including but not limited to breaks for bathroom use, for taking medications, and for like purposes. Breaks for employees within any department or division of the City may be required to be scheduled or left unscheduled, as determined by individual supervisors. 
Under normal circumstances, the aggregate length of breaks shall not be more than 15 minutes during the first half of the workday, and not more than an additional 15 minutes during the second half of the workday. Any breaks taken during the first hour of the workday, within a half hour before or after the mid-shift meal (lunch) break, or within a half hour before the end of the workday shall be taken at the work site; no break shall be scheduled so as to allow any employee to arrive at the work site late or to leave the worksite early. No employee shall receive additional compensation for any break not taken or allowed, and break times shall not be transferred from one half-day period to another, nor from one employee to another, nor aggregated in any manner to exceed 15 minutes in length. No employee shall receive additional break time, other than that provided herein, for the use of tobacco products. 
Except when taking any work break, employees are expected to devote their work time diligently and productively to the business of the City of Douglasville, consistent with their job descriptions and pursuant to the instructions of their supervisors. 
Section 11-4. - Holidays. 
The following days are designated as regular holidays for employees in the classified service: 
New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Martin Luther King Day, Friday after Thanksgiving Day, Memorial Day, December 24th, July 4th, December 25th [1], Labor Day, Employee Birthday†, Veterans Day. 
Other days may be declared a holiday by the Mayor and Council at their discretion. Overtime pay shall be granted for work done on a holiday under the same conditions as specified below, except for the Police Department. The Police Department employees shall receive an additional hour of pay for every hour worked on a holiday. Whenever a holiday falls on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be considered a holiday. 
Whenever a holiday falls on a Sunday, the following Monday shall be considered a holiday. Holidays that occur during annual leave or sick leave shall not be charged against annual leave or sick leave respectively. Full time hourly employees who are off on holidays shall be paid for holidays on the basis of hours worked on a normally scheduled workday. Part-time and temporary employees will only be paid regular pay for holidays actually worked. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
In any year when December 25th falls on a Thursday or a Monday, the December 24th holiday will be taken on December 26th instead. 
†The Employee Birthday shall be considered a holiday. For any employee whose normal work week is Monday through Friday, the employee may not take another day as a substitute unless his birthday occurs on a weekend, then the employee must take either the preceding Friday if his birthday is on Saturday or the following Monday if his birthday is on Sunday. An employee with a birthday which occurs on other holidays or on other regularly scheduled days off shall take his birthday holiday on a date within the same calendar week and pay period as his birthday on a date approved by his department head. An employee may not elect to work on his birthday and receive additional compensation for his birthday. Where there are unusual circumstances wherein an employee's schedule or work load compel him to work on his birthday, his department head may give consent for the employee to work on his birthday and reschedule the birthday holiday for another date approved by his department head; whenever possible, the rescheduled holiday shall be taken within the same calendar week and pay period as the employee's birthday. 

Section 11-5. - Annual leave (vacation). 
Vacation leave is for the purpose of rejuvenating both mental and physical faculties and all employees are urged to avail themselves of accumulated vacation leave. 
1.  All full-time employees in the regular service shall be entitled to earn and accrue vacation leave up to a maximum of 360 hours. Part-time and temporary employees shall not be eligible for annual leave. 
2.  Full-time employees begin to accrue annual leave immediately upon employment and annual leave may only be taken after the employee has successfully completed his new hire probationary period. Annual leave shall be accrued biweekly at the following rate: 
40-hour employees: 3.08 hours biweekly = 80 hours/annually* 42-hour employees: 3.23 hours biweekly = 84 hours/annually* 
3.  After five years of full-time continuous service with the City, an employee shall accrue annual leave at the following rate bi-weekly, and accrual of leave at this rate shall begin immediately after the fourth anniversary of the employee's beginning employment date: 
40-hour employees: 4.62 hours biweekly = 120 hours/annually* 42 hour employees: 4.85 hours biweekly = 126 hours/annually* 
4.  After ten years of full-time continuous service with the City, an employee shall accrue annual leave at the following rate bi-weekly, and accrual of leave at this rate shall begin immediately after the ninth anniversary of the employee's beginning employment date: 
40-hour employees: 5.53 hours biweekly = 144 hours/annually* 42 hour employees: 5.82 hours biweekly = 152 hours/annually* 
5.  After 15 years of full-time continuous service with the City, an employee shall accrue annual leave at the following rate bi-weekly, and accrual of leave at this rate shall begin immediately after the fourteenth anniversary of the employee's beginning employment date: 
40-hour employees: 6.15 hours biweekly = 160 hours/annually* 42-hour employees: 6.46 hours biweekly = 168 hours/annually* 
*Figures have been rounded to the nearest hour. 
6.  Annual leave shall not be credited to the employee until it is posted for the pay period, and it cannot be taken earlier than the next pay period. No leave time shall be approved during the same pay period in which said leave time is earned. 
Section 11-6. - Use of annual leave and compensatory time. 
1.  Request for leave. A request to use annual leave or compensatory time shall be submitted in writing to the employee's immediate supervisor. Except as provided in paragraph 3 below, no annual leave or compensatory time is to be approved to be taken on the same day on which the request is made. 
2.  Use of leave . Annual leave or compensatory time may be used in lieu of sick leave, if sick leave has been exhausted. Sick leave may not be used in lieu of annual leave or compensatory time. 
3.  Approval of annual leave and compensatory time. Annual leave and compensatory time for a period of more than one day may be taken only after approval by the department head; for less than one day, the supervisor shall have the authority to approve said leave. The vacation schedule shall be arranged in each department so that, insofar as practicable, the department can function without the hiring of temporary help. 
4.  Exceptional situations. On those occasions in which a supervisor determines an exception to paragraph 1 above, said supervisor shall have authority to grant an exception. Said supervisor shall provide the department head a written explanation. Generally, exceptions are expected to relate to unexpected events that occur between midnight and the time the employee's workday begins or during the workday itself. 
5.  Increments of use . Leave time shall not be authorized to be taken in units of less than one-half hour. 
6.  Maximum allowable accumulation. It is the intent of the Mayor and Council to have employees take their annual leave yearly. Employees may carry a maximum of 360 hours of accumulated annual leave; any excess annual leave will be forfeited on the anniversary of the employee's hire date. Annual leave will be earned and will expire on a first-in-first-out basis, so that the oldest earned annual leave will expire first. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-22, § 3, 4-1-2013; Ord. No. O-2013-24, § 3, 4-15-2013) 
Section 11-7. - Payment for unused annual leave. 
When an employee is separated from the City, such employee shall be paid for all unused annual leave earned, up to a maximum of 360 hours, unless he is in the probationary work period, or fails to provide 14 days' written notice of resignation and works scheduled hours during two-week notice period. Failure to provide such written notice may result in a forfeiture of certain unused annual leave as set forth in Section 12-2. Exceptionally, where the employee owes the City a debt for Work Matching Training, payment due the employee for annual leave after completion of the training may be set-off to satisfy the employee's debt to the City as provided in Chapter 9. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-22, § 4, 4-1-2013) 
Section 11-8. - Sick leave. 
1.  Earned sick leave. 
a.  Sick leave may be used by an employee in case of the employee's actual sickness, injury or disability, or for purposes of attending a health-related examination or treatment, which cannot be scheduled outside normal working hours. An employee may additionally use sick leave to care for a child, spouse, grandchild, grandparent, parent, any dependent as shown in the employee's most recent tax return, or any person domiciled in the employee's home. As used in this section, "care" means: (a) personal healthcare assistance or supervision, at home or at a health-care facility, to an eligible individual who is sick or injured and cannot attend to his own health needs adequately; or (b) supervision for, and transportation to and from, a health-related examination or treatment for an eligible individual who is in need of assistance due to age, health or disability. 
b.  Those employees entitled to earn annual leave shall also be eligible to earn sick leave. Full-time employees begin to earn sick leave immediately upon employment. An employee may accumulate an unlimited amount of sick leave. Every full-time permanent employee earns two hours of sick leave every week. 
c.  Sick Leave shall not be credited to the employee until it is posted for the pay period, and it cannot be taken earlier than the next pay period. No leave time shall be approved during the same pay period in which said leave is earned. Leave time shall not be authorized or taken in units of less than one-half hour increments. 
d.  The employee shall report the illness prior to his scheduled work time if possible. If not, the employee shall see that the illness is reported within 30 minutes after the time he is scheduled to have reported for work. Examination or treatment appointments shall be reported as close to the time of scheduling as possible. 
e.  If approved by the employee's supervisor, an employee may use earned sick leave in his initial probationary period. 
f.  In no event will sick leave be granted to an employee who has failed to request sick leave prior to his supervisor turning in time sheets to the payroll clerk. 
2.  Donated sick leave. 
a.  Generally. Where the requirements of this subsection are met, any full-time regular employee may donate earned sick leave to another qualified full-time regular employee. Donations of sick leave to another permanent full-time employee shall be strictly voluntary, and no City employee should be pressured, in any way, to encourage the donation of his accrued sick leave. 
b.  Approval. No donation of sick leave shall be allowed without the express written approval of the Donated Sick Leave Review Committee, who shall deny any request for donation where the recipient's department cannot make reasonable accommodation for the recipient's absence during the period of leave proposed for donation. Where any donation of sick leave is approved, the recipient's department shall not hire any part-time or full-time replacement employee, or approve overtime to replace the recipient without prior approval of the City Manager. 
c.  Calculation. Sick leave shall be donated and received on an hour-for-hour basis, rather than on a dollar-for-dollar basis, and the City shall absorb the monetary loss or benefit where the pay rate of the recipient and the donor differ. 
d.  Eligible recipients. 
(1)  Any employee receiving donated sick leave must be absent from work due to having personally suffered a catastrophic illness, surgery, or disability resulting from a medical condition or accident or to care for a spouse or any other person domiciled in the employee's home or to care for the employee's child or parent, no matter where such individual may be domiciled, who has suffered a catastrophic illness, surgery or disability resulting from a medical condition or accident. Written medical evidence of the catastrophic illness or injury must accompany any request for sick leave donation. 
(2)  Catastrophic illness/injury is defined as a medical emergency of an employee that is likely to require the employee's absence from duty for a prolonged period of time and to result in substantial loss of income because of the unavailability of paid leave. The sole determinant of whether a substantial loss of income is likely to result from the medical emergency is that the absence without available paid leave will be for at least 40 hours. 
(3)  The employee receiving a sick leave donation must not have abused his earned sick leave and must have exhausted all accumulated compensatory time, sick leave, annual leave and other paid leave for which he is eligible, before a request for donated sick leave will be considered. The employee receiving sick leave donation must not be receiving, or qualified to receive, worker's compensation or any other periodic remuneration for his absence from work. 
(4)  The employee receiving a sick leave donation must have completed one year of full-time service with the City immediately prior to the proposed leave period, and cannot be serving disciplinary probation. 
e.  Accrual of new earned leave. While an employee is using donated sick leave, his normal accrual of both annual and sick leave will continue. The leave accrued by the recipient employee will be exhausted before any donated leave. 
f.  Termination of emergency. Upon termination of the medical emergency, the recipient may no longer use donated leave, and any unused donated leave remaining will be returned to the last employees who donated the leave not used. The employee's department director or supervisor will immediately notify the Human Resources Director when the medical emergency is terminated. 
g.  Procedures. 
(1)  Applications for donated sick leave will be submitted by the proposed recipient to the Human Resources Director. Every application shall specify the proposed amount of sick leave to be donated and shall be signed by the proposed donor. 
(2)  The Donated Sick Leave Review Committee, composed of the Human Resources Director, Assistant City Attorney and City Manager, will review the request for compliance with the criteria listed in paragraph d. above. If the request meets the criteria and all items of the request form are completed, the request will be approved by the Committee. If the Committee determines that the request does not meet the criteria listed in paragraph d. above, the Human Resources Director will notify the employee of the reasons determined by the Committee to deny the request. 
Recoupment. Any employee who leaves or is separated from City employment, for any reason other than retirement or death, within 90 days after having donated sick leave to another employee shall repay to the City any sick leave donated within that 90-day period, and any sums owed the City for this purpose may be offset by withholding a like sum from the donor employee's final checks. 
3.  Advanced sick leave . No sick leave in excess of the leave accumulated to the employee's credit shall be granted unless such sick leave advance is specifically authorized upon recommendation of the department head and approved by the Human Resources Director and the City Manager. Factors to be considered in granting such advance are: 
1.  The length of City service of the employee. 
2.  The classification of the employee's position. 
3.  The sick leave record of the employee with the City. 
4.  The medical condition of the employee, which shall include the nature of the illness, the prognosis, and the probable date that the employee will return. 
No advance of sick leave may be authorized unless the employee shall have first exhausted all accrual to his credit for sick leave, annual leave and compensatory time. No advance of sick leave may be granted until an employee has completed at least three years of full-time continuous service with the City of Douglasville. If approved, such advance of sick leave shall be one day at full pay for each completed year of full time work service. In no case, shall such advanced sick leave exceed 30 days at full pay. Any advanced sick leave as may be granted shall be repaid by a charge against such sick leave, annual leave and/or compensatory time as the employee may subsequently accrue. Repayment of advanced sick leave will be charged against hours earned by the employee after the employee accumulates 40 hours of sick leave, annual leave or compensatory time in any combination to total 40 hours. If the employee leaves the City's employment before all advanced sick leave is repaid, the payroll clerk shall deduct the remainder from the employee's final check. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-37, § 1, 8-17-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-24 , § 1, 6-5-2017) 
Section 11-9. - Certification by physician. 
An acceptable medical certificate signed by a licensed physician will be required of an employee by his department head to substantiate a request for sick leave under the following conditions: 
1.  When requested by a supervisor. 
2.  Any period of absence in excess of five consecutive working days. 
3.  To support a request for sick leave during annual leave. 
4.  Leave of any kind if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually, provided the employee has been notified or warned that a certificate will be required. 
Section 11-10. - Payment for unused sick leave. 
When a permanent employee dies while in the service of the City of Douglasville, his estate shall be eligible to receive monetary compensation for the deceased employee's accrued sick leave, not to exceed 600 hours. Additionally, a retiring employee may be paid for unused sick leave as provided in Chapter 12. Exceptionally, whenever an employee retires (other than for disability retirement) owing the City a debt for Work Matching Training, the debt may be set off against any unused sick leave as provided in Chapter 9. Except as provided in this section, no employee shall be paid for unused sick leave. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-22, § 5, 4-1-2013) 
Section 11-11. - Trading days; sick leave buy back. 
1.  Trading days. Fulltime employees may exchange up to 24 hours of unused sick leave per year for an equal number of Trading Days' leave hours, which may be used for the same purposes and with the same scheduling requirements as annual leave, provided that the subject employee: 
a.  has completed 12 months of fulltime service with the City; and 
b.  has at least 80 hours of unused sick leave on June 1 in the year of request. 
Requests to exchange leave must be received by the requesting employee's supervisor between June 1 and June 15, and exchanged days shall become available for use by the employee on the first day of the first two-week payroll period of the following calendar month (July). Once exchanged, any Trading Days' time awarded shall be available for use through the next June 14; unused Trading Days shall expire and be forfeited on the June 15 following their award. Trading Days' time may not be donated nor redeemed for compensation at the time of separation from employment. 
2.  Sick leave buy back. Any fulltime employee may exchange up to 24 hours of unused sick leave per year for extra pay, provided that the subject employee: 
a.  has completed 24 months of fulltime service with the City; and 
b.  has at least 208 hours of unused sick leave on November 1 in the year of request. 
Requests to exchange sick leave must be received from the employee by the requesting employee's supervisor between November 1 and November 15, and exchanged days shall become payable not later than the following December 31. Once payment is made pursuant to any buy-back request from the employee, exchanged sick leave cannot be repurchased or restored. 
Payment for buy-back sick leave shall be made at the employee's rate of pay on November 1 in the year of request for hourly employees. For salaried employees, payment shall be made at the employee's hourly equivalent pay rate effective on November 1 in the year of request: current annualized gross pay rate (less any bonuses), divided by 2080. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-43 , § 1, 7-17-2017; Ord. No. O-2017-48 , § 2, 8-7-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-46 , § 1, 11-5-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2017-43 , § 1, adopted July 17, 2017, amended § 11-11 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 11-11 pertained to trading days and derived from Ord. No. O-2014-41, § 3, adopted July 21, 2014. 
Section 11-12. - Tools of service as retirement bonus. 
Any employee who resigns and retires from the position of City Manager, having not less than 20 years of service with the City shall be entitled to receive, at the time of his retirement, a bonus in the form of ownership of the vehicle which was assigned to him for City use prior to his retirement. Any Police Department POST-mandated employee who resigns from any positon with that department and retires, shall be entitled to receive, at the time of his retirement, a bonus in the form of ownership of the one handgun which was assigned to him for City use prior to his retirement. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-54 , § 2, 11-16-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-54 , § 2, adopted Nov. 16, 2015, amended § 11-12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 11-12 pertained to bereavement leave. 
Section 11-13. - Other types of leave. 
1.  Military leave. 
a.  Generally. Any regular service employee who leaves regular employment with the City to join the military forces of the United States during time of war, other declared national emergency or is inducted by the Selective Service, may, upon written request prior to induction into military service, be placed on military leave without pay. Such leave shall extend through a date 90 days after such service terminates. Such employee on military leave shall be entitled to be restored to the vacated position or a comparable position, provided the employee makes application to the Human Resources Director within 90 days of the date of discharge under honorable conditions, and the employee is physically and mentally capable of performing the work of the position. Time so served shall be considered as continuous with the City. 
b.  In the event a position vacated by a person entering the military service as stated above no longer exists at the time he qualifies to return to work, such person shall be entitled to be re-employed in another position of the same status, class, and pay in the regular service, provided that such position is vacant. 
c.  Military Leave for National Guard, Reserves or Organized Militia. 
(1)  Definitions. As used in this subsection (c), the term "Ordered military duty" means: 
(A)  Any military duty (other than "activated reserve duty" as defined in this subsection c.) performed in the service of the state or of the United States including but not limited to attendance at any service school or schools conducted by the armed forces of the United States by the employee as a voluntary member of any force of the organized militia or of any reserve force or reserve component of the armed forces of the United States pursuant to orders issued by competent state and federal authority without the consent of the employee. 
(B)  (i)  Except as provided in division (ii) such duty, performed for a period or periods not exceeding a total of 30 days in any one federal fiscal year, shall be deemed ordered military duty regardless of whether the orders are or may be issued with the consent of the employee. 
(ii)  If such duty exceeds a total of 30 days in any calendar year but does not exceed a total of 30 days in the federal fiscal year (normally beginning on October 1 and ending on September 30 annually) it shall be deemed "ordered military duty" regardless of whether the orders are or may be issued with the consent of the employee. 
As used in this subsection (c), "activated reserve duty" means military duty performed in the service of the state or of the United States by the employee as a member of the national guard or of any reserve force or reserve component of the armed forces of the United States, by an employee who is called to active duty pursuant to orders issued by competent state and federal authority, and whose salary benefits under the ordered military duty provisions of this ordinance have expired or are inapplicable. 
(2)  Leave of absence while engaged in performance of ordered military duty or activated reserve duty. Every employee shall be entitled to absent himself and shall be deemed to have a leave of absence from duties or service as an employee while engaged in the performance of ordered military duty or activated reserve duty and while going to and returning from such duty. 
(3)  Leave of absence while attending service schools. Every employee who is or becomes a voluntary member of any force of the organized militia or of any reserve force or reserve component of the armed forces of the United States shall be entitled to absent himself and shall be deemed to have a leave of absence from duties or service as an employee while in attendance as a member of such force or reserve component at any service school or schools conducted by the armed forces of the United States for a period or periods up to and including six months and while going to and returning from the school or schools, notwithstanding that orders for such attendance are or may be issued with the consent of the employee. However, no employee shall be entitled to absent himself in excess of a total of six months during any four-year period. 
(4)  Employment rights. Time during which an employee is absent pursuant to subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall not constitute an interruption of continuous employment and, notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, no such employee shall be subjected directly or indirectly to any loss or diminution of time, service, increment, vacation, holiday privileges, or any other right or privilege by reason of such absence or be prejudiced with reference to continuance in employment, reemployment, reinstatement, transfer, or promotion by reason of such absence. 
(5)  Pay while on military leave. 
(A)  Pay while on ordered military duty. 
(i)  Except as provided in division (ii), every employee shall be paid his salary or other compensation as such employee for any and all periods of absence while engaged in the performance of ordered military duty and while going to and returning from such duty, not exceeding a total of 18 days in any one federal fiscal year and not exceeding 18 days in any one continuous period of absence. If the Governor or the President of the United States declares an emergency and orders any employee to state active duty as a member of the National Guard, any such employee, while performing such duty, shall be paid his salary or other compensation as an employee for a period not exceeding 30 days in any one federal fiscal year and not exceeding 30 days in any one continuous period of such state active duty service. 
(ii)  If such periods of absence exceed a total of 18 days or, if the Governor or the President of the United States declares an emergency, 30 days for the calendar year, but does not exceed such limits for the federal fiscal year beginning October 1 and ending September 30, every employee shall be paid his regular pay, salary or other compensation as such employee as if the absence was 18 or 30 days or less, as the case may be, as specified in division (i) of this subsection. 
(B)  Pay differential while on activated reserve duty. Any employee called to activated reserve duty (and whose pay benefits for ordered military duty under subsection A of this paragraph have expired or are inapplicable) shall be paid, for a period not exceeding 365 days in any one federal fiscal year and not exceeding 365 days in any one continuous period of such state active duty service, a sum equal to the aggregate amount by which his regular pay, salary or other non-benefit compensation as a city employee (computed on the basis of the City pay rate at the time activated reserve duty began) would have exceeded the gross amount received by the employee for base pay, housing and rations while on activated reserve duty. Compensation for any military temporary duty shall be excluded from this calculation. It shall be the responsibility of the employee to claim such pay differential benefits and to submit to the Human Resources Director satisfactory documentary proof of the employee's military pay benefits during the entire period of activated reserve duty. Such pay differential benefits shall be aggregated and paid by the City quarterly, provided that the City Manager may approve pay disbursement on an accelerated basis upon a showing of financial need. 
(6)  Rights and contributions under retirement systems. 
(A)  The amount of required contributions to any pension or retirement system of which a public officer or employee is a member, absent while engaged in the performance of ordered military duty or activated reserve duty, shall be deducted from the salary or other compensation paid to such employee as an employee as provided in this section. If the required contributions exceed the amount of such pay, salary or other compensation to which the employee is entitled while engaged in the performance of ordered military duty or activated reserve duty, the amount of the pay, salary or other compensation shall be applied upon the required contributions; and the employee shall have the right to pay to the pension or retirement system the amount by which the contributions exceed the pay, salary or other compensation. The employee shall also have the right to pay to the system, for any period of such absence during which he shall receive no pay, salary or other compensation as an employee, the amount that he would have contributed to the system if he had been present and continuously engaged in the performance of the duties of his position during such period. 
(B)  Payments made pursuant to paragraph (A) of this subsection, other than those deducted from his pay, salary or other compensation as an employee, may be paid from time to time at any time while engaged in ordered military duty or activated reserve duty or within five years after the date of termination of the ordered military duty or activated reserve duty or, in the event of the death of the employee while engaged in ordered military duty or activated reserve duty, the payments or any part thereof may be made by the named beneficiary or the legal representative of the employee's estate within one year following proof of such death. 
(C)  To the extent that contributions made pursuant to paragraphs (A) and (B) of this subsection are paid, the period of absence while engaged in the performance of ordered military duty or activated reserve duty, shall be counted in determining the length of total service under the pension or retirement system. 
(D)  While engaged in the performance of ordered military duty or activated reserve duty, any such employee or his beneficiary, as the case may be, shall be entitled to all the benefits of the pension or retirement system of which such employee is a member, except accidental disability retirement and accidental death benefit. 
(7)  (A)  Exception as to draftees, etc. Subsection 15-18(1)(c) shall not apply to: 
(i)  Any employee who was or is involuntarily transferred, assigned, drafted, or inducted to or into any of the forces of the organized militia or any of the reserve forces or reserve components of the armed forces of the United States; or 
(ii)  Any employee who was or is inducted into the armed forces of the United States, but not as a member of any force of the organized militia or of any reserve force or reserve component of the armed forces of the United States; or 
(iii)  Any employee of the City who is employed on a temporary basis. 
(B)  Activated reserve duty benefits shall not be applicable to any employee who was not employed by the City for the 12 calendar months immediately preceding commencement of the employee's call to activated reserve duty. 
2.  Civil leave or jury duty. Any employee shall be given time off with pay when performing jury duty or when subpoenaed to appear before a court, public body or commission in connection with City business. Pay received by such employee for performing jury duty or so subpoenaed shall be given by the employee to the Human Resources Director for deposit into the City's bank account. 
3.  Workers' compensation leave. 
a.  Generally. An employee who is temporarily disabled because of an injury or illness sustained directly in the performance of his or her work shall be covered by the provisions of the State Workers' Compensation Act. 
b.  Reporting. When an employee is injured while on the job, such injury must be reported to the employee's supervisor immediately. The supervisor shall report the injury to the Human Resources Director on the day of occurrence. A Supervisors First Report of Accident/Injury Worksheet must be completed and turned in to the Human Resources Director as soon as possible. 
c.  Leave compensation. If an employee who is injured on the job is unable to perform his essential duties and this is substantiated by a written medical doctor's report, if allowed by law, the employee may draw Workers' Compensation, up to the limit stipulated by State Law, starting on the eighth day of disability. For the first seven working days of Workers' Compensation disability, the employee may use accumulated sick leave, annual leave and/or trading days (but not donated sick leave) to receive up to 40 hours of wages for this period, or the employee may waive use of such leave and receive no wages or Workers' Compensation benefits for the first seven working days. 
Beginning on the eighth day of worker's compensation disability, the City shall resume payment to the employee of his normal fulltime wages excluding overtime, and shall pay the employee's wages and maintain full benefits for a period of up to six months while the employee remains disabled and entitled to worker's compensation wage benefits under State law. During this period of up to six months, the employee shall reimburse to the City all wage benefits paid to the employee by the State. If the employee continues to be disabled pursuant to worker's compensation law after the six-month period or otherwise fails to return to work, then the City shall discontinue payment of wages and benefits, and while the employee remains employed with the City employee may supplement his worker's compensation disability income benefits by using his accrued sick leave, annual leave, compensatory leave, and trading day hours (but not donated sick leave), but not beyond the amount the employee would earn during a regular average work week excluding overtime. This provision is not intended to prevent the use or redemption of leave otherwise authorized by this ordinance. 
d.  Temporary, light or part-time transitional duty. The City of Douglasville will seek return to work opportunities through the use of transitional employment for all employees who are temporarily disabled due to an on-the-job injury as quickly as medically possible. Temporary assignments, duties and positions will be utilized where feasible, and may include work outside the employee's regular job description and regular department. To the extent a disabled employee can perform transitional work, he shall be compensated at his normal pre-injury rate of pay. 
4.  Maternity leave. 
a.  Maternity leave is a period of approved absence for incapacitation related to pregnancy and confinement. Maternity leave may be charged to sick leave or any combination of sick leave, annual leave and leave without pay. 
b.  The employee desiring maternity leave should report the pregnancy to the department head. Such notification shall include a written statement from the attending physician specifying the approximate date of birth and any work related limitations. 
c.  The employee may be permitted to continue work so long as the conditions of the pregnancy do not adversely impair work performance or health. In consultation with the employee's department head, a decision as to when maternity leave shall begin will be made taking into consideration the written medical opinion of the employee's physician, the nature of the job in terms of physical stress, and the employee's ability to perform normal job duties with full efficiency. 
d.  An employee shall be granted leave without pay for maternity purposes in accordance with Section 11-13(5). Upon return to work following maternity leave, the employee must present to the department head a medical statement from a certified physician stating that the employee has been released from the physician's care. 
5.  Family and medical leave. 
1.  Generally. The City of Douglasville will comply with the Family and Medical Leave Act. The Human Resources Director posts and shall maintain the mandatory FMLA Notice, and upon hire, provides all new employees with notices required by the U.S. Department of Labor (DOL) on Employee Rights and Responsibilities under the Family and Medical Act in the Human Resources Department. 
The purpose of this subsection is to provide employees with a general description of their FMLA rights. In the event of any conflict between this subsection and the applicable law, employees will be afforded all rights required by law. Any employee questions, concerns, or disputes with this policy should be directed in writing to the Human Resources Director. 
The City of Douglasville will grant up to 12 weeks (or up to 26 weeks of military caregiver leave to care for a covered military service member with a serious injury or illness) during a 12-month period to eligible employees. The leave may be paid, unpaid or a combination of paid and unpaid leave, depending on the circumstances of the leave and as specified in this subsection. 
2.  Eligibility. To qualify to take family or medical leave under this subsection, the employee must meet all of the following conditions: 
a.  The employee must have worked for the City of Douglasville for 12 months or 52 weeks. The 12 months or 52 weeks need not have been consecutive. Separate periods of employment will be counted, provided that the break in service does not exceed seven years. Separate periods of employment will be counted if the break in service exceeds seven years due to National Guard or Reserve military service obligations or when there is a written agreement, including a collective bargaining agreement, stating the employer's intention to rehire the employee after the service break. For eligibility purposes, an employee will be considered to have been employed for an entire week even if the employee was on the payroll for only part of a week or if the employee is on leave during the week. 
b.  The employee must have worked at least 1,250 hours during the 12-month period immediately before the date when the leave is requested to commence. The principles established under the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) determine the number of hours worked by an employee. The FLSA does not include time spent on paid or unpaid leave as hours worked. Consequently, these hours of leave should not be counted in determining the 1,250 hours eligibility test for an employee under FMLA. 
c.  The employee must work in a worksite where 50 or more employees are employed by the City of Douglasville within 75 miles of that office or worksite. The distance is to be calculated by using available transportation by the most direct route. 
3.  Type of leave covered. To qualify as FMLA leave under this policy, the employee must be taking leave for one of the six reasons listed below: 
(a)  The birth of a child and in order to care for that child. 
(b)  The placement of a child for adoption or foster care and to care for the newly placed child. 
(c)  To care for a spouse, child or parent with a serious health condition (described below). 
(d)  The serious health condition (described below) of the employee. 
An employee may take leave because of a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of the employee's position. 
A serious health condition is defined as a condition that requires inpatient care at a hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility, including any period of incapacity or any subsequent treatment in connection with such inpatient care or a condition that requires continuing care by a licensed health care provider. 
This subsection covers illnesses of a serious and long-term nature, resulting in recurring or lengthy absences. Generally, a chronic or long-term health condition that would result in a period of three consecutive days of incapacity with the first visit to the health care provider within seven days of the onset of the incapacity and a second visit within 30 days of the incapacity would be considered a serious health condition. For chronic conditions requiring periodic health care visits for treatment, such visits must take place at least twice a year. 
Employees with questions about what illnesses are covered under this FMLA subsection or under the City's sick leave policy are encouraged to consult with the Human Resources Director. If an employee takes paid sick leave for a condition that progresses into a serious health condition and the employee requests unpaid leave as provided under this policy, the City may designate all or some portion of related leave taken as leave under this policy, to the extent that the earlier leave meets the necessary qualifications. 
(e)  Qualifying exigency leave for families of members of the National Guard or Reserves or of a regular component of the Armed Forces when the covered military member is on covered active duty or called to covered active duty. An employee whose spouse, son, daughter or parent either has been notified of an impending call or order to covered active military duty or who is already on covered active duty may take up to 12 weeks of leave for reasons related to or affected by the family member's callup or service. The qualifying exigency must be one of the following: 
(1)  Short-notice deployment; 
(2)  Military events and activities; 
(3)  Child care and school activities; 
(4)  Financial and legal arrangements; 
(5)  Counseling; 
(6)  Rest and recuperation; 
(7)  Post-deployment activities; or 
(8)  Additional activities that arise out of active duty, provided that the City Manager and employee agree, including agreement on timing and duration of the leave. 
"Covered active duty" means: 
(1)  in the case of a member of a regular component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country; and 
(2)  in the case of a member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces, duty during the deployment of the member with the Armed Forces to a foreign country under a call or order to active duty under a provision of law referred to in section 101(a)(13)(B) of title 10, United States Code. 
The leave may commence as soon as the individual receives the call-up notice. (Son or daughter for this type of FMLA leave is defined the same as for child for other types of FMLA leave except that the person does not have to be a minor.) This type of leave would be counted toward the employee's 12-week maximum of FMLA leave in a 12-month period. 
(f)  Military caregiver leave (also known as covered service member leave) to care for an injured or ill service member or veteran. 
An employee whose son, daughter, parent or next of kin is a covered service member may take up to 26 weeks in a single 12-month period to take care of leave to care for that service member. Next of kin is defined as the closest blood relative of the injured or recovering service member. 
The term "covered service member" means: 
(1)  a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is otherwise in outpatient status, or is otherwise on the temporary disability retired list, for a serious injury or illness; or 
(2)  a veteran who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, for a serious injury or illness and who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during the period of 5 years preceding the date on which the veteran undergoes that medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy. 
The term "serious injury or illness". 
(1)  in the case of a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves), means an injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member's active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that may render the member medically unfit to perform the duties of the member's office, grade, rank, or rating; and 
(2)  in the case of a veteran who was a member of the Armed Forces (including a member of the National Guard or Reserves) at any time during a period when the person was a covered service member, means a qualifying (as defined by the Secretary of Labor) injury or illness that was incurred by the member in line of duty on an active duty in the Armed Forces (or existed before the beginning of the member's active duty and was aggravated by service in line of duty on active duty in the Armed Forces) and that manifested itself before or after the member became a veteran. 
4.  Amount of leave. An eligible employee can take up to 12 weeks for the FMLA circumstances (1) through (5) above under this subsection during any 12-month period. The City of Douglasville will measure the 12-month period as a rolling 12-month period measured backward from the date an employee uses any leave under this subsection. Each time an employee takes leave, the City of Douglasville will compute the amount of leave the employee has taken under this FLMA subsection in the last 12 months and subtract it from the 12 weeks of available leave, and the balance remaining is the amount the employee is entitled to take at that time. 
An eligible employee can take up to 26 weeks for the FMLA circumstance (6) above (military caregiver leave) during a single 12-month period. For this military caregiver leave, the City will measure the 12-month period as a rolling 12-month period measured forward. FMLA leave already taken for other FMLA circumstances will be deducted from the total of 26 weeks available. 
If a husband and wife both work for the City of Douglasville and each wishes to take leave for the birth of a child, adoption or placement of a child in foster care, or to care for a parent (but not a parent "in-law") with a serious health condition, the husband and wife may only take a combined total of 12 weeks of leave. If a husband and wife both work for the City of Douglasville and each wishes to take leave to care for a covered injured or ill service member, the husband and wife may only take a combined total of 26 weeks of leave. 
5.  Employee status and benefits during leave. While an employee is on leave, the City of Douglasville will continue the employee's health benefits during the leave period at the same level and under the same conditions as if the employee had continued to work. 
If the employee chooses not to return to work for reasons other than a continued serious health condition of the employee or the employee's family member or a circumstance beyond the employee's control, the City of Douglasville will require the employee to reimburse the City of Douglasville the amount it paid for the employee's health insurance premium during the leave period. 
Under current City policy, depending on the health care plan chosen by the employee, the employee may pay a portion of the health care premium. While on paid leave, the City of Douglasville will continue to make payroll deductions to collect the employee's share of the premium. While on unpaid leave, the employee must continue to make this payment, either in person or by mail. The payment must be received in the City Finance Department by the first day of each month. If the payment is more than 30 days late, the employee's health care coverage may be dropped for the duration of the leave. The City of Douglasville will provide 15 days' notification prior to the employee's loss of coverage. 
If the employee contributes to a life insurance or disability plan, the City of Douglasville will continue making payroll deductions while the employee is on paid leave. While the employee is on unpaid leave, the employee may request continuation of such benefits and pay his portion of the premiums, or the City of Douglasville may elect to maintain such benefits during the leave and pay the employee's share of the premium payments. If the employee does not continue these payments, the City of Douglasville may discontinue coverage during the leave. If the City of Douglasville maintains coverage, the City of Douglasville may recover the costs incurred for paying the employee's share of any premiums, whether or not the employee returns to work. 
6.  Restoration of sick leave. The City Manager is authorized to restore up to six months of sick leave to any employee who used an equivalent amount of sick leave during calendar 2013 to supplement his income due to worker's compensation disability. 
7.  Use of paid and unpaid leave. An employee who is taking FMLA leave because of the employee's own serious health condition or the serious health condition of a family member must use all paid vacation, personal or sick leave prior to being eligible for unpaid leave. Sick leave shall be run concurrently with FMLA leave if the reason for the FMLA leave is covered by the established sick leave policy. 
Sick leave for the birth of the child and for an employee's serious health condition, including workers' compensation leave (to the extent that it qualifies), will be designated as FMLA leave and will run concurrently with FMLA. For example, if an employee takes six weeks of sick leave due to pregnancy, the six weeks will be designated as FMLA leave and counted toward the employee's 12-week entitlement. The employee may then be required to use earned paid leave before being eligible for unpaid leave for what remains of the 12-week entitlement. An employee who is taking leave for the adoption or foster care of a child must use all accumulated paid leave prior to being eligible for unpaid leave. 
An employee who is using military FMLA leave for a qualifying exigency must use all accumulated paid leave prior to being eligible for unpaid leave. An employee using FMLA military caregiver leave must also use all accumulated paid leave (as long as the reason for the absence is covered by the City's sick leave policy) prior to being eligible for unpaid leave. 
8.  Intermittent leave or reduced work schedule . The employee may take FMLA leave in 12 consecutive weeks, or may use the leave intermittently (take a day periodically when needed over the year) or, under certain circumstances, may use the leave to reduce the workweek or workday, resulting in a reduced hour schedule. In all cases, the leave may not exceed a total of 12 workweeks (or 26 workweeks to care for an injured or ill service member over a 12-month period). 
The City of Douglasville may temporarily transfer an employee to an available alternative position with equivalent pay and benefits if the alternative position would better accommodate the intermittent or reduced schedule, in instances of when leave for the employee or employee's family member is foreseeable and for planned medical treatment, including recovery from a serious health condition or to care for a child after birth, or placement for adoption or foster care. For the birth, adoption or foster care of a child, the City of Douglasville and the employee must mutually agree to the schedule before the employee may take the leave intermittently or work a reduced hour schedule. Leave for birth, adoption or foster care of a child must be taken within one year of the birth or placement of the child. 
If the employee is taking leave for a serious health condition or because of the serious health condition of a family member, the employee should try to reach agreement with the City Manager before taking intermittent leave or working a reduced hour schedule. If this is not possible, then the employee must prove that the use of the leave is medically necessary. 
9.  Certification for the employee's serious health condition. The City of Douglasville will require certification for the employee's serious health condition. The employee must respond to such a request within 15 days of the request or provide a reasonable explanation for the delay. Failure to provide certification may result in a denial of continuation of leave. 
The City of Douglasville may directly contact the employee's health care provider for verification or clarification purposes using a health care professional, an HR professional, leave administrator or management official. The City of Douglasville will not use the employee's direct supervisor for this contact. Before the City of Douglasville makes this direct contact with the health care provider, the employee will be a given an opportunity to resolve any deficiencies in the medical certification. In compliance with HIPAA Medical Privacy Rules, the City of Douglasville will obtain the employee's permission for clarification of individually identifiable health information. 
The City of Douglasville has the right to ask for a second opinion if it has reason to doubt the certification. The City of Douglasville will pay for the employee to get a certification from a second doctor, which the City will select. The City of Douglasville may deny FMLA leave to an employee who refuses to release relevant medical records to the health care provider designated to provide a second or third opinion. If necessary to resolve a conflict between the original certification and the second opinion, the City of Douglasville will require the opinion of a third doctor. The City of Douglasville and the employee will mutually select the third doctor, and the City of Douglasville will pay for the opinion. This third opinion will be considered final. The employee will be provisionally entitled to leave and benefits under the FMLA pending the second and/or third opinion. 
10.  Certification for the family member's serious health condition. The City of Douglasville will require certification for the family member's serious health condition. The employee must respond to such a request within 15 days of the request or provide a reasonable explanation for the delay. Failure to provide certification may result in a denial of continuation of leave. Medical certification will be provided using the DOL Certification of Health Care Provider for Family Member's Serious Health Condition. 
The City of Douglasville may directly contact the employee's family member's health care provider for verification or clarification purposes using a health care professional, an HR professional, leave administrator or management official. The City of Douglasville will not use the employee's direct supervisor for this contact. Before the City of Douglasville makes this direct contact with the health care provider, the employee will be a given an opportunity to resolve any deficiencies in the medical certification. In compliance with HIPAA Medical Privacy Rules, the City of Douglasville will obtain the employee's family member's permission for clarification of individually identifiable health information. 
The City of Douglasville has the right to ask for a second opinion if it has reason to doubt the certification. The City of Douglasville will pay for the employee's family member to get a certification from a second doctor, which the company will select. The City of Douglasville may deny FMLA leave to an employee whose family member refuses to release relevant medical records to the health care provider designated to provide a second or third opinion. If necessary to resolve a conflict between the original certification and the second opinion, the City of Douglasville will require the opinion of a third doctor. The City of Douglasville and the employee will mutually select the third doctor, and the City of Douglasville will pay for the opinion. This third opinion will be considered final. The employee will be provisionally entitled to leave and benefits under the FMLA pending the second and/or third opinion. 
11.  Certification of qualifying exigency for military family leave. The City of Douglasville will require certification of the qualifying exigency for military family leave. The employee must respond to such a request within 15 days of the request or provide a reasonable explanation for the delay. Failure to provide certification may result in a denial of continuation of leave. This certification will be provided using the DOL Certification of Qualifying Exigency for Military Family Leave Form. 
12.  Certification for serious injury or illness of covered service member for military family leave. The City of Douglasville will require certification for the serious injury or illness of the covered service member. The employee must respond to such a request within 15 days of the request or provide a reasonable explanation for the delay. Failure to provide certification may result in a denial of continuation of leave. This certification will be provided using the DOL Certification for Serious Injury or Illness of Covered Service member Form. 
13.  Re-certification. The City of Douglasville may request re-certification for the serious health condition of the employee or the employee's family member no more frequently than every 30 days and only when circumstances have changed significantly, or if the employer receives information casting doubt on the reason given for the absence, or if the employee seeks an extension of his leave. Otherwise, the City of Douglasville may request re-certification for the serious health condition of the employee or the employee's family member every six months in connection with an FMLA absence. The City of Douglasville may provide the employee's health care provider with the employee's attendance records and ask whether need for leave is consistent with the employee's serious health condition. 
14.  Procedure for requesting FMLA leave. All employees requesting FMLA leave must provide verbal or written notice of the need for the leave to the Human Resources Director. Within five business days after the employee has provided this notice, the Human Resources Director will complete and provide the employee with the DOL Notice of Eligibility and Rights Form. 
When the need for the leave is foreseeable, the employee must provide the City of Douglasville with at least 30 days' notice. When an employee becomes aware of a need for FMLA leave less than 30 days in advance, the employee must provide notice of the need for the leave either the same day or the next business day. When the need for FMLA leave is not foreseeable, the employee must comply with the City of Douglasville's usual and customary notice and procedural requirements for requesting leave, absent unusual circumstances. 
15.  Designation of FMLA leave. Within five business days after the employee has submitted the appropriate certification form, the Human Resources Director will complete and provide the employee with a written response to the employee's request for FMLA leave using the DOL Designation Notice. 
16.  Intent to return to work from FMLA leave . On a basis that does not discriminate against employees on FMLA leave, the City of Douglasville may require an employee on FMLA leave to report periodically on the employee's status and intent to return to work. 
(Ord. No. 2012-39, § 1, 8-6-2012; Ord. No. O-2014-8, § 1(Exh. A) , 1-21-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-10, § 1 , 2-3-2014) 
Section 11-14. - Notification to payroll and human resources director. 
When an employee has taken leave of any kind or is absent without leave, his department head shall notify the Human Resources Director and payroll clerk in writing prior to the end of the pay period in which the absence occurs. Such notification may be by notation on a time card or attendance sheet or by memo, giving specific information covering type of leave, dates, hours, and other pertinent information. 
Section 11-15. - Health and dental insurance premium discount. 
Where both individuals in any married couple are active service employees of the City, and where the couple meets the City's health/dental insurer's qualifications for dependent coverage, and where the couple elects to carry one of their members as the primary insured and the other as a dependent rather than carrying both individuals as primary insured, if there is a cost savings from this arrangement, then, in addition to the City's standard contribution to the cost of health/dental premiums for the primary insured and his dependents, the City shall contribute a sum equal to the lesser of that cost savings or the remaining unpaid cost of such insurance. The City reserves the right to amend, limit, suspend, terminate or significantly alter insurance coverage or premium payments provided for employees and their dependents, at any time, at the discretion of the Mayor and Council. 
Section 11-16. - Health and dental insurance for retirees. 
1.  Eligibility generally. For any retiree to carry health insurance into retirement, for himself only or for himself and any dependent(s), the retiring employee must be: (a) initially employed before January 1, 2016, and (b) enrolled for health insurance for all prospective insureds at the time he retires, and (c) must elect to begin receiving his pension benefit immediately after separation from employment, so that there is no lapse in health insurance coverage. For any retiree to carry dental insurance into retirement, (a) initially employed before January 1, 2016, and (b) enrolled for dental insurance for all prospective insureds at the time he retires, and (c) must elect to begin receiving his pension benefit immediately after separation from employment, so that there is no lapse in dental insurance coverage. The City may require retirees to pay a premium for any insurance in the same amount as required for active employees. 
2.  Medicare to be primary insurance. For any insured retired employee or insured dependent of a retired employee and is Medicare-eligible, standard health insurance shall not be offered by the City, but the City shall offer Medicare supplemental health insurance if the individual designates Medicare as his primary health insurance. 
3.  Exception for certain retirees and dependents. As an exception to paragraph 2 above, for retired employees who: (a) were initially hired before January 1, 2016, and (b) retire prior to January 1, 2017, and (c) are eligible for City retirement health insurance benefits, and (d) are eligible for Medicare, the available health and dental insurance plans provided by the City to those retired employees and their insured dependents shall be the same ones available to active-service under-65 employees from time to time, and no such Medicare-eligible retired employee or his insured dependent shall be required to waive standard City health insurance in favor of City-provided Medicare supplemental health insurance. 
4.  Dependent COBRA coverage. Where a retired employee dies having dependent health insurance for his dependent(s), and where such dependents are eligible for COBRA coverage and have no other available private or public health insurance (such as Medicare, Medicaid, or private insurance), the dependents shall have the option to require the City to pay the cost of coverage to maintain COBRA health insurance benefits for the dependents for a maximum of 12 months immediately subsequent to the death of the retired employee. Any such election shall be made in writing to the City Human Resources Director in the manner and within the time period required for other COBRA elections. Any such elected period of paid COBRA coverage shall count against the dependents' time period for COBRA provided under law, and shall not be provided in addition to the self-paid COBRA coverage period. Any dependent receiving City-paid COBRA coverage shall be subject to any and all health plan rules governing self-paid COBRA coverage. This subsection 3. shall not apply to employees initially hired on or after January 1, 2016. 
5.  Right to change. Except as provided in subsection 3. of this section, the City reserves the right to amend, limit, suspend, terminate or significantly alter insurance coverage or premium payments provided for employees and their dependents, at any time, at the discretion of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2011-45, § 2, 10-17-2011; Ord. No. O-2015-37, § 2, 8-17-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-56 , § 1, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-44, § 1, 9-19-2016) 
Note— The provisions of Ord. No. O-2016-44 codified herein shall be effective on Jan. 1, 2017. 
Section 11-17. - Bereavement leave. 
1.  Bereavement leave of up to three working days will be granted with pay for the absence from duty of employees in the event of a death in the immediate family. Immediate family is defined as spouse, child, stepchild, parent, parent-in-law, stepparent, sibling, sibling-in-law, daughter or son-in-law, grandparent or grandparent-in-law, grandchild. Bereavement leave may also be taken for any person domiciled in the employee's household. Additional bereavement leave may for this reason be granted at the Human Resources Director's discretion. 
2.  In no event, will bereavement leave be granted to an employee who has failed to request bereavement leave prior to his supervisor turning in time sheets to the payroll clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-17 , § 1, 3-20-2017) 
Chapter 12 - SEPARATIONS 

Section 12-1. - Types of separation from regular service. 
Separations and/or terminations from positions in the regular service shall be designated as one of the following: 
1.  Resignation. 
2.  (Reserved). 
3.  Lay-off or reduction in force. 
4.  Disability. 
5.  Loss of job requirements. 
6.  Dismissal or discharge. 
7.  Retirement. 
8.  Death. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 13 , 9-21-2015) 
Section 12-2. - Resignation. 
To resign in good standing, an employee should give at least 14 calendar days prior written notice to his department head and work the scheduled hours during the resignation period. Immediately upon receipt of such notice of resignation, the department shall forward the same to the Human Resources Director. If an employee fails to provide 14 days written advance notice of resignation and fails to work scheduled hours during the resignation period, then the Human Resources Director may reduce the employee's accumulated annual leave one day for each day notice was not given and/or scheduled work not performed. Failure to comply with this rule shall be grounds for denial of reemployment rights. However, the department head may with the written approval of the Human Resources Director exempt from any or all of these penalties an employee who has given and worked less than the required notice under exceptional circumstances warranting such exemption in the judgment of the department head and the Human Resources Director. 
Section 12-3. - Lay-off or reduction in work force. 
Any involuntary separation not related to an employee's conduct shall constitute a lay-off or reduction in force. 
1.  Reason for. Any employee may be laid-off because of shortage of work or funds, elimination of the Department or position, material changes in the duties or organization, or related reasons beyond the employee's control which do not reflect dissatisfaction with the service of the employee. The duties previously performed by any laid-off employee may be reassigned to other employees holding positions in appropriate classes. 
2.  Order of lay-off. Should it become necessary to reduce the number of employees within a department or class, such employees shall be laid-off on the basis of the following three factors to be weighted equally: length of service in class, length of service with City, and performance evaluations for the past three years. 
3.  Special cases. Should a Department Head determine that the retention of a certain employee is essential to the efficient operation of the department because of the fact that such an employee possesses special skills or abilities, and should the department head wish to retain such employee in preference to another with a higher rating, then the department head shall submit a written request to the Human Resources Director. Such notification shall set forth in detail the specific skills and abilities possessed by the employee and the reasons why such employee is essential to the effective operation of the department. With the approval of the Human Resources Director and the City Manager, such an employee may be retained. 
4.  Notice of lay-off. Prior to a reduction in force, the names and job titles of any and all permanent employees scheduled for lay-off shall be submitted to the Human Resources Director for confirmation of names and approval; until such approval is given no lay-off shall be consummated. The Human Resources Director shall give written notice to regular employees to be laid-off at least 14 calendar days prior to the effective date of the lay-off. 
5.  Demotions . Any regular employee scheduled to be laid-off shall have the right to be demoted to a lower classification, provided that a vacancy exists and such employee is qualified to fill the position in the lower classification. 
Section 12-4. - Disability. 
A department head, with the approval of the Human Resources Director, shall have the right to direct any employee within such department to be examined by a physician designated by the City. When a disability of any kind is discovered which impairs the effectiveness of an employee or makes his continuance on the job a danger to himself or others, the following action shall be taken: 
1.  If the disability is correctable, the employee shall be allowed a specified time as determined by the Human Resources Director to have it corrected. If the employee fails to take substantial steps to have the disability corrected within this specified time or fails to have the disability corrected, the employee may be subject to disciplinary action or lay-off. The Human Resources Director and department head shall review the employee's progress every 90 days to determine if the employee is correcting the disability and if the position may remain unfilled. 
2.  If in the opinion of the examining physician, the disability cannot be corrected, the department head, subject to the approval of the Human Resources Director, shall: 
a.  attempt to place the employee in another position that he can perform satisfactorily, if that can be accomplished successfully; or 
b.  take steps to separate the employee from the City service through retirement or lay-off. 
Section 12-5. - Loss of job requirements. 
Any employee who is unable to do his job adequately because of loss of a necessary license or other requirement, may be separated by lay-off and may be reappointed at the time such license or requirement is re-obtained, unless the loss was due to fraud or misrepresentation in application with the City or in obtaining the license or other requirement, then such employee shall be separated by dismissal. The employee is responsible to report any loss of required license or certification necessary to perform his job to the employee's immediate supervisor within 48 hours of such loss. Failure of an employee to report such loss of necessary license or certification shall be grounds for immediate termination. 
Section 12-6. - Dismissals. 
Dismissals are discharges or separations for delinquency, misconduct, inefficiency, inability to perform the work of the position satisfactorily or just cause, and shall be governed by these policies and procedures as hereinafter set forth. Appointed employees are not protected under the provisions of this section and may be dismissed with or without cause after compliance with procedures required by City Charter Section 3.10. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 14 , 9-21-2015) 
Section 12-7. - Retirement. 
The retirement of an employee shall consist of the voluntary separation of an employee who has met the requirements of age and length of service under the policies governing any benefit provided to employees by the City of Douglasville as may be amended in the discretion of the Mayor and Council. Current age and service requirements for retirement are as follows: 
1.  Pension. The City's retirement plan for pension benefits is contained within its Ordinance (the "GMEBS Retirement Plan") approved November 15, 1971, as amended, establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the City of Douglasville, Georgia, and setting forth the joint trust agreement and that contract for the administration of said plan by the City and the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, a copy of which is maintained in the office of the Human Resources Director and is incorporated herein by reference. Where the terms of these policies and procedures conflict with those of the GMEBS Retirement Plan, the terms of the GMEBS Retirement Plan prevail. 
2.  Disability retirement. Any employee who qualifies and applies timely for disability retirement under the guidelines set by the GMEBS Retirement Plan or any subsequent retirement pension benefit provider of the City then in effect, may take disability retirement at any age and with any number of years of service, and receive pension benefits without regard to whether benefits have vested pursuant to Section 12-7.1. The amount of disability retirement benefits for an employee who has less than five years of service will be calculated as provided in the Plan. 
3.  Retirement. Payment for accumulated sick leave. Sick leave accumulated by any retiring employee, up to 600 hours, shall be paid as additional compensation to the employee on the date of his retirement, provided the employee has reached the age of 55 and has at least ten years of service with the City at the time of his separation from City employment. 
4.  City's right to change. The City of Douglasville reserves the right to amend, limit or significantly alter insurance coverage or premiums payments provided for employees and retirees at the discretion of the Mayor and Council. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-56 , § 1, 12-7-2015) 
Section 12-8. - Death. 
Separation shall be effective as of the date of the death of the employee. All compensation, including annual leave pay up to 360 hours and up to 600 hours of sick leave, due to such an employee shall be paid to the beneficiary of the employee, the surviving spouse of such employee or to the estate of such an employee, as may be determined by the law or by the applicable executed documents in the personnel file of such employee. 
Where an individual dies while employed by the City and while having dependent health insurance for dependent(s), and where the dependents have no other available private or public health insurance (such as Medicare, Medicaid, or private insurance), the dependents shall have the option to require the City to pay the cost of coverage to maintain COBRA health insurance benefits for the dependents for a maximum of 12 months immediately subsequent to the death of the employee. Any such election shall be made in writing to the City Human Resources Director in the manner and within the time period required for other COBRA elections. Any such elected period of paid COBRA coverage shall count against the dependents' time period for COBRA provided under law, and shall not be provided in addition to the self-paid COBRA coverage period. Any dependent receiving City-paid COBRA coverage shall be subject to any and all health plan rules governing self-paid COBRA coverage. This section 12-8 shall not apply to employees initially hired by the City on or after January 1, 2016. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-56 , § 1, 12-7-2015) 
Section 12-9. - Severance for appointed employees. 
Any appointed employee, who is involuntarily separated from employment other than for cause, shall be entitled to receive, in addition to any other separation benefits otherwise due, the following benefit: 
1.  For employees who have served as appointed employees less than five years, a benefit of two weeks' gross base pay; or 
2.  For employees who have served as appointed employees five years but less than ten years, a benefit of three weeks' gross base pay; or 
3.  For employees who have served as appointed employees ten years or more, a benefit of four weeks' gross base pay. 
Benefits under this section shall be payable whether or not the employee makes use of his right to have a post-termination hearing. Benefits under this section shall not be payable in cases of resignation or other voluntary separation, or appointment or transfer to an alternate position. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 15 , 9-21-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 15 , adopted Sept. 21, 2015, amended § 12-9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 12-9, pertained to failure to be reappointed. 
Section 12-10. - COBRA continuation rights. 
1.  Upon their termination, all provided health care coverage shall cease for employees who leave the service of the City before meeting the requirements for retirement or do not qualify for disability retirement. Upon termination, continuation of health coverage will be offered to all eligible employees and their dependents covered at the time of the employee's termination, in accordance with the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA). 
2.  Employees and/or dependents that choose to exercise their COBRA option for continuation of their health insurance coverage will be assessed the full cost of the health insurance premium. The cost of the insurance premium and the health care insurance provider is determined annually and may change from year to year. Payment for insurance premiums are due by the first of each month and payment should be made or mailed to: 
City of Douglasville 
P O Box 219 
Douglasville, GA 
30133 
3.  Failure to pay a premium, as required by the insurance provider and by COBRA regulations, will result in termination of the individual's coverage. 
Chapter 13 - OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT 

Section 13-1. - Outside employment. 
Outside employment is any paid employment performed by an employee in addition to his or her employment with the City of Douglasville. Such employment shall be reported to the department head who shall notify the City Manager and the Human Resources Director and shall be governed by the following regulations: 
1.  Outside employment shall not interfere with the efficient performance of the employee's duties; 
2.  Outside employment shall not involve a conflict of interest as determined by the employee's department head, the City Manager and the Human Resources Director, or conflict with the employee's duties to the City; 
3.  Outside employment shall not involve the performance of duties that the employee should perform as a part of his or her employment with the City of Douglasville; 
4.  Outside employment shall not occur during the employee's regular or assigned working hours unless the employee is on either annual leave, compensatory leave or authorized leave without pay; 
5.  Each employee desiring to undertake outside employment shall first request in writing from his or her supervisor permission to do so and receive written permission from the department head. Such request shall state the type of employment, hours of work, name of prospective employer, and place of employment; 
6.  Any employee accepting outside employment shall make arrangements with the outside employer to be relieved of his or her outside duties if and when called upon for emergency service by the City. 
Chapter 14 - INCLEMENT WEATHER POLICY 

Section 14-1. - Inclement weather policy. 
1.  Purpose. This Policy is to set out the procedures to be followed by City employees during times of inclement weather which may include such weather occurrences as ice or snow storms or other weather events where the conditions may warrant the closing of some or all of the City's departments, not including Police Services. 
2.  Position designations. All City positions shall be designated as essential or non-essential. Essential employees are designated positions within the Police (not including Courts and Records), Maintenance, Garage and Sanitation Departments plus the City Manager, City Engineer and Information Services Director. All other employees are non-essential for purposes of this policy. 
3.  Closures . In cases of inclement weather, the City Manager shall have the option to close non-emergency functions of City government for specified periods of time. In making the decision on whether to close City departments for any period of time due to weather, the City Manager will consider the needs of the public, any City business or deadlines scheduled for that day, closures by other government agencies and road conditions within a 35 mile radius of City Hall. 
Decisions for closure will normally be made by 6:00 a.m. for 8:00 a.m. closures and closures may be made for partial days. Decisions for closures will generally be made at least 2 hours in advance of the effective time and announced on radio and TV stations, not limited to the cable television government access channel for Douglasville. Closures, of whatever length, will not be rescinded once announced. Employees may also call the main telephone number at City Hall to receive information on closures. 
4.  Reporting. When the City Manager closes city government for a period of time, all non-essential employees not notified by the City Manager to report are excused from work unless called individually to work and will be paid for the period of closure. This paid time will be considered like any other day taken for sick leave, vacation, etc. and not included in the calculation of overtime for that time period. All non-essential employees that have not been notified to report to work shall remain available for telephone contact from the City Manager, their Department Heads, or designees, in the event that their services are needed. 
Essential employees that are required to report to work shall be paid for their normal shift for the same length of time as similarly situated non-essential employees who were not required to report. If any employee is required to report to work after his normal shift, he will be paid a minimum of three hours or for the number of actual hours worked, whichever is greater. 
Each City Department Head, or designee, shall have a list of employees' home telephone numbers in his possession at home so that contact may be made with his employees on an as-needed basis. It is the responsibility of each Department Head to communicate to his employees how they are to be contacted in an inclement weather situation, if it is other than by telephone to the employees' homes. 
5.  Failure to report. Unless other arrangements are made with the supervisor, essential employees who have not been excused due to closure and who cannot report at the start of the next normal shift must call in or otherwise contact their supervisor, at or before the time the employee's shift begins, or in no case later than 30 minutes after the time the employee's shift begins. 
Essential employees must make every attempt within reason to contact their supervisor to report their inability to report to work or request authorized leave. Failure to essential employees and those non-essential employees that have been individually called to work to call in or otherwise contact their supervisor will result in the leave being designated unauthorized without pay and will subject the employee to disciplinary action. Mitigating circumstances that prohibit the employee from calling in, or reporting to duty at his normal shift, will be considered on a case-by-case basis based on the facts of each circumstance. 
Chapter 15 - ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE POLICY 

Section 15-1. - Policy statement. 
It is the position of the City of Douglasville that alcohol and controlled substance abuse is a significant health problem in the United States today. The costs involved with this problem include human costs, such as lost jobs, morale problems, injuries, illnesses, and deaths, as well as economic costs, such as property damage, absenteeism, tardiness, lost productivity, increased health insurance costs, and the costs involved in replacing and retraining new employees. Further, in professions that serve the public, alcohol and substance abuse represents a real danger to the health and safety not only of the employees themselves, but also of the constituents served by those employees. 
It is the objective of the City of Douglasville is to provide safe and effective public service. To meet this objective, the problem of alcohol and controlled substance abuse must be identified, confirmed and defeated. In order to achieve this, the City of Douglasville has developed a comprehensive alcohol and controlled substance abuse policy. 
Section 15-2. - Definitions. 
Within this Policy, and on any accompanying forms, the following terms shall have the meanings associated therewith: 
Controlled substance shall have the meaning and include the substances defined as "controlled substances" in the Georgia Controlled Substances Act, O.C.G.A. 16-13-20 and 16-12-21(4) as said Act shall appear from time to time. 
Safety sensitive positions shall be those positions where inattention to duty or errors in judgment by the employee or applicant while on duty will have the potential for significant risk of physical harm to the employee, other employees or the general public. Such positions include, but are not limited to the following: all certified police officers, all automotive mechanics, all employees who drive City-owned vehicles in the regular course of employment, and all employees who supervise prisoners, carry weapons, make arrests or use physical force. 
Confirmed positive result . Whenever an initial test for drugs or alcohol is found to be positive, the laboratory will carry out additional tests pursuant to laboratory testing guidelines to confirm that the initial positive indication was correct. If the second procedure also indicates the presence of drugs or alcohol, the test result will be considered a confirmed positive result. 
Medical review officer shall mean a properly licensed physician who reviews and interprets the results of drug tests and evaluates those results together with medical history and any other relevant biomedical information to confirm positive results. 
Section 15-3. - Drug and alcohol use prohibited. 
Alcohol and controlled substance use by employees during assigned working hours, in City of Douglasville buildings or on City of Douglasville grounds, or otherwise while on official business shall be prohibited. This shall include the use or possession of controlled substances, the abuse of prescription medications, the possession of prescription medications by anyone other than the person for whom the medication was prescribed (except as required by official duty), and the use or abuse of alcohol. This prohibition (and the procedures set forth below) is in addition to any other drug and alcohol policy, including any policies or programs required by federal or state law. 
Section 15-4. - Types of testing to be implemented. 
Pre-employment testing. Because substance abuse is not easily detectible in an applicant without the provision of a drug and alcohol screening, and because the safety and health of employees and the health and safety of citizens depend upon a workforce free from drug and alcohol abuse, all job applicants being considered for employment in positions for which pre-employment drug and/or alcohol screening is allowed by law, shall be required to pass a drug and/or alcohol screening test prior to being hired. All job applicants shall be informed in advance that such testing shall be required, and postings for all jobs shall include a notice of this testing requirement. Pre-employment testing shall take place only after an offer of employment has been made but before employment actually commences. 
Random and periodic drug testing. Employees in all positions designated as safety sensitive, involved in drug interdiction, or having unsupervised access to prisoners or contraband shall be required to submit to a drug and alcohol screening tests at random or on a periodic basis from time to time as determined by the department head and the human resources director. 
State or federally required testing. All employees who hold a commercial driver's license as a requirement of employment shall comply with the requirements for drug testing of the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act of 1991, 49 U.S.C. section 31306(b) and 5331(b), with the testing requirements of Title 40, Chapter 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and with applicable regulations of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
Drug and/or alcohol screening test based on reasonable suspicion. 
1.  Any employee shall be required to submit to drug and/or alcohol testing when there is reasonable suspicion to believe that such employee is under the influence or effects of drugs and/or alcohol immediately before, during or immediately after assigned working hours or while otherwise on duty or in control of government property. 
2.  Reasonable suspicion means a reasonable belief based on specific objective and articulable facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts in light of experience. Situations that may give rise to a conclusion that an employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol include, but are not limited to, the following: 
• An employee is involved in a physical or verbal altercation on the job. 
• An employee has an excessive number of incidents or accidents on the job. 
• An employee exhibits unusual behavior such as slurred speech or unsteady walking or movement on the job. 
• An employee has an odor of alcohol or marijuana on his person on the job. 
• An employee is in possession of alcohol, drugs, or drug paraphernalia on the job. 
• An employee is observed using illegal drugs or alcohol or has exhibited the symptoms and manifestations of being impaired due to alcohol or drug use. 
• An employee has caused or contributed to an accident while on the job. 
3.  In the event a supervisor determines that reasonable suspicion exists that an employee is under the influence of drugs and/or alcohol, the supervisor shall immediately report the incident to his immediate supervisor or department head and shall complete the form entitled Observation Checklist. 
4.  The determination of whether reasonable suspicion exists shall be made by the department head or, in his absence, by the highest-ranking supervisory staff on duty at the time. 
5.  Following the determination that reasonable suspicion exists, the facts underlying the determination of reasonable suspicion shall be disclosed to the employee at the time the demand to submit to testing is made. The employee shall be transported to and from the testing site by the employee's supervisor or a designee. Following the testing procedure, the person transporting the employee shall make appropriate arrangements to transport the employee home. 
6.  Supervisors shall be required to document in writing, by the next working day, the specific facts, symptoms or observations that formed the basis for their determination that reasonable suspicion existed to warrant the testing of an employee. All documents created in connection with the determination of reasonable. Suspicion shall be forwarded to the human resources director. 
7.  Testing after accidents or injury: An employee in a safety sensitive position, an employee involved in the interdiction of illegal drugs, or an employee who, in his job duties, is given unsupervised custody of prisoners or contraband shall be subject to a drug and alcohol test conducted when, while on duty or just prior to going on duty: 
a.  The employee is operating a vehicle and/or equipment causing damage or bodily injury; or 
b.  The employee is involved in a fatality; or 
c.  The employee is cited with a traffic violation; or 
d.  The employee sustains a work-related injury requiring medical treatment beyond first aid. 
Promotion testing. Whenever an employee is promoted or transferred to a safety-sensitive position from a non-safety-sensitive position, and whenever an employee is promoted or transferred to a position which requires a commercial driver's license from a position which does not require a commercial driver's license, the employee shall be required to pass a drug and alcohol screening test. The employee shall be informed, prior to his application for promotion/transfer that testing is required. Such testing shall take place only after an offer of promotion/transfer has been extended to the employee, conditional on passing the test. 
(Ord. No. 2011-15, § 1, 5-16-2011) 
Section 15-5. - Prescription drug use. 
Any employees using prescription medication while on the job shall do so in strict accordance with medical directions. It is the employee's responsibility to notify the prescribing physician of the duties required by the employee's position and to ensure the physician approves the use of the prescription medication while the employee is performing his duties. 
The abuse and/or inappropriate use of legally prescribed drugs, including the performance of duties when the employee knows or should know that he is potentially impaired due to prescription drug use, shall be prohibited and shall be deemed a violation of this policy. Job performance or attendance deficiencies resulting from use shall be cause for disciplinary action up to and including termination. If any employee's behavior or job performance gives rise to a reasonable suspicion that the employee is abusing or inappropriately using prescription medication, the employee may be required to submit to drug testing and to take leave until such time as the employee is cleared to return to work by the employee's physician, the Medical Review Officer, and the human resources director. 
Employees and job applicants shall at the time of testing provide the testing laboratory with a list of those prescriptions and over-the-counter medications the employee recently has used. The list of medications shall be kept confidential until there has been a test result. The list of medications shall be disclosed only to the Medical Review Officer, who will determine whether the positive result was due to the lawful use of any of the listed medications. 
Section 15-6. - Consent. 
Before a drug and/or alcohol test is administered, employees and job applicants will be asked to sign a Consent Form authorizing the test and permitting release of test results to the employer and the Medical Review Officer. The consent form shall provide a space for employees and job applicants to acknowledge that they have been notified of the requirements of this policy. Section 15-7. Refusal to consent. 
Job applicants: Any applicant for a position for which pre-employment drug and/or alcohol screening is permitted by law who refuses to consent to a drug and/or alcohol test shall be denied employment, and any conditional offer of employment shall immediately be rescinded. 
Employees. Any employee who refuses to sign the required consent form or to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test as required shall be deemed to have violated this policy. 
No show. Employees who fail to appear at the designated collection site to submit to a required drug and/or alcohol test when so directed shall be deemed to have refused to submit to the test shall be deemed to have violated this policy. A "no show" shall include any attempt to adulterate a test sample or otherwise frustrate, impair, or otherwise impede the testing process. 
[Section 15-7. Reserved.] 
Section 15-8. - Testing laboratory guidelines. 
All testing procedures shall be administered and accounted for by an approved laboratory and/or medical facility operating in compliance with the National Institute of Drug Abuse (NIDA) or College of American Pathologists (CAP) guidelines. 
Urine samples shall be provided in a private restroom stall or similar enclosure so that employees and applicants may not be viewed while providing the sample, unless circumstances require monitored testing. Outer garments, bags, briefcases, purses, or other containers will not be permitted into the test area. The water in the commode shall be colored with dye to protect against dilution of test samples. If the drug and/or alcohol test is to be conducted using a specimen other than urine (e.g. hair, saliva, blood, etc.), the sample shall be collected in a manner consistent with the privacy of the employee and the need to minimize the possibility of adulteration and/or mislabeling of the sample. 
Whenever an initial test for drugs and alcohol is found to be positive, the laboratory will then carry out additional tests pursuant to laboratory testing guidelines to confirm that the initial positive indication was correct. If the second procedure also indicates the presence of drugs or alcohol, the test result is considered a Confirmed Positive Result. 
Section 15-9. - Confidentiality of test results. 
To the extent allowed by law, all information from an employee's or job applicant's drug and alcohol screening shall be confidential and only available to the Medical Review Officer, department head, the human resources director and those with a need to know at the discretion of the city manager. Disclosure of test results to any other person, agency, or organization shall be prohibited unless written authorization is obtained from the employee or job applicant. In any case, the results of an initial positive drug or alcohol test shall not be released until the results are confirmed. 
Section 15-10. - Drug and alcohol convictions. 
Consistent with the Federal Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988, employees shall report to his department head within five working days any arrest or conviction made under a criminal drug or alcohol law and any charge made under a drug or alcohol law for which conviction could cause the loss of driving privileges. The department head shall then investigate and make appropriate recommendations to the human resources director. Section 15-11. Procedure for voluntarily reported impairment. 
If an employee voluntarily comes forward to human resources director or to his supervisor to seek treatment for alcohol or substance abuse problem before he is required to submit to a screening test by a supervisor) the City of Douglasville will seek to assist the employee. The employee shall receive the following assistance: 
The human resources director shall provide the employee with a list of alcohol and substance abuse hotlines where counseling can be obtained, a list of treatment programs, and assistance in filing for health insurance reimbursement. 
The employee will be allowed to use available annual leave and sick leave to seek treatment. If the employee does not have sufficient available leave to seek treatment, then the employee will be granted unpaid leave of absence as allowed in Section 11-13(6) of the City of Douglasville Personnel Ordinance to seek treatment. 
Voluntarily reported impairment shall not be the sole basis for employee discipline. Where disciplinary action was not being considered by the City prior to voluntary reporting by the employee, if the employee is able to continue working while seeking treatment, then employee may remain in his job as long as the employee is not using public vehicles or in a position to present a danger to the public or fellow workers, and so long as no further violations of this Policy occur. At no time may the employee be under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substance while at work or on work premises. 
After the employee successfully completes an alcohol and/or controlled substance abuse program and receives a negative result in screening tests, the employee may return to his regular job subject to random alcohol and controlled substance screening tests for a period of 12 months. If at any time during this 12-month period, a screening test indicates the presence of alcohol or controlled substances in the employee's system, the employee may be immediately terminated. 
At all times, the confidentiality of the employee shall be protected. 
Chapter 16 - SAFETY POLICY 

Section 16-1. - Purpose. 
It is the policy of the City of Douglasville to provide a safe place of employment for every employee and to abide by accident prevention regulations set forth by federal and state government. In accordance with enforcing this safety policy, the City will maintain a multi-departmental safety committee with a designated person serving as "Safety Coordinator" to preside over this committee. The safety committee will hold quarterly meetings covering various safety related topics. The safety committee will also conduct two safety self inspections every six months to ensure citywide compliance. 
Section 16-2. - Safety rules. 
Maintenance of a safe and healthful working environment is of the utmost importance for the successful operation of the City. Each employee must be alert constantly to his personal obligation to observe safe operating procedures. All employees shall adhere to the following safety rules: 
1.  Report all accidents with injuries or damage to City property on the same day ofthe occurrence and obtain proper first aid to prevent further injury. 
2.  Report obviously unsafe conditions or defective equipment as soon as possible to your immediate supervisor. 
3.  Supervisors shall keep fire exits and walkways clear and accessible at all times. No employee shall obstruct any fire exit. 
4.  Do not work on any electrical equipment unless the power is turned off. 
5.  Use ladders properly; never use the top two steps. Use only ladders in good condition as determined by the Maintenance Supervisor or the immediate supervisor. 
6.  Never move furniture or heavy objects unless authorized to do so; use proper personal protection equipment and other staff assistance. 
7.  Do not engage in horseplay. 
8.  Never obstruct a breaker panel (three feet clearance is required all around). 
9.  Use safety glasses or personal protection equipment when cutting grass, wood or welding. 
10.  Obey all warning signs. 
11.  Wear protective gloves when administering first aid. 
12.  Use caution when lifting heavy loads. Lift with the legs instead of with the back. 
13.  Use caution when walking or working on wet or slick surfaces. 
14.  Report immediately any defective or unsafe electrical equipment or appliances. 
15.  Exercise caution at all times. 
16.  Regarding any operation of a City-owned vehicle, and regarding operation of any other vehicle while being used for City business: 
a.  Do not drive while impaired by drugs, alcohol or other intoxicants; do not drive when impaired by illness, fatigue, injury, or prescription medication. 
b.  Do not permit non-employees or unauthorized employees to drive. 
c.  Use special caution when backing up; use a "spotter" when visibility is limited. 
d.  In the event of an emergency stop or a stop due to a disabled vehicle, move the vehicle completely off the road when possible, avoiding curves, hills, or other places where the view may be obstructed; set the parking brake when stopped on a hill to avoid vehicle movement; use four-way flashers to warn approaching traffic. 
e.  Do not smoke or allow smoking within the vehicle. 
f.  Do not use a radar detector with the vehicle. 
g.  Keep the vehicle secure after parking by locking the doors and taking the key. 
h.  Do not "text" while driving. 
i.  Drivers and all passengers must wear seatbelts. 
j.  Turn on headlights after dark or during rain. 
k.  Obey the speed limit. 
l.  Use turn signals when turning or changing lanes. 
m.  Obey all State and local laws. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-62, § 1 , 12-15-2014) 
Section 16-3. - Injury reporting requirements. 
The following procedures should be followed to ensure compliance with the City's Safety Policy and Worker's Compensation regulations. 
1.  Every employee should immediately notify his immediate supervisor of any injury. 
2.  The immediate supervisor should assess the injury and make the determination if the injury requires first aid, treatment by a physician or clinic posted on the Worker's Compensation Panel of Physicians or transport to an area hospital. Under State Law, the City is NOT responsible for treatment rendered by the employee's choice of physician when the employee has knowledge and has been advised to seek treatment from a physician on the posted panel. 
3.  The immediate supervisor should complete the Supervisor's First Report of Injury or Accident and submit it to the Human Resources Department within 24 hours or on the first day of business after the injury. 
4.  All incidents requiring medical services require the Supervisor to follow-up with the injured employee to determine work availability of the employee. 
5.  All initial and subsequent medical reports or information that are made available to an immediate supervisor should be immediately forwarded to the Human Resources Department. 
6.  Employees shall obtain a form from the treating physician's office listing their work restrictions, next appointment date, time and date of the current appointment and the physician's name and phone number. The employee is responsible for getting this form or a copy of it to the immediate supervisor. 
7.  If an employee misses any full day of scheduled work time due to injury on the job, the immediate supervisor shall notify the Human Resources Director immediately and shall ensure that the injured employee's time sheet is correctly coded for workers' compensation leave. 
8.  An employee who is absent from work due to workers' compensation leave shall maintain contact with his or immediate supervisor and the Human Resources Department regarding his work availability and injury status. Immediate supervisors shall inform the Human Resources Department whenever an employee fails to comply with this policy. 
Section 16-4. - Instructions to drivers in case of accident. 
These instructions shall apply to non-police employees driving a City of Douglasville vehicle involved in any collision. 
Call the Georgia State Patrol and then report the accident to the Human Resources Director or the Department Head if the Human Resources Director is not available. 
Section 16-5. - Driver license check, driver background check, defensive driving training. 
Every employee whose job description requires a valid driver's license shall consent and cooperate to assist the Human Resources Director in verifying annually the status of the employee's driver's license; any such employee who suffers the suspension or revocation of his driver's license, or is cited for any offense which may impact his ability to drive shall immediately thereafter inform his supervisor. 
Every employee whose job description requires a valid driver's license shall additionally consent and cooperate to assist the Human Resources Director in obtaining an annual check of his drivers history from GCIC and/or MVR. Such consent shall be in writing, and may be in the form of continuing consent for repeated history checks. The information in such drivers histories may be used by supervisors to determine which, if any, City-owned vehicles the subject employee may drive. 
Every employee whose job description requires a valid driver's license shall, annually or whenever required by his supervisor, take and pass a driver safety training course administered by the Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 2011-15, § 2, 5-16-2011) 
Section 16-6. - Fitness for duty. 
1.  Generally. All employees shall be fit for duty to perform the tasks required by their respective job descriptions. Whenever an employee's performance of any essential function in his job description has become substantially impaired, his supervisor may require the employee to submit to a fitness examination to determine whether there is a health-related cause, as a condition of continued employment When warranted, an employee in non-safety-sensitive position may be required to submit to a physical fitness examination; when warranted, an employee in safety-sensitive position may be required to submit to a physical and/or mental fitness examination. A supervisor may not require a non-safety-sensitive employee to submit to a mental examination. 
2.  Voluntary exams, options after exam. In addition to fitness examinations mandated due to failure to perform, where relevant, voluntary fitness examinations may be utilized as a condition in settlement of an employee disciplinary matter. Whenever loss of fitness is confirmed or substantiated by an examination by a physician or other professional health care provider, either temporarily or permanently, appropriate employment options may include: use of leave, reasonable accommodation of a disability, reassignment transfer/demotion where alternate work is available, disability retirement, or discharge. 
3.  Notice. In order to require an employee to submit to fitness examination, the supervisor shall first consult with the Human Resources Director, and coordinate preparation of a written notice to the affected employee. No examination shall be required unless: 
(a)  The employee's work performance has suffered; or 
(b)  The employee has exhibited continuing behavior (or admitted a health problem) which could endanger the safety of others if left uninvestigated. 
The notice shall state: 
(a)  The employee's job position; 
(b)  Any task(s) or ability in his job description which the employee has substantially failed to perform; 
(c)  How and approximately when that failure was manifested in the employee's behavior, or expressed verbally; 
(d)  The fact that an examination will be required, that the employee must consent to release of this information to the supervisor and other administrative personnel, and any other relevant matters; 
(e)  The date, time and place of the evaluation; 
(f)  The name of the medical doctor, psychiatrist or psychologist conducting the evaluation; 
(g)  A directive to cooperate with the medical doctor, psychiatrist, or psychologist and/or his staff, and completely and honestly answer any questions posed by the evaluator or their staff; 
(h)  Notice to the employee and the evaluator that the evaluation is being conducted for use by the City; 
(i)  Notice that the evaluation is confidential between the employee and the evaluator to the extent required by law which allows the evaluator to release limited information with the permission of the employee to the City as necessary to determine if the employee is fit for duty; 
(j)  Notice that if the employee declines to provide access to information provided by the evaluator to be provided to the City, the department will take the appropriate action which may include disciplinary action up to termination. 
The evaluation shall be conducted to provide the City with sufficient information to make a determination of the employee's fitness for duty. The evaluator will be designated by the City and must meet the requirements of law for licensing of medical doctors, psychiatrists, and/or psychologists. The evaluator shall be instructed by the City to only release that information as allowed by the employee or as otherwise authorized by law. 
The evaluation shall be paid by, ordered by and conducted for the City. 
(Ord. No. 2011-15, § 3, 5-16-2011) 
Section 16-7. - Weapons prohibited on city property. 
The Chief of Police shall maintain a policy, applicable to employees of the City Police Department, regulating the carrying of weapons in City buildings and on City property. All other employees are prohibited from carrying or bringing weapons, including but not limited to firearms, into City buildings and on City property. 
( Ord. No. O-2014-36, § 2 , 7-2-2014) 
Section 16-8. - Workplace violence. 
The City is committed to providing a safe workplace for its employees. To ensure a safe workplace, the City will not tolerate any work-related threat or act of physical violence by any employee. City employees shall not: 
(a)  Intentionally cause physical injury or unwanted touching to any other person while on duty, or to any City elected official or any City employee at any time; or 
(b)  Verbally, in writing, or by gesture express a desire to physically harm any other person while on duty, or to harm any City elected official or any City employee at any time; or 
(c)  Intentionally cause or threaten to harm to City property. 
Exceptionally, it is not a violation of this policy for an employee to defend himself from physical violence initiated by another person, nor to defend another person from violence initiated by a third party. It is not a violation of this policy for an employee to express thoughts of violence about a third person to a professional counselor nor to any employee of the Human Resources department in the course of requesting an EAP referral for counselling. 
Violence or the threat of violence, by or against any City employee or any other person will result serious disciplinary action, up to and including termination. 
All employees are expected to immediately report any potentially dangerous situation to a supervisor or Human Resources. When an employee observes or becomes aware of an act of violence in the work place which has resulted in physical injury of any person and where medical attention is needed, the employee shall call 911 and request medical assistance. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-40 , § 1, 8-1-2016) 
Chapter 17 - OTHER POLICIES 

Section 17-1. - Equal opportunity and non-discrimination policy. 
All applicants for positions and employees of the City of Douglasville shall be ensured of fair and equitable treatment in all aspects of personnel administration, including hiring, training, promotion, and disciplinary action without regard to political affiliation, handicap, race, color, national origin, sex, age, or religious creed and with proper regard for their privacy and constitutional rights as citizens. 
The Human Resources Director shall see that information about job opportunities and the equal employment policy of the City of Douglasville are readily available to all citizens of the City and especially to all potential job applicants. 
Any applicant or employee who believes that he has been discriminated against shall have the right to counsel with the Human Resources Director. The Human Resources Director shall take immediate steps to correct any violation of this policy. Any complaint against the Human Resources Director shall be taken to the City Manager. 
The City maintains an Equal Employment Opportunity Plan in accordance with Department of Justice Regulations, and the same is available for inspection by employees and members of the public in the office of the Human Resources Director. 
Section 17-2. - Unlawful harassment policy. 
1.  It is the policy of the City of Douglasville to prohibit harassment of its employees based on sex, age, race, color, national origin, religion or disability. This prohibition applies to management employees, non-management employees and even outsiders and vendors. It is not the purpose of this policy to intrude upon the personal lives of City employees or to interfere with social relationships, which are not otherwise regulated or prohibited by departmental rules or the City's policy prohibiting nepotism within a single department. Nevertheless, unlawful harassment has no place at the City of Douglasville and will not be permitted. 
2.  Sexual harassment includes: not only unwelcome or offensive sexual advances, and requests for personal favors, but also other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature, such as uninvited touching or sexually related comments of any kind. 
3.  Other types of unlawful harassment include derogatory comments, jokes, or other offensive speech or conduct regarding individuals or groups based on the gender, sexual orientation, age, race, color, national origin, religion or disability of these persons. 
Any employee who believes he has witnessed, is being subjected to or has been subjected to unlawful harassment by anyone connected with his work is required to report the matter immediately to his supervisor, to the Human Resources Director or to the City Manager. Every report of unlawful harassment will be investigated, and incidents of actual unlawful harassment will result in appropriate remedial action. Violation of this policy by any employee who harasses another can result in discipline up to and including immediate discharge. 
Under normal circumstances the supervisor of the employee alleged to have harassed another shall be assigned to investigate the incident and dispose of the matter appropriately, and shall make a verbal or written report of the matter to the City Manager. Exceptionally, where the City Manager determines that the supervisor has or may have a conflict of interest, or where the City Manager determines that it is in the best interest of the city to proceed otherwise, the City Manager shall relieve the supervisor of such responsibility and shall personally investigate the incident and make an appropriate disposition of the matter. All parties involved in the investigation of a complaint must provide full and complete information relevant to the complaint. 
Any supervisor, who has reason to believe that an employee in his department has unlawfully harassed another employee, should take appropriate disciplinary action, whether or not the harassed victim requests assistance, if the harassment includes any of the following: 
1.  Threats of violence or reprisals; 
2.  Non-consensual physical contact; 
3.  Repeated harassment after any warning from a supervisor regarding prior harassment; or 
4.  Offers to trade work-related favors for sexual favors. 
Other types of unlawful harassment shall be dealt with appropriately by the supervisors or the Human Resources Director, as the situation dictates. 
No employee who has made any truthful report of unlawful harassment shall be allowed to suffer any sanction or retaliatory action as a result of such report. No employee should assume that the City is aware of a problem. Complaints and concerns must be brought to the attention of the City so that the City can take steps to correct any problem. 
Section 17-3. - Policy on employee use of computers, and other communications. 
1.  Computers generally. Computer technologies, including computer files, the internet, cell phones telecommunications equipment, and electronic mail (i.e., email) are designed to enable and enhance the performance of official duties. Computer hardware and software should be used for legitimate City business to serve a significant City purpose. Every employee has a duty to protect and conserve government property, and shall not use such property, or allow its use, for other than authorized purposes or in violation of any law. Most computerized records and communications are subject to the Georgia Open Records Act, and are considered public information. Most computerized records are subject to the City's records retention schedule. 
Employees shall use reasonable judgment in the performance of their duties including use of computer technologies, and employees who abuse computer hardware, software and other technology resources are subject to disciplinary action. Sending and consent to receipt of fraudulent, harassing or lewd sexual messages by employees is prohibited, except where job performance requires the employee to quote or paraphrase the message of another speaker. No messages, websites, or other communications with derogatory or inflammatory remarks about an individual's or group's race, age, sex, religion, national origin, physical attributes, disability or sexual orientation should be transmitted or willingly received on City computers, except where job performance requires the employee to quote or paraphrase the message of another speaker. Likewise employees shall not attempt or consent to access such materials. No email or other computer technology shall be created or sent that might constitute discriminatory, harassing, intimidating, hostile or offensive communications on the basis of gender, race, color, national origin, sexual orientation, disability, or other grounds. 
2.  System safety. City computer equipment and software is owned by the City of Douglasville and shall not be treated as private property. Employees, other than employees of the Information Services Department, shall refrain from any practices that might jeopardize the operating system of City computers and/or data files, including but not limited to modifications to the operating system, installing applications, and work on system hardware. To prevent computer viruses from being transmitted through the system, employees other than those of the Information Services Department shall not download unauthorized software. Any questions about the safety of a down loaded file or email should be directed to the Information Technology Department before taking any action. 
3.  E-mail. Email should be used primarily for City business. Its purpose is to provide expeditious communication for employees for business purposes. It may be used for any business purpose including but not limited to routine matters such as scheduling meetings and conference calls, policy notices, request for information or directives to complete tasks, and notification of employees' whereabouts. Incidental purposes may include announcing work-related social events, or contacting others about work-related transportation or work hours. 
No employee should send any email communication that would be socially inappropriate if communicated face-to-face or over the telephone, or if seen by a staff member, an elected official or a consultant, other than the intended receiver. While email is intended for official purposes, brief, incidental and occasional personal use of email is authorized. Short personal messages to individuals or to small groups are acceptable, but email users must exercise common sense, good judgment, and propriety in the use of this resource. 
Whenever any City employee uses an electronic signature for official city business, the signature shall be in a form pre-approved by the Community Relations Director. 
4.  Internet. 
a.  Generally. Internet access other than email shall be primarily for business purposes. Due to limited bandwidth, internet audio and streaming capabilities shall be used for City business purposes only, and personal use is prohibited. All other City internet capabilities may be used for the same purposes as for email. 
b.  Social media. 
i.  Personal use of websites other than those registered to the City or City entities. The City permits very limited personal usage of social media during the workday, similar to receiving a personal phone call of a limited duration. Employees should use discretion and understand that even very brief periods of usage can collectively amount to significant periods of time. Supervisors have the right and ability to further restrict usage, as appropriate. Nothing in this policy limits or restricts the City's right and/or ability to monitor or modify use of City equipment. 
It is the policy of the City of Douglasville that employees may make personal use of social media websites other than those registered to the City or City entities, but it is the responsibility of employees to ensure that such use does not cause a decline in public confidence in or respect for the City or the individual employee. Employees must exercise appropriate discretion, so as not to discredit the City or themselves as employees. Generally, employees may post personal information that is not inconsistent with this or any other City policy. Such posts may include general information about City activities, including information about the workplace, an employee's projects, etc. For certain positions, the City recognizes social media as a significant and effective communication tool. 
If otherwise compliant with copyright and other legal restrictions, employees may post photographs or other depictions of the City, including City facilities, events, etc. However, the City reserves the right to require pre-approval of such posts and to require the employee to remove the photograph or other depiction. Employees may not post the City's adopted logos and trademarks except in compliance with the provisions of this section. City employees shall demonstrate respect for the dignity of the City, its citizens, its customers, its vendors, and its employees. Internet postings or messages left on social media sites are available for public viewing, and employees shall refrain from embarrassing, harassing, or bullying other users of such sites, as well as City employees, customers, vendors, or citizens. Employees shall refrain from using ethnic slurs, personal insults, or obscenity, or using language that may be considered hateful or bullying. Even if a message is posted anonymously, it may be possible to trace it back to the sender. 
Employees may not upload any audio/video files or other data files captured on devices owned by the City, without prior approval by his department manager. Employees are not permitted to use social media technologies to influence or affect the results of any election or nomination while acting in their official City capacity, on City time, or using any City equipment. Employees are not permitted to post any privileged or confidential information. Employees should use good judgment in their postings and social media activity. If the content of a post is not something that an employee would feel comfortable with their supervisor reading or viewing, it is probably inappropriate and may conflict with this policy. 
ii.  Sites owned by the City or City entities. Employees shall not set up separate social media pages or websites for the city without approval from the City Manager or the Community Relations Director. Social media pages representing the city will be managed by the Community Relations Department. Social media sites owned by the city's constituent corporations or authorities may be managed by city staff other than employees of the Community Relations Department, but shall coordinate their work with the Community Relations Department staff. 
5.  Employee privacy. Employees using computer e-mail, the Internet, and other computer technologies shall have no right of privacy therein for their use of City-owned devices or for use during City-paid work time, and the City reserves the right to monitor and review email, internet use, computer files and other computer records and use history by any employee at any time. 
All e-mail, data files, records, hardware and software on City computers are owned by the City of Douglasville. The City has the right to inspect any communications, records, files, email, and websites visited or used by any employee at any time. Inappropriate access is subject to review with employees and may result in disciplinary action. 
Employees should be aware that information posted on the Internet, and social media in particular, is not secure or private, even if active steps are taken to restrict access to an employee's site. Once information has been posted on the Internet, it is generally trackable, traceable, and accessible indefinitely. In addition, police employees, in particular, are advised that, in the event information has been posted on the Internet identifying them as a police officer, they may be ineligible for specialized positions in which anonymity is required. 
6.  Employee use of non-city computers. All employees should be aware that due to the nature of their employment in the public sector, they are held to a higher standard. As a result, certain kinds of Internet postings may be detrimental in the employee's professional capacity. Whether social media technologies are used during or after business hours or posts made on personal or publicly accessible websites, employees should assume they are at all times representing the City, and employee postings, images, etc. are a reflection of both the City and its staff. In the event employees choose to post information that is in violation of this policy, they should be aware that they will be held accountable and disciplinary action may be taken. Employees should consider the possible adverse consequences of some Internet postings with respect to continued employment, cross examination in court cases, and potential public embarrassment. Employees are encouraged to seek the guidance of supervisors regarding any posting that they are concerned may adversely reflect upon the City. 
When making use of social media and other internet technologies, employees shall ensure that such use does not cause a decline in public confidence in and/or respect for the City or the individual employee. Employees must exercise appropriate discretion, so as not to discredit the City or themselves as employees. Generally, employees may post personal information and information related to City employment that is not inconsistent with this or any other City policy. Such posts may include general information about City activities, including information about the workplace, an employee's projects, etc. 
If an employee identifies himself as a City employee or discusses matters related to the City on a website, web log, or social media site, the employee's web log or social media site must include a disclaimer on the front page stating that it does not express the views of the City and that the employee is expressing only his personal views. For example: "The views expressed on this website/web log are mine alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of my employer" Place the disclaimer in a prominent position and repeat it for each posting expressing an opinion related to the City or the City's business. Employees must keep in mind that if they post information on a web log or social media site that is in violation of City policy and/or federal, state, or local law, the disclaimer will not shield them from disciplinary action. 
Police employees are reminded that, in the event information has been posted on the Internet identifying them as a police officer, they may be ineligible for specialized positions in which anonymity is required. 
Employees may not upload any audio/video files or other data files captured on devices owned by the City, without prior approval by his department manager. Employees are not permitted to post any privileged or confidential City information. 
7.  City website. The City's website will be managed by the Community Relations Department, which will approve, edit and post any information. However, each department will be responsible for ensuring the accuracy and timeliness of information on its web page, both at the time of posting and as a continuing duty. Each department head shall should review their department's web content on a regular basis. Departments requesting posting should submit information to the Community Relations Department not later than 24 hours prior to the posting date requested. The provisions of Subsection 8. on City communications generally also apply to employee use of computers. 
8.  Communications generally. 
a.  Paid promotions. The Community Relations Director will approve in advance and edit all paid promotion for the City and for its corporations and authorities, including but not limited to print promotions, broadcast, internet, billboard, and radio. This does not include paid advertising of legal notices or notices utilized for hiring. The City will not advertise programs, services or events for which neither the City nor its corporations nor authorities serves as a sponsor. 
b.  Photo usage. No employees will post or publicize photographs or videos for which the City does not possess the copyright or the owner's written permission for use. The City will not provide photo credit in its publications or postings. 
c.  Cultural identity. Except when necessary for official or legal purposes, in signing official communications employees will refrain from use of their department's name in favor of using "City of Douglasville" or the name of the City corporation or authority for which they work. Should a department have a specific need for utilizing the department's name for advertising or branding purposes, the employee shall consult the Community Relations Director prior to such use. Employees may use their job titles without special permission in all official communications. 
d.  City seal. The city seal is the skint chestnut tree with an urban and rural background, with a rounded border bearing the name of the city. The city seal logo will be reserved for official city business, and may be used by the City Clerk to seal official documents, but no employee shall use the City seal for any other purpose. 
e.  Press releases and press statements. Unless otherwise directed by the City Manager, the Community Relations Director will act as the City's Public Information. Exceptionally, for civil emergencies the City's PIO shall be as stated in Chapter 30 of the City Code. The Director may utilize press releases to announce City programs, services, events, and for public education, among other purposes. Proposed press releases may be prepared by any individual, but must be approved by the Community Relations Director, or designee, prior to distribution or release to the press. The Community Relations Director shall seek guidance from the City Manager, the City Council or the City Attorney whenever appropriate. Employees requesting a press release, should email ask-comm@douglasvillega.gov and submit detailed information proposed for release, allowing at least one week prior to the proposed distribution date whenever possible. 
f.  Media inquiries and interviews. A media inquiry is a request for information, other than a request for records, made by a member of the press. Employees will promptly refer all media inquiries and media requests for interviews to the Community Relations Department, and assist with formulating a response. The Community Relations Department will consult with the City Manager or the City Attorney when appropriate. Exceptionally, media inquiries about and during a civil emergency will be handled as provided in Chapter 30 of the City Code. 
g.  Presentations and publications for the public. The City creates and distributes a variety of communication documents for the general public including, but not limited to, press releases, media advisories, brochures, PowerPoint presentations, annual reports, staff reports, newsletters, advertisements, posters, postcards, and flyers. All presentations, publications and items purchased with City funds should bear the City of Douglasville logo and web site address. Externally distributed publications must be reviewed by the Community Relations Director or designee to guarantee that all publications representing the City reflect a consistent message and image and to ensure that branding guidelines have been met. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-56 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2018-56 , § 1, adopted Dec. 17, 2018, amended § 17-3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17-3 pertained to policy on employee use of computers and derived from Ord. No. 2010-18, § 1, adopted April 19, 2010. 
Section 17-4. - Policy on off-duty use of City vehicles. 
1.  General policy. City-owned vehicles are generally not for personal use and generally not for travel between any employee's home and the work site. City-owned vehicles shall be utilized primarily for work purposes by on-duty employees. Except as provided below, each city-owned vehicle in service shall be parked at the end of each business day in the designated "motor pool" area of the City Hall parking lot, the Maintenance and Sanitation parking lot, the Hunter Park parking lot or other city controlled area as directed by the City Manager. 
For certain employee positions, where the employee is likely to be called in to work or to a remote work site on short notice, or where the employee's responsibilities require frequent short-duration periods of work during off-duty times, or under other appropriate circumstances, the mayor and council may authorize limited use of a vehicle for travel between home and the work site. These exceptions shall be made only where it is advantageous to the city in terms of cost or time efficiency. 
Additionally, any employee to whom a vehicle has been assigned for on-duty use may additionally use the vehicle during meal breaks within a 15-mile radius of City Hall or the work site. 
City vehicles shall not be used for purposes of allowing the employee to commute to or to perform work for another employer, nor to earn income in any way other than through his employment with the city. 
Where required by law, the value of any personal use of any city vehicle shall be attributed to the employee as income. However, personal use of any city-owned vehicle shall not be considered an entitlement, a vested employment benefit, nor a term of employment for any employee, and the city may terminate use of vehicles to all employees or to any class of employees at any time. 
2.  Established indefinite exceptions. 
a.  Non-police. The Maintenance and Sanitation Director, and the on-call Maintenance Department Crew Chief are authorized to use City vehicles for travel between work and home within a 25-mile radius of City Hall, and for all city business regardless of distance. If the City Manager is assigned a vehicle for general use pursuant to Section 17-5, then the City Manager shall utilize that vehicle subject to the restrictions of this paragraph a. The City Manager shall have authority to give written permission for any employee to have indefinite off-duty use of a City take-home vehicle if the City Manager finds that the duties of this employee impose a substantial likelihood that the employee will be called regularly to duty on short notice to perform work of an urgent nature; all such use shall be limited to travel between work and home within a 25-mile radius of City Hall, and for all city business regardless of distance. 
b.  Police. Vehicles assigned to the Police Department shall be utilized as follows: 
i.  Unlimited use. Employee has the use of his assigned department vehicle for work use and some personal use based upon the degree of on-call responsibilities assigned to his position. Notwithstanding any other restrictions imposed by this subsection (i), the employee may use his assigned vehicle for commuting between his primary residence located not more than 40 miles from the Douglasville city limits (or to a point not more than 40 miles from the Douglasville city limits, if the primary residence is located more than 40 miles from the Douglasville city limits) and his work site, and for incidental personal stops made while traveling to and from work (outside the 25-mile radius of the Douglasville city limits) to destinations not farther than five miles off the most direct route between home and work. 
The Chief of Police has unlimited use, with the restriction of providing fuel for his department issued vehicle for personal use outside a 25 mile radius of the Douglasville city limits and for such other areas in which he is authorized to patrol, and in any areas for purposes of lawful hot pursuit or authorized mutual aid. On-duty use by the Deputy Chief of Police, the Police Major and all captains is unlimited within a 25-mile radius of the Douglasville city limits, but City vehicles can be utilized by these officers for on-duty use outside the 25-mile radius only upon approval of the Chief of Police. The Deputy Chief of Police, the Police Major and all captains have unlimited personal and off-duty use of their vehicles within a 25-mile radius of the Douglasville city limits and for such other areas in which the officer is authorized to patrol, and in any areas for purposes of lawful hot pursuit or authorized mutual aid. 
ii.  Limited use. Employee has the use of his assigned department vehicle for limited on-duty and off-duty use. Notwithstanding any other restrictions imposed by this subsection (ii), the employee may use his assigned vehicle for personal use for commuting between his primary residence located not more than 40 miles from the Douglasville city limits (or to a point not more than 40 miles from the Douglasville city limits, if the primary residence is located more than 40 miles from the Douglasville city limits) and his work site, and for incidental personal stops made while traveling to and from work (outside the 25-mile radius of the Douglasville city limits) to and from destinations not farther than five miles off the most direct route between home and work. Employees shall have unlimited on-duty use of City vehicles within a five mile radius of the Douglasville city limits and such other areas in which the officer is authorized to patrol, and in any areas for purposes of lawful hot pursuit or authorized mutual aid. City vehicles can be utilized by these officers for on-duty use outside the above prescribed limits only upon approval of the Chief of Police. Additionally, while the employee is off-duty but officially "on call", the employee shall have personal use of the City vehicle at any location within a 25-mile radius of the Douglasville city limits or within a 25-mile radius of his primary residence in Georgia. 
This limited use category includes all POST-certified Police employees not included in subsection (i) above, and the Police Evidence Technician, provided that such employee has worked for the City for at least one year and is not serving disciplinary suspension. 
iii.  On-duty use only. Employee has the use of their assigned department vehicle only in an on-duty capacity and only for use which is directly related to department or city business. Employees in this capacity are not allowed to take their vehicles home except under special approved instances which are approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. All Police employees not expressly classified in subsection (i) or (ii) are classified for (iii) "On-duty use only". 
3.  Temporary exceptions. The City Manager may authorize temporary check-out of a vehicle by an employee, for purposes of travel to training sessions and for other work-related purposes, for limited periods of time outside the employee's normal work schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2011-45, §§ 2, 3(17-4), 10-17-2011; Ord. No. O-2014-21, § 1(Exh. A) , 3-3-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-57 , § 1, 12-7-2015; Ord. No. O-2017-48 , § 1, 8-7-2017) 
Section 17-5. - Policy on on-duty use of city vehicles, vehicle allowance option for City Manager. 
1.  List of authorized users. For any City department which uses one or more City vehicles on a recurring basis, the department director shall maintain a written record specifying: (a) the names of department employees or position titles authorized to drive City vehicles; (b) the vehicles each employee is authorized to drive; and (c) any purpose restrictions for any vehicles or employees. Each such record shall constitute a department rule, and department directors shall keep department employees informed of the content. Every employee who operates a City-owned vehicle shall comply with the safety rules of Section 16-2. 
2.  City Manager. The mayor and council may authorize a City-owned vehicle to be provided for use by the Manager, or the mayor and council may provide to the City Manager a cash vehicle allowance as part of the City Manager's compensation. Any cash vehicle allowance shall be set in an amount calculated to compensate the City Manager for use of his personal vehicle for purposes of daily transportation between the City Manager's home and City Hall, and for intrastate city business including but not limited to transportation to and from recurring meetings of the Georgia Municipal Association, the Georgia City and County Managers Association meeting locations, and similar meetings within Georgia. For City business where the City Manager must travel out of state, the City Manager shall receive mileage reimbursement at the same rate specified for reimbursement for elected City officials for those miles traveled outside the boundaries of Georgia in the City Manager's personal vehicle. Any vehicle allowance shall be treated as income for City tax and withholding purposes. To prevent compensation duplication, whenever the City Manager has been provided a vehicle allowance, for all city business within Georgia, the City Manager shall not make use of a City-owned vehicle where the City Manager is the only passenger, but the City Manager may ride in a City-owned vehicle carrying other City employees or City officials. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-57 , § 1, 12-7-2015) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. O-2015-57 , § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2015, amended § 17-5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 17-5 pertained to policy on on-duty use of City vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 2011-45, § 3(17-5), adopted Oct. 17, 2011. 
Section 17-6. - Policy on employment verification and reference checks. 
1.  For purposes of this section, the term "employment reference" means a verbal or written statement including a subjective opinion, and any basis for that opinion, from a City employee concerning the job performance of another named employee, given pursuant to a request from someone other than a City employee where the request is made for the purpose of considering the subject individual for employment or civic appointment. The phrase does not include an employee performance evaluation or other personnel records kept in the normal course of business. For purposes of this section, the term "employee" means a living individual employed or formerly employed by the City of Douglasville. 
2.  City employees, including the Human Resources Department, may share employment records information concerning named individual employees among staff members who have a job-related need for it, and may make the same available to agents and contractors of the City providing employment benefits or employment-related services to the City (such as insurers) to the extent allowed by state and federal laws and regulations. Additionally, statistics and other assembled information which do not name individual employees may be released to anyone. Further, any City employee may give affidavits or testimony concerning the employment or former employment of another employee in any legal proceeding, and may comply with requests for information from law enforcement officers. 
3.  Except as stated in paragraph 2 above, all requests for verification of employment, employment records, employment references, or other employment information will be handled by, and should be directed by other employees to, the Human Resources Department. Certain "directory information" may be released verbally or in written form by the Human Resources Department without restriction as follows: 
(a)  Employees' current and former position (job) titles and job descriptions; 
(b)  Employees' dates of employment; and 
(c)  Current, previous, and ending compensation amounts. 
4.  Except as stated in paragraph 2 above, for requests for employee information other than "directory information" any response shall be made in writing by the Human Resources Department, and shall be limited to the following: 
(a)  Existing employment records provided as follows: 
(i)  Pursuant to an Open Records Act request, which need not specify the legal basis for the request, limited and redacted as required by law; 
(ii)  Pursuant to a lawful subpoena or discovery request, provided that the City Attorney may object or seek to quash the request in the best interest of the City; 
(iii)  Pursuant to a written request or written consent from the subject employee or former employee. 
(b)  Employment references where the same are authorized by the subject individual pursuant to his written request or his written consent. 
5.  No employment information shall be provided except as authorized by this section or as otherwise required by law. 
Section 17-7. - State and federal legislation; condition of employment. 
(1)  These policies shall reflect, and be superseded by any changes mandated by state or federal legislation. 
(2)  Except as provided in Section 11-16, the benefits, policies and procedures herein are not conditions of employment. Except as provided in Section 11-16, the City of Douglasville reserved the right to modify, revoke, suspend, interpret, terminate or change any or all such plans, policies or procedures in whole or in part at any time, with or without prior notice. The language used in any city plan, policy or procedure is not intended to create, nor shall it be construed to constitute, a contract between the city and any one or all its employees. Employees are employed at will. 
(Ord. No. 2011-45, § 4, 10-17-2011) 
Section 17-8. - Conflicts of interest. 
1.  Conflict of interest. No City employee shall knowingly: 
a.  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of that employee's official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of that person's judgment or action in the performance of that employee's official duties; or 
b.  Disclose confidential information, including information obtained at meetings which are closed pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 14, concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which that person is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of that person or others; or 
c.  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this City or any portion of its government. 
2.  Disclosure. Any employee who shall have any financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the City shall disclose such interest to his supervisor and the City Manager and refrain from participating in any decision or action as an employee relating thereto. 
( Ord. No. O-2015-45, § 16 , 9-21-2015) 
Section 17-9. - Dress code. 
1.  General requirements. Except as otherwise provided in this section, City employees shall adhere to the following requirements for clothing and dress while on duty: 
a.  No clothing that reveals any uncovered undergarment, except shirts which reveal not more than five inches in length of the top of a camisole or undershirt directly below the neck. Layered shirts which reveal a shirt other than a traditional undergarment may be worn without limitation. 
b.  No midriff tops or other clothing that reveals any portion of the body below the top of the curvature of the breast and above a point two inches above the top of the kneecap. 
c.  No tank tops, sleeveless tops, dresses, or other shirts which reveal more than half of the top of either shoulder. 
d.  No shorts or pants for which the bottom sits higher than three inches below the bottom of the knee cap when the employee is standing. 
e.  No clothing with cut-off or frayed ends; no clothing with holes, rips, stains or paint spatters. 
f.  No skirts, kilts or dresses with a bottom hem falling higher than two inches above the top of the kneecap when the employee is standing; no skirts, kilts or dresses with slits which reveal any portion of the upper leg higher than five inches above the top of the kneecap when the wearer is standing or kneeling. 
g.  No clothing which is substantially transparent to skin on private parts of the body. 
h.  No piercing jewelry worn on any visible part of the body other than the ears; no ear piercing jewelry which fills a flesh piercing larger than ½ inch in diameter; no jewelry which could pose physical danger or inhibit the wearer's physical ability to perform work; no jewelry which bears text or a symbol which is demeaning or offensively directed toward any specific individual or specific group of individuals. 
i.  All employees shall wear appropriate undergarments adequate to support private areas of the body, and to complete the opaque body covering for any partly transparent outer garments. 
j.  No excessive body odor or excessive cologne or perfume. 
k.  No denim pants, shirts or jackets may be worn Monday through Thursday. 
l.  No sandals may be worn, but open toe shoes revealing the foot or toes over a length of not more than four inches measured along the radius of the front end of the shoe sole shall be permitted. Clogs with an open heel may be worn with opaque socks which cover the entire heel. All footwear other than open toe shoes and clogs shall completely enclose the toes and all lower edges of the foot, and be sufficient to protect the employee's feet from physical injury. 
m.  When tights or hose are worn, they must be covered by pants, a dress, a skirt or another looser garment from the top of the hips to a point not higher than two inches above the knee. 
2.  Exceptions. The following exceptions to subsection 1. shall apply: 
a.  POST-certified Police employees may instead wear a uniform or training clothing prescribed by the Police Chief or the Police Department Standard Operating Procedure, when it is appropriate to do so. 
b.  Parks and Recreation employees may wear alternate clothing as prescribed by written objective gender-neutral departmental rules made by the Director of Parks and Recreation. 
c.  Maintenance and Sanitation employees other than office clerks shall wear alternate clothing as prescribed by written objective gender-neutral departmental rules made by the Director of Maintenance and Sanitation. 
d.  Conference Center laborers and building inspectors shall wear the uniforms prescribed by written departmental objective gender-neutral rules made by the Director of Community and Development Services. 
e.  Any employee may dress within the bounds of good taste but outside the requirements of subsection 1: 
i.  At non-paid or optional events after normal work hours, such as the annual Chamber of Commerce gala, even if the employee is there as a result of City employment. 
ii.  When performing special assignments, such as retreat events or conferences, even if the employee is there as a result of City employment. 
iii.  Whenever the City Manager gives express permission for a special occasion. 
iv.  Whenever approved on a continuing basis by the City Manager as an accommodation to an individual's special health or religious needs. 
( Ord. No. O-2016-10 , § 1, 4-18-2016) 
Section 17-10. - Policy on signing city contracts. 
1.  Authorized signers. City Code Section 2-8 authorizes the Mayor and the City Manager to sign contracts on behalf of the City within certain limitations. City Code Section 2-175 authorizes the Human Resources (Personnel) Director to sign certain City agreements regarding deferred compensation. No City employee other than the City Manager or the Human Resources Director may sign any contract on behalf of the City unless the Mayor or the City Manager has already signed that contract document. 
2.  Document as contract. A contract is any document which purports to obligate or bind the City to any terms, or to release or waive or assign any rights or responsibilities of the City, regardless of whether the document is entitled "contract", and regardless of whether the document requires payment of any funds. "Contract" includes agreements, memoranda of understanding, amendments to contracts or agreements, change orders, assignments, waivers, releases, contracts, and other documents. "Contract" can include an application if the application states that the City will or may be bound to the terms without further action by the City. Any City employee who is in doubt about whether a document may constitute a City contract should contact the City's staff attorney and seek guidance. 
3.  Processing contracts for signature. Whenever a City employee or vendor requires a signature for the City on a new contract document, the employee should present the document initially to the City's staff attorney or to the City Clerk's office, as prescribed by the Standard Operating Procedure for Contracts on file with the City staff attorney. Absent a public safety emergency, no employee should initially present any contract for signature directly to the City Manager or to the Mayor, prior to presenting it to the City Clerk. 
4.  Unauthorized Signing by employee prohibited; mandatory minimum penalty. o Except as provided in paragraph 1 of this section, City employees are prohibited from signing any contract on behalf of the City. Any employee who commits a second or subsequent violation of this paragraph within any 36-month period shall be disciplined with punishment not less stringent than a three-day suspension without pay. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-55, § 3, 8-21-2017) 
Section 17-11. - City credit card policy. 
1.  Purpose. The City's credit card is a purchase card system, benefiting the City's departments through prompt payment to suppliers for low value purchases. Use of a City credit card benefits City employees by saving labor and time. 
2.  Generally. The City Manager may approve use of City credit cards by selected City department heads and other City employees (other than any employee of the Finance Department) to facilitate expeditious purchases for travel related expenses and for materials and services unrelated to travel. 
3.  Authorized employees. 
a.  The City Manager may authorize use of a City credit card, for intermittent use or continuing use, for any City employee who consents to use of the credit card and for whom the employee's department head consents to use by that employee. No City employee shall be required to use a City credit card. Any City employee who consents to use a City credit card shall first sign an employee consent statement, the provisions for which shall include the employee's pledge to use the credit card for business purposes only, authorization for the City to the amount of deduct any unauthorized purchases from the employee's wages, and the employee's acknowledgement of the applicable credit limit on the employee's use of the card. If City issued credit cards are used for personal use or any stated violation in this section, the cost of such purchase(s) will be considered an advance of future wages payable to the employee who made the purchase, and will be recovered in full from the employee's wages until the wage advance is fully repaid. Such wage deductions may result in receipt of wages by the employee below minimum wage for the pay period(s) subject to deduction. 
b.  For any City credit card issued to a City employee who is not a department head, the employee's department head must also approve the consent statement for issuance of the credit card and acknowledge the responsibility of the department head to monitor proper use of the card. No City employee who is authorized to use a City credit card may allow use of the credit card by any designee, employee or individual who has not signed an employee consent statement and received authorization for its use by the City Manager. 
4.  Authorized purchase purposes. Authorized employees may use City issued credit cards only for official business purchases of materials and services and for business travel expenses. The City's credit card serves as a means of payment only, and use of the card does not eliminate the need for employee compliance with other regulations concerning purchasing, budgeting and pre-authorization for travel. 
5.  Prohibited purchases. The City credit card may not be used to charge personal purchases; food may not be purchased with the City credit card except food incident to approved business travel and purchases pursuant to express permission from the City Manager. Prohibited uses of the City credit card include but are not limited to: 
a.  purchase of items substantially for personal use; 
b.  purchase of items in violation of the travel policy; 
c.  use of credit card for cash advances; and 
d.  unauthorized food purchases. 
6.  Purchase amount restrictions. Authorized employees may use the City credit card to purchase up to $1,000.00 per day for operating supplies or services and up to $5,000.00 per for travel expenses pursuant to the City's travel policy, with a daily limit of $5,000.00 for all such purchases. The City Manager may authorize a lower limit for any employee on a continuing basis, or may authorize a higher limit temporarily due to exceptional circumstances. 
7.  Ownership and cancellation of the credit card. The authorized employee and his department head are accountable for all activity on the credit card issued. The bank or the City Manager may limit, suspend or terminate charging privileges at any time without cause. If requested to do so, the employee cardholder will surrender the credit card upon request to the Finance Department, or to any authorized agent of the issuing bank if the bank so requests. 
8.  Department head responsibility. For every department for which a City credit card has been issued, the department head shall: 
a.  refrain from authorizing any subordinate employee to use a City credit card unless the employee has signed a consent agreement and received authorization to use the credit card from the City Manager; 
b.  know and observe the credit card's limitations and restrictions; 
c.  monitor card usage and require internal policies and procedures to be followed; 
d.  maintain proper record keeping; and 
e.  perform timely reconciliation and supply supporting documentation to the Finance Department within 60 days after any credit card purchase. 
9.  Protecting the Credit Card. Every holder of a City credit card shall protect it from theft and misuse, and shall treat it with the same care and security required for personal credit cards, bankcards, cash, and checks. Every employee authorized to use the City credit card shall sign the credit card immediately upon receipt, and store the City credit card in one or more a secure locations at all times. If a City credit card is lost or stolen, the authorized employee or his department head shall immediately contact the issuing bank's 24-hour toll-free number and notify the Finance Department. 
10.  City Manager's authority to vary restrictions. The City Manager is authorized to waive the restrictions of this policy concerning: (a) types of allowable purchases, (b) allowable time for reconciliation and (c) dollar limits on purchases, due to exceptional circumstances. The City Manager's authorization shall be documented in writing to the Finance Department, stating any applicable limits on such departures from this policy. 
11.  Compliance with policy. The Finance Department will investigate any suspected employee violations of this policy and refer any violations to the City Manager for sanctions. Sanctions for an employee who has made inappropriate charges with City credit card may include employee termination or other discipline, revocation or suspension or limitation of credit card privileges, and criminal prosecution. Sanctions for a department head innocent of any wrongful use of the credit card but whose subordinate employee has violated of this policy shall exclude personal discipline, but the City Manager may terminate or limit or suspend the credit card privileges of that department head regardless of personal culpability. The City Manager may consider human error and extraordinary circumstances when dealing with any violation of this policy. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-7 , § 1, 3-5-2018) 
Section 17-12. - Public events. 
A public event is any event hosted by the City or a City entity that is open to and intended primarily to entertain or inform the general public or media, including but not limited to press conferences, parades, concerts, tours, informational seminars, public input meetings, and seasonal festivals. Exceptionally, "public event" excludes meetings of the Mayor and City Council, meetings of City boards and commissions, meetings of City authorities and corporations, City sponsored athletic competitions other than non-profit fundraisers, and press conferences relating to and during a civil emergency. Planning for any public event shall be initiated by an employee filing a public event request form with the Community Relations Director, or by the Community Relations Director initiating this form. For any requested public event approved to proceed, the Community Relations Department will supervise scheduling, promotion and logistics. 
(Ord. No. O-2018-57 , § 1, 12-17-2018) 
Chapter 18 - MISCELLANEOUS 

Section 18-1. - Nepotism. 
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Douglasville that no department head shall employ nor supervise any person in a full-time regular service position who is a member of his immediate or extended family. Nor shall any member of an employee's immediate or extended family work in the same department with another member of his immediate family. For purposes of this section "immediate or extended family" shall be deemed to include spouses, parents, grandparents, children, grandchildren, brothers, sisters, and the same such members of the spouse's family. Extended family shall also include a person of the opposite sex who resides on a permanent basis with an employee. 
Section 18-2. - Acceptance of gifts or gratuities. 
An employee shall not accept gifts, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns, or individuals with whom he has official relationships on business of the City government. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of articles of negligible value that are distributed generally, nor to prohibit employees from accepting social courtesies, which promote good public relations, nor to prohibit employees from obtaining loans from regular lending institutions. It is particularly important that inspectors, contracting officers, and enforcement officers guard against relationships that might be construed as evidence of favoritism, coercion, unfair advantage or collusion. If any employee is in doubt about whether the acceptance of a particular gift is of negligible value, he should confer with his department head and the Human Resources Director before acceptance. Any violation of this provision may subject the employee to disciplinary action including termination. 
An employee shall not solicit any gifts gratuities or loans from organizations business concerns or individuals with whom he has official relationships or business of the City government where such donation would be for the benefit of another except where the employee has the written permission of the City Manager, naming the employee, naming the potential beneficiary and limiting the authorization to a time certain not to exceed six months in duration. 
Section 18-3. - Appointed employees, non-appointed employees, adjunct appointees. 
The following named positions shall be appointed employee positions within City employment: City Manager, Assistant City Manager, Police Chief, Chief Assistant City Attorney, Finance Director, City Clerk, Parks and Recreation Director, Community Development Director, Community Relations Director and Court Services Administrator. All other employee positions of City employment shall be non-appointed positions, although some non-appointed employees may be adjunct appointees, as defined by the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-42 , § 2, 7-3-2017; Ord. No. O-2018-8 , § 1, 3-5-2018) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances and resolutions adopted and made a part of the 2012 Code. Ordinances and resolutions adopted since 2010, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 

 