CODE OF ORDINANCES PICKENS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published 1999 by Order of the Commissioner 
____________ 
Adopted: April 9, 1999  Effective: April 9, 1999 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of 
PICKENS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Frank Martin 
Commissioner 
____________ 
Lawrence McFarland 
County Manager 
____________ 
Susan Landrum 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Deborah E. Watson 
County Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of Pickens County, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances and resolutions Code, adopted by the commissioner. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 

 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Winnie Miles, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Susan Landrum, County Attorney, and Mr. Lawrence McFarland, County Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Pickens County, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Pickens County, Georgia. 
©  Copyrighted material.  Municipal Code Corporation and Pickens County, Georgia. 1999. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE OF 4-9-99 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for Pickens County, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be it Ordained by the Commissioner: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Pickens County, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 74, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before November 14, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after November 14, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective April 9, 1999. 
Passed and Adopted by the Commissioner this 9 day of April, 1999. 

 By: /s/ Frank K. Martin 
Commissioner of the County 
ATTEST: 

Certificate of Adoption 
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the commissioner held on the 9 day of April, 1999. 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this County Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
PART I - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Act. No. 558 of the Georgia General Assembly passed Mar. 18, 2010, which created the Board of Commissioners of Pickens County. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Editor's note— Formerly, printed herein is 1920 Ga. Laws, page 598, which created and established the office of commissioner of the county. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-20, the words "roads and revenues" have been stricken from the name of the governing authority. Pursuant to art. 6, sec. 6, par. 14 of the Georgia Constitution of 1976 the words "ordinary" and "court of ordinary" have been changed to "probate court judge" and "probate court." 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; matters over which governing authority has jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22.1; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I. 

PART I. 
AN ACT 
To create the Board of Commissioners of Pickens County; to provide for continuation of certain obligations and liabilities; to provide for the composition of the board; to provide for elections and terms of office; to provide for qualifications; to provide for commissioner districts; to provide for the appointment of a clerk; to provide for a county administrator or manager under certain circumstances; to provide for filling of vacancies; to provide for oaths of office and surety bonds; to provide for the compensation and expenses of the chairperson and members of the board; to provide for a vice chairperson; to provide for powers and duties of such officers; to provide for regular meetings, work sessions, and other meetings; to provide for the powers, duties, and authority of the chairperson and members of the board; to provide for formal bids for certain purchases; to provide for the appointment, removal, and compensation of employees and department heads; to provide for the preparation, submission, review, adoption, and amendment of budgets; to provide for expenditure of county funds; to provide for audits of county finances and financial records; to provide for other related matters; to provide for submission; to provide for the specific repeal of certain local Acts; to provide for submission of this Act for preclearance pursuant to Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended; to provide for referendums and the submission of questions related thereto to the electors of Pickens County; to provide for effective dates and automatic repeals; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Sec. 1-1. - Created. 
There is created the Board of Commissioners of Pickens County to be elected and organized as provided for in this Act. The board of commissioners shall be the successor to the office of commissioner of Pickens County and shall continue to have the obligations and liabilities of the commissioner of Pickens County as existed immediately prior to January 1, 2013. The board of commissioners shall constitute the governing authority of Pickens County and shall exercise the powers, duties, and responsibilities vested in and upon said officers by the provisions of this Act. The term "board," whenever used in this Act, shall mean the Board of Commissioners of Pickens County, including the chairperson and all members. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-2. - Composition of board of commissioners. 
(a)  On and after January 1, 2013, the board of commissioners of Pickens County shall consist of a chairperson and two district commissioners. The two district commissioners shall be residents of their respective commissioner districts as described in subsection (b) of this section and shall be elected by the electors of their respective districts as provided in Section 1-3 of this Act. The chairperson shall be elected at large as provided in Section 1-3 of this Act. 
(b)  For the purpose of electing members of the board of commissioners, Pickens County shall be divided into two commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. Commissioner Districts 1 and 2 shall be and correspond to those two numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as Plan: pickenscc-prop8-tiger2010 Plan Type: Local Administrator: Pickens User: bak. 
(c)  For the purposes of such plan: 
(1)  The term "VTD" shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a "VTD" heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia; and 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any district, whenever the description of any district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  Any part of Pickens County which is not included in any district described in subsection (a) of this section shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(e)  Any part of Pickens County which is described in subsection (a) of this section as being included in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010; Act. No. 278, 2-15-2012) 
Sec. 1-3. - Eligibility. 
(a)  No person shall be a member of the board if that person is ineligible for such office pursuant to Code Section 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. or any other general law. 
(b)  In order to be elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district, a person must be 21 years of age or older, must have resided in that district for at least 12 consecutive months prior to election thereto, and must receive a majority of the votes cast for that office by the electors of that district. At the time of qualifying, each candidate for such office shall specify the commissioner district for which that person is a candidate. A person elected as a member of the board from a commissioner district must continue to reside in that district during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon become vacant. 
(c)  The chairperson of the board must be 25 years of age or older, must have resided in Pickens County for at least 12 consecutive months prior to election to such office, may reside anywhere within Pickens County, and must receive a majority of the votes cast for such office by the electors of the entire county. The chairperson must continue to reside within Pickens County during that person's term of office or that office shall thereupon become vacant. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-4. - Election of members of the board. 
(a)  The first chairperson and members of the Board of Commissioners of Pickens County shall be elected at the November 2012 state-wide general election. The member of the board elected thereto from Commissioner District 1 in 2012 shall take office on the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for an initial term of office which shall expire on December 31, 2014, and upon the election and qualification of his or her successor. The chairperson and the member of the board elected thereto from Commissioner District 2 in 2012 shall take office on the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire on December 31, 2016, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those and all future successors to the chairperson and members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the state-wide general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office on the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years. Members of the board shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  The chairperson and all members of the board who are elected thereto shall be nominated and elected in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code." 
(c)  The commissioner of Pickens County who is in office on January 1, 2012, or any person filling a vacancy in such office, shall serve out the remainder of that person's term of office until the regular expiration of the term of office on December 31, 2012. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-5. - Vacancy. 
(a)  In the event of a vacancy occurring on or after January 1, 2013, in the membership of the board, whether the vacancy is in the office of chairperson or any other member, for any reason other than expiration of term, that vacancy shall be filled as provided in this section. 
(b)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the board of commissioners when at least 180 days remain in the unexpired term of office, the election superintendent of Pickens County, within 15 days after the vacancy occurs, shall issue the call for a special election to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. Such special election shall be called and conducted as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. Any person elected in a special election to fill such a vacancy shall take office immediately upon certification of the results of such special election and qualification. If such vacancy is in the office of chairperson of the board of commissioners, the vice chairperson of the board shall exercise the powers and duties of the chairperson for the period beginning on the date the vacancy occurs and ending on the date the successor chairperson takes office for the unexpired term following the special election provided for in this subsection. 
(c)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the board of commissioners when less than 180 days remain in the unexpired term of office, the remaining members of the board of commissioners shall appoint a qualified person to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term. Any person appointed by the board to fill a vacancy as provided in this subsection shall possess the residency and other qualifications required for the office and shall take office immediately upon appointment and qualification. If such vacancy is in the office of chairperson of the board of commissioners, the vice chairperson of the board shall exercise the powers and duties of the chairperson for the period beginning on the date the vacancy occurs and ending on the date the successor chairperson takes office for the unexpired term following his or her appointment as provided for in this subsection. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-6. - Oath of office; bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the chairperson and commissioners shall subscribe an oath before the judge of the probate court of said county for the true and faithful performance of their duties and that they are not the holders of any public funds unaccounted for. In addition, the chairperson and each commissioner shall further give a satisfactory surety bond to the judge of the probate court of the county and payable to the judge of the probate court or that judge's successor in office and filed in the office of the judge of the probate court, in the sum of $10,000.00, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. The costs of said bonds shall be paid out of the county treasury. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-7. - Terms; salary. 
(a)  Commissioners, other than the chairperson, shall serve in such capacity on a part-time basis and shall be paid a salary of $10,200.00 per year. Such compensation shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Pickens County. 
(b)  The chairperson shall serve in such capacity on a full-time basis and shall be paid an annual salary equal to the annual salary of the highest paid elected county officer of Pickens County, plus an additional $1,200.00. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "county officer" shall mean only the tax commissioner, the judge of the probate court, the sheriff, or the clerk of superior court. The salary provided in this subsection shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of Pickens County. The county shall furnish the chairperson with an appropriate automobile to be used by such chairperson in carrying out the official duties of the office. The automobile and the replacement cost thereof from time to time as well as the costs necessary to maintain and operate such automobile shall be paid from the funds of Pickens County. The chairperson shall be reimbursed from county funds for actual and necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the official duties of the office. The salary and expenses provided for in this subsection shall constitute the entire compensation to which the chairperson shall be entitled, to be paid from county funds. 
(c)  The chairperson and the commissioners may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses incurred in carrying out their duties. Expenses may be reimbursed only after the submission of receipts or records of said expenses to the county clerk and approval by majority vote of the board of commissioners at a regularly scheduled meeting. The chairperson and commissioners shall be entitled to compensation for serving on any other boards or authorities for which their membership is provided by law. 
(d)  At their own expense, the district commissioners may participate in county provided health, dental, and other health related programs and in county sponsored retirement programs. No county funds shall be spent on these programs for the benefit of the district commissioners. 
(e)  Any commissioner who completes the Certified Commissioners Training program shall be entitled to an additional $100.00 per month. As an additional incentive, any commissioner who completes the Certified Commissioners Advanced Training program shall be entitled to receive $100.00 per month in addition to the $100.00 per month for completing the Certified Commissioners Training program. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-8. - Vice chairperson. 
At the first regular meeting of each year, the board of commissioners shall elect from its members a vice chairperson. In the event of death, disqualification, or resignation of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall perform the duties and exercise the authority of the chairperson until a new chairperson is chosen as provided in this Act. The vice chairperson shall preside at meetings of the board of commissioners in the absence of the chairperson and shall serve for the calendar year in which elected. In the event of a vacancy in the office of vice chairperson, the board of commissioners shall elect a new vice chairperson to serve for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-9. - Meetings. 
Each month, at the county seat, the board of commissioners shall hold a minimum of one regular meeting, preceded at least seven days prior by a minimum of one work session. All meetings, whether regular or work sessions, shall be open to the public and shall provide a time period exclusively for public comment. All regular meetings shall be held during evening hours. The time, date, and place of the meetings shall be determined by the board in the first meeting of the year. Any resolution passed by the board regarding the time, date, and place of its monthly meetings shall be published in the official county organ once a week for two weeks during a period of 30 days immediately following the passage of the resolution. The board of commissioners may hold such additional meetings as shall be necessary when called by the chairperson or any two commissioners, provided all members of the board of commissioners shall have been notified at least three days in advance of such special meeting which is open to the public. Two district commissioners or the chairperson and any one commissioner shall constitute a quorum. No official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least two members of the board of commissioners and except upon compliance with Chapter 14 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A., relating to open meetings. The chairperson shall be entitled to vote on a question only if the chairperson's vote would affect the outcome of any vote or issue before the board. The vice chairperson while serving as chairperson shall be entitled to vote on all matters before board. All regular and called meetings shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-10. - Duties of chairperson. 
The chairperson shall administer the affairs and day-to-day business of the county and preside over the meetings of the board of commissioners. The duties of the chairperson shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Calling meetings of the board as provided in Section 1-9 of this Act; 
(2)  Preparing proposed agenda and presiding at meetings of the board; 
(3)  Representing the county government at ceremonial functions; 
(4)  Being empowered to submit motions, that are made and seconded by district commissioners, to the board of commissioners for action; 
(5)  Appointing members and chairpersons to all committees of the board with the approval of the commission; and 
(6)  Performing such other duties as shall be delegated to the chairperson by the board of commissioners or as provided by law or ordinance. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-11. - Powers and duties. 
The board of commissioners shall have the power and authority to fix and establish, by appropriate resolution entered on its minutes, policies, rules, and regulations governing all matters reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction. Such policies, rules, and regulations, when so adopted with proper entry thereof made on the minutes of the board of commissioners, shall be conclusive and binding. The board of commissioners shall exercise only those administrative powers which are necessarily and properly incident to its functions as a policy-making or rule-making body or which are necessary to compel enforcement of its adopted resolutions. The following powers are vested in the board of commissioners and reserved to its exclusive jurisdiction: 
(1)  To levy taxes; 
(2)  To make appropriations; 
(3)  To fix rates and charges for services provided by the county; 
(4)  To authorize the incurring of indebtedness; 
(5)  To order work done where the cost is to be assessed against benefitted property and to fix the basis for such assessment; 
(6)  To authorize and provide for the execution of contracts; 
(7)  To establish, alter, open, close, build, repair, or abolish public roads, bridges, and ferries, according to law; provided, however, that the chairperson shall have the authority to accept subdivision plats when the requirements established by the board of commissioners for subdivisions have been met; 
(8)  To establish, abolish, or change election precincts and militia districts according to law; 
(9)  To accept, for the county, the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of the county; 
(10)  To exercise all powers, duty, and authority formerly imposed upon or vested in the commissioner of Pickens County in respect to zoning and planning; 
(11)  To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law; 
(12)  To fix the bonds of county officers where same are not fixed by statute; 
(13)  To enact any ordinances or other legislation which the county may be given authority to enact; 
(14)  To determine the priority of capital improvements; 
(15)  To call elections for the voting of bonds; 
(16)  To exercise all of the power and authority formerly vested by law in the commissioner of Pickens County together with the power and authority, which may be delegated by law to the governing authority of the county, by whatever name designated; 
(17)  To appoint retained legal counsel and an independent county auditor and provide for their compensation; and 
(18)  To require all county officers to report on the general or specific conduct of the financial affairs of their respective offices. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-12. - Sealed bids. 
Formal sealed bids shall be received for all purchases in amounts over the state limit for sealed bids unless the board of commissioners sets a lower limit. Advertisements for such bids shall be published for two consecutive weeks in the official organ of Pickens County. The need for such bids may be dispensed with by the board of commissioners if it decides that an emergency exists which will not permit a delay. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-13. - Internal organization on county government. 
The internal organization of the county government shall be established and altered by the board of commissioners. Existing departments may be abolished and their functions transferred to other departments, additional departments may be created, and any two or more departments may be consolidated. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-14. - Minutes. 
The board of commissioners shall appoint a clerk who shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes. The book of minutes of the board of commissioners shall contain all the acts, orders, and proceedings of the board of commissioners in chronological order. The minutes book of the board of commissioners shall be open to the public for inspection at all times during regular office hours; and certified copies of any entries in the minutes book shall be furnished by the clerk to any person requesting same upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as are other funds, to be assessed by the board of commissioners in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing same. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-15. - Budget. 
The chairperson shall submit annually to the board of commissioners a proposed budget governing expenditures of all county funds, including capital outlay and public works projects for the following fiscal year. The board of commissioners shall thereafter hold two public hearings at least seven days apart on the budget, giving notice thereof at least ten days in advance by publication of such notice and of the proposed budget in the official organ of Pickens County and by posting same at the courthouse door. The budget shall then be reviewed and adopted or amended by the board of commissioners prior to the beginning of the new fiscal year to which it applies, which budget, when so adopted or amended by the board of commissioners, shall constitute the board's appropriation of all funds for such year. The budget so adopted may be revised during the year only by formal action of the board of commissioners in a regular meeting, and no increase shall be made therein without provision also being made for financing same. The proposed budget submitted by the chairperson shall be accompanied by a report containing information and data relating to the financial affairs of the county pertinent to arriving at and establishing the annual budget. A copy of the budget and of each revision or amendment to same shall be transmitted by the chairperson to the grand jury of the Superior Court of Pickens County within ten days from the time such budget or amendment thereof is adopted by the board of commissioners. The board of commissioners may from time to time, upon a majority vote thereof, change the ending and beginning date of the fiscal year for the county or may operate on a calendar basis; provided, however, that in the event of such change, the budget shall be submitted at least two months prior to the beginning date of the next fiscal year or January 1, whichever shall apply, and shall be adopted at least one month prior to said beginning date. The procedures for budget preparation, submission to the governing authority, review by the governing authority, public review, notice, and hearings shall be as provided for in Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-16. - Compliance—County budget. 
No expenditures of county funds shall be made except in accordance with the county budget, or amendments thereto, adopted by the board of commissioners. The chairperson of the board of commissioners shall enforce compliance with this provision by all departments of county government and to this end shall institute a system of allotments of all moneys appropriated and budgeted. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-17. - Audit. 
The board of commissioners shall on or before the final day of the month following the end of each fiscal year employ a certified public accountant for the making of an annual continuous audit of county finances and financial records. The accountant so employed shall be paid out of county funds and shall perform a complete audit of the financial records of the county for the preceding year, pointing out any irregularities found to exist, and reporting the results of such audit to the board of commissioners. The same person or firm shall not perform such audit for more than four consecutive annual periods. Each annual report submitted to the board of commissioners shall be made available for public inspection, as are other records in such office. The board of commissioners shall cause to be published in the official organ of Pickens County and posted at the courthouse door a statement of the financial condition of the county as of December 31 and June 30 of each year. Said accountant shall transmit to the grand jury of the Superior Court of Pickens County a copy of each annual report furnished by said accountant to the board of commissioners. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010) 
Sec. 1-18. - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
(a)  The commissioner of Pickens County in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue to have the powers, duties, obligations, and liabilities of the office in existence immediately prior to January 1, 2012, through midnight on December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2013, an Act creating the office of commissioner of Pickens County, approved August 16, 1920 (Ga. L. 1920, p. 598), and all amendatory Acts thereto are repealed in their entirety. 
(Act. No. 558, 3-18-2010; Act. No. 278, 2-15-2012) 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2764 which created and established the Pickens County Water and Sewer Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
This shall be known and may be cited as the "Pickens County Water and Sewer Act." 
Section 2. - Pickens County Water and Sewer Authority. 
There is hereby created a body corporate and politic, to be known as the county water and sewer authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the state and a public corporation; and by that name, style, and title, said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain, and defend in all courts of law and equity. The authority shall consist of five members, all of whom shall be residents of the county, all of whom shall reside outside the corporate limits of any municipality. The original members of the authority shall be appointed by the governing authority of the county, one member for a one year term, two members for a two year term and two members for a three year term, said terms to be designated at the time of appointment. Thereafter the authority shall furnish to the governing authority of the county a list of three names for each member whose term expires and the governing authority of the county shall appoint from said list of names the person or persons to serve, each for a three year term, as a member or members of the authority. If for any reason the authority fails to furnish said list prior to 30 days before the expiration of any term, the governing authority of the county shall appoint the member or members to fill the vacancies created by the expiration of the terms of the members of the authority whose terms expire. A member whose term expires shall be eligible for reappointment by the governing authority of the county to one additional term. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, all members of the authority shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. To be eligible for appointment, no member shall have been found guilty of a felony. A member must be at least 21 years of age and a resident of the county for at least two years prior to his appointment. 
The original members of the Authority shall immediately enter upon their duties. They shall elect one of their number as chairman, another as vice-chairman, and may also elect a secretary and/or treasurer, who need not necessarily be a member of the Authority. The chairman and vice-chairman, secretary, and treasurer shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are elected and qualified. Three members of the Authority shall constitute a quorum. 
In the event of a vacancy by reason of death, disqualification, resignation, or other reason, the governing authority of Pickens County shall appoint a person meeting the qualifications above set out for membership, to serve for the unexpired term. 
Members of the Authority shall lose their positions as such upon being found guilty of a felony or moving from Pickens County. 
No vacancy on the Authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the Authority. 
The chairman of the Authority shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, motion, or resolution the same as other members. 
The members of the Authority shall serve without compensation, provided that all members shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses necessarily incurred in the performance of their duties. The Authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. 
The Authority shall have a complete audit of its financial record made at least once in each calendar year by a certified public accountant, and such audit shall be published in the official newspaper of Pickens County at least once each calendar year and within one month of the submission thereof. 
(Act. No. 530, § 1, 4-11-2012) 
Section 3. - Definitions. 
As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "Authority" shall mean the Pickens County Water and Sewer Authority created by section 2 of this Act. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition and construction of all necessary and usual water facilities useful and necessary for the obtaining of one or more sources of water supply within or without the territorial boundaries of Pickens County, the treatment of water and the distribution and sale of water to users and consumers, including counties and municipalities, for the purpose of resale, within and without the territorial boundaries of Pickens County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities so as to assure an adequate water utility system deemed by the Authority necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of such type of undertaking; the acquisition and construction of all necessary and usual facilities useful and necessary for the gathering of waste matter, individual and industrial, the treatment of such waste, including the acquisition and construction of treatment plants, lagoons, without and within the territorial boundaries of Pickens County, and the operation, maintenance, additions, improvements, and extensions of such facilities deemed necessary by the Authority to be necessary or convenient for the efficient operation of the sanitary and storm sewer system. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during the construction, and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural, and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project, the placing of the same in operation, and the condemnation of property necessary for such construction and operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds" and "bonds" as used in this Act, shall mean revenue certificates as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60), as amended, and such type of obligations may be issued by the Authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law, and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the Authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the Authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the Authority therefrom will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving, and extending the project, and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued for the cost of such project or projects. 
Section 4. - Powers. 
The Authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise, and to hold, lease, and dispose of, real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, grant, or gift, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, or rights of easements therein, or franchises or personal property necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the Authority; and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action, or proceedings as may be just to the Authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned, and no property shall be acquired under the provisions of this Act upon which any lien or encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; and if the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project on any other lands the title to which shall then be in the State of Georgia, the Governor is hereby authorized to convey, for and in behalf of the State, title to such lands to the Authority upon payment to the State Treasurer, for the credit of the general fund of the State, of the reasonable value of such lands, such value to be determined by three appraisers to be agreed upon by the Governor and the Chairman of the Authority; 
(d)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts, leases, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases or projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the Authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and, without limiting the generality of the above, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations and counties and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings relative to the furnishing of water, sewerage, and related services and facilities by the Authority to such municipal corporations and counties or for the purchase of water by the Authority therefrom for a term not exceeding fifty (50) years. As to any political subdivision, department, institution, or agency of this State which shall enter into an agreement under the authority granted herein or in subsection (e) above, the obligation to perform and fulfill such agreement shall constitute a general obligation of such entity for which its full faith and credit shall be and hereby is pledged to the extent as may be now or hereafter permitted under the Constitution and laws of Georgia; 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the Authority or from such proceeds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)  To accept loans with, and accept grants of money, materials, or property of any kind from, the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(i)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, provided the same is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of this State; and 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Section 5. - Revenue bonds. 
The Authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the Authority so created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the Authority for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined or any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund hereby provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates not exceeding the maximum limit then provided for bonds permitted by the Revenue Bond Law at the time of issuance, shall be payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 30 years from their date or dates, or at such times exceeding 30 years as may be hereafter authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the Authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the Authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the Authority in the resolution for the issuance of bonds. 
Section 6. - Same; form; denominations; registration; place of payment. 
The Authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the State. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the Authority may determine. Provisions may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Section 7. - Same; signatures; seal. 
All such bonds shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman of the Authority, the attesting manual or facsimile signature of the secretary of the Authority and the official seal of the Authority shall be affixed thereto. The signature of one of such officers shall be placed manually on each bond. Any coupons attached thereto shall bear the manual or facsimile signature of the chairman or the secretary of the Authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signature of such person, and any bond may bear the facsimile signature of and may be manually signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the Authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. 
Section 8. - Same; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to negotiable instruments. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose, and the said bonds, their transfers, and the income therefrom shall be exempt from all taxation within the State. 
Section 9. - Same; sale; price. 
The Authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interests of the Authority. 
Section 10. - Same; proceeds of bonds. 
The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects; and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds, or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit, which, unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, shall be deemed to be of the same, and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund, without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purpose. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into the fund, hereinafter provided, for the payment of principal and interest of such bonds. 
Section 11. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the Authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Section 12. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The Authority may also provide for the replacement of any bonds which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Section 13. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance; object of issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions, and things which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the Authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular, special, or adjourned meeting of the Authority by a majority of the quorum as in this Act provided. 
Section 14. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Pickens County or a pledge of the faith and credit of said county, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the funds hereinafter provided for; and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate the said county to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor, or to make an appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Section 15. - Same; trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the Authority, any issuance of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the Authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the State. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings to be received by the Authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the Authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insurance of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all moneys, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the Authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depositary of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be unlawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this State to act as such depositary and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the Authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders, as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the Authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Section 16. - Same; to whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
The Authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Section 17. - Same; sinking funds. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the Authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the Authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide; and such funds not pledged, from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking funds shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture; but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Section 18. - Same; remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia, or granted hereunder, or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act, or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the Authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Section 19. - Same; refunding bonds. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the Authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities, and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the Authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Section 20. - Same; venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such Authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Pickens County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court, which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Section 21. - Same; validation. 
Bonds of the Authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the Revenue Bond Law, as now or hereafter amended. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the Authority for services and facilities of the water system for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated; and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the Court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the Authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds against the Authority issuing the same and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision, or instrumentality contracting with the said Pickens County Water and Sewer Authority. 
Section 22. - Same; interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the Authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said Authority or of its officers, employees, or agents, shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds; and no other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will compete with the Authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the rights and interests of the holders of such bonds, nor will the State itself so compete with the Authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the Authority and the holders of any such bonds and, upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Section 23. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, fees, and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Section 24. - Purpose of the Authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provision of this Act, the general purpose of the Authority is declared to be that of acquiring an adequate source or sources of water supply, treatment of such water, and thereafter the distribution of same to various citizens in said county and environs, including adjoining counties and municipalities located therein, and further for the general purpose of gathering and treatment of waste, both individual and industrial; but such general purpose shall not restrict the Authority from selling and delivering water direct to consumers in those areas where there does not now exist water distribution systems, or furnishing sewer facilities to such consumers, and areas where neither any county nor municipality deems it desirable or feasible to furnish water in such locality. 
The Authority shall not have the authority to construct water lines for the distribution of water directly to consumers within any water district or municipality or within three hundred (300) yards of any water lines existing at the time of the passage of this Act and owned by any water district or municipality or within three hundred (300) yards of any water lines hereafter constructed by any Water Authority heretofore or hereafter created, without first obtaining the express written consent of the appropriate governing bodies of the above-referred-to water districts, municipalities, or other Authority. 
Section 25. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The Authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls, or charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls, or charges, for the services, facilities, or commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of the water and sewer utility system, and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Section 26. - Tax exempt status of Authority. 
The properties of the Authority, both real and personal, are declared to be public properties used for the benefit and welfare of the people of the State of Georgia, and not for purposes of private or corporate benefit and income; and such properties and the Authority shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of any city, county, or the State or any political subdivision thereof. The tax exemption herein provided shall not include any exemption from sales and use tax on property purchased by the Authority or for use by the Authority. 
Section 27. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the Authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this Act, including the basis on which water and sewer service and facilities shall be furnished. 
Section 28. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Section 29. - Liberal construction of Act. 
This Act, being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the State and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes thereof. 
Section 30. - Effect of partial invalidity of Act. 
The provisions of this Act are severable; and, if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of such court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
Section 31. - Preservation of powers. 
This Act does not in any way take from Pickens County or any municipality located or any adjoining county the authority to own, operate, and maintain water or sewer systems or issue revenue certificates, as is provided by the Revenue Bond Law of Georgia (O.C.G.A. § 36-82-60). 
Section 32. - Repeal. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
ARTICLE III. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTIONS 
DIVISION 1. - FOR RESIDENTS FROM COUNTY TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1997 Ga. Laws, page 4288 which provides a homestead exemption in the stated amount for residents from county ad valorem taxes. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  " Ad valorem taxes for county purposes " means all ad valorem taxes for county purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of Pickens County, excluding taxes to retire county bond indebtedness. 
(2)  " Homestead " means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
Section 2. - Amount of exemption; filing of affidavit. 
(a)  Each resident of Pickens County is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Pickens County ad valorem taxes for county purposes in the amount of $3,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead for the taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 1998, and prior to January 1, 1999; $4,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead for the taxable year beginning January 1, 1999, and prior to January 1, 2000; and $5,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead for all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2000. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(b)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Pickens County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such person is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the applicant for the exemption. 
Section 3. - Automatic yearly renewal; responsibility of person to notify county upon becoming ineligible. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the applicant occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2 of this Act, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Pickens County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. Any person who, as of January 1, 1997, has applied for and is eligible for the $2,000.00 homestead exemption from county and school district ad valorem taxes pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-44 shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this Act without further application if that person has applied for and been eligible for the immediately preceding year for such exemption. 
Section 4. - Other taxes not affected. 
(a)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, or county school district taxes for educational purposes. 
(b)  The exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of any other homestead exemption from Pickens County ad valorem taxes for county purposes. 
Section 5. - Effective date. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1998. 
DIVISION 2. - FOR RESIDENTS FROM SCHOOL DISTRICT TAXES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1997 Ga. Laws, page 4291 which provides a homestead exemption in the stated amount from county ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  " Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes " means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Pickens County School District, excluding taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  " Homestead " means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
Section 2. - Amount of exemption; filing of affidavit. 
(a)  Each resident of the Pickens County School District is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Pickens County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the amount of $3,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead for the taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 1998, and prior to January 1, 1999; $4,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead for the taxable year beginning January 1, 1999, and prior to January 1, 2000; and $5,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead for all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2000. The value of that property in excess of such exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(b)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Pickens County giving such information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such person is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the applicant for the exemption. 
Section 3. - Automatic yearly renewal; responsibility of person to notify county upon becoming ineligible. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the applicant occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2 of this Act, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Pickens County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. Any person who, as of January 1, 1997, has applied for and is eligible for the $2,000.00 homestead exemption from county and school district ad valorem taxes pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-44 shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this Act without further application if that person has applied for and been eligible for the immediately preceding year for such exemption. 
Section 4. - Other taxes not affected. 
(a)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, or county taxes for county purposes. 
(b)  The exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of any other homestead exemption from Pickens County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
Section 5. - Effective date. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1998. 
DIVISION 3. - FOR SENIOR CITIZENS OR DISABLED PERSONS FROM SCHOOL DISTRICT TAXES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1997 Ga. Laws, page 4283 which provides a homestead exemption in the stated amount for senior citizens or disabled persons from ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  " Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes " means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the Pickens County School District, including, but not limited to, taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  " Homestead " means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(3)  " Income " means gross income, as defined by Georgia law, from all sources. 
(4)  " Senior citizen " means a person who is 62 years of age or over on or before January 1 of the year in which application for the exemption under this Act is made. 
Section 2. - Senior citizens and disabled persons granted an exemption; providing proof of disability; filing of affidavit. 
(a)  Each resident of the Pickens County School District who is a senior citizen or who is disabled is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all Pickens County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes for the full value of that homestead if that person's income, together with the income of all members of the family residing within the homestead, does not exceed $25,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. 
(b)  In order to qualify for the exemption provided for in subsection (a) of this section as being disabled, the person claiming such exemption shall be required to obtain a certificate from not more than three physicians licensed to practice medicine under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, relative to medical practitioners, as now or hereafter amended, certifying that in the opinion of such physician or physicians such person is mentally or physically incapacitated to the extent that such person is unable to be gainfully employed and that such incapacity is likely to be permanent. 
(c)  A person shall not receive the homestead exemption granted by subsection (a) of this section unless the person or person's agent files an affidavit with the tax commissioner of Pickens County giving the person's age, or if disabled, the certificate or certificates required by subsection (b) of this section, the amount of income which that person and all members of the family residing within the homestead received during the last taxable year, and such additional information relative to receiving such exemption as will enable the tax commissioner to make a determination as to whether such person is entitled to such exemption. The tax commissioner shall provide affidavit forms for this purpose and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the initial and continuing eligibility of the applicant for the exemption. 
Section 3. - Automatic yearly renewal; responsibility of person to notify county upon becoming ineligible. 
The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the applicant occupies the residence as a homestead. After a person has filed the proper affidavit as provided in subsection (b) of Section 2 of this Act, it shall not be necessary to make application and file such affidavit thereafter for any year and the exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Pickens County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. Any person who, as of January 1, 1997, has applied for and is eligible for the homestead exemption from Pickens County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes pursuant to an Act approved April 4, 1991 (1991 Ga. Laws, page 3851), shall be eligible for the exemption granted by this Act without further application if that person has applied for and been eligible for the immediately preceding year for such exemption. 
Section 4. - Other taxes not affected. 
(a)  The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes, municipal taxes, or county taxes for county purposes. 
(b)  The exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of any other homestead exemption from Pickens County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
Section 5. - Effective date. 
The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 1998. 
Section 6. - Repeal. 
An Act providing a homestead exemption from all Pickens County School District ad valorem taxes for educational purposes, approved April 4, 1991 (1991 Ga. Laws, page 3851), is repealed effective at the last moment of December 31, 1997. 
ARTICLE IV. - PICKENS COUNTY AIRPORT AUTHORITY[6] 
AN ACT 
To create the Pickens County Airport Authority; to provide for a short title and legislative findings; to confer powers and impose duties on the authority; to provide for the membership and the appointment of members of the authority and their terms of office, qualifications, duties, powers, and compensation; to provide for vacancies, organization, meetings, and expenses; to prohibit authority employees and members from having certain interests; to provide for definitions; to provide for revenue bonds and their form, signatures thereon, negotiability, sale, and use of proceeds from such sales; to provide for interim documents and for lost or mutilated documents; to provide for conditions for issuance; to provide for an effective date; and for other purposes. 
AN ACT 
To create the Pickens County Airport Authority; to provide for a short title and legislative findings; to confer powers and impose duties on the authority; to provide for the membership and the appointment of members of the authority and their terms of office, qualifications, duties, powers, and compensation; to provide for vacancies, organization, meetings, and expenses; to prohibit authority employees and members from having certain interests; to provide for definitions; to provide for revenue bonds and their form, signatures thereon, negotiability, sale, and use of proceeds from such sales; to provide for interim documents and for lost or mutilated documents; to provide for conditions for issuance; to prohibit the pledge of credit for the payment of bonds; to provide for trust indentures and a sinking fund; to provide for payment of bond proceeds; to provide for bondholder remedies and protection; to provide for refunding bonds; to provide for bond validation; to provide for venue and jurisdiction; to provide for trust funds; to provide for authority purpose; to provide for charges; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for tort immunity; to provide for tax exemptions; to provide for supplemental powers; to provide for effect on other governments; to provide for liberal construction; to provide for an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is Act. No. 483 of the Georgia General Assembly passed Mar. 30, 2006, which created the Pickens County Airport Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
This Act shall be known and may be cited as the "Pickens County Airport Authority Act." 
Section 2. - Legislative findings. 
The General Assembly determines and finds that there is present and projected growth in commercial and private air traffic in the Pickens County area. There is the need for adequate airport safety and efficiency to serve the air transportation needs of Pickens County, the need to eliminate airport hazards, and the need to raise capital for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of present and future airports. The General Assembly further determines and finds that the establishment of an authority is necessary and essential to ensure the welfare, safety, and convenience of citizens of the region and the entire state to ensure the proper economic development of the region and the entire state. 
Section 3. - Pickens County Airport Authority. 
(a)  There is created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Pickens County Airport Authority which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title, said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, and bring and defend actions in all courts. 
(b)  The authority shall consist of five members who shall be residents of Pickens County. Four of the members shall be appointed by the governing authority of Pickens County for terms of office of four years each; three of the four such members appointed shall at the time of their appointment be pilots fully licensed by the Federal Aviation Administration. One of the members shall be appointed by the Pickens County Development Authority for a term of office of four years. After the first term expires, members of the authority shall serve the terms specified until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. Each of the members shall be appointed for four years. Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself or herself. After such appointment, the members of such authority shall enter upon their duties. Any vacancy on the authority shall be filled in the same manner as was the original appointment of the member whose term of membership resulted in such vacancy, and the person so selected and appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. The members of the authority shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties out of funds of the authority. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. 
The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(c)  In May of each year, the members of the authority shall elect one of their number as chairperson. Also, the members of the authority shall elect one of their number as vice chairperson, shall elect one of their number as secretary, and may elect one of their number as treasurer. Each of such officers shall serve for a period of one year and until their successors are duly elected and qualified. The chairperson of the authority shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, motion, or resolution. 
(d)  A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. No vacancy on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to exercise all of the rights and perform all of the duties of the authority. 
(e)  A vacancy on the authority shall exist in the office of any member of the authority who is convicted of a felony or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or who enters a plea of nolo contendere thereto; who moves such person's residence from the county; who is convicted of any act of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance of such person's duties as a member of the authority; or who fails to attend any regular or special meeting of the authority for a period of three meetings without an excuse approved by a resolution of the authority. 
(f)  All meetings of the authority, regular or special, shall be open to the public. The authority may hold public hearings on its own initiative or at the request of residents of Pickens County or any area affected by the actions of the authority. The authority may go into executive session to discuss matters of personnel, real estate acquisition or disposal, and litigation. No votes may be taken during an executive session. 
(Act No. 567, 5-3-2016, § 1) 
Section 4. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Airport" means any area of land or structure which is or has been used or which the authority may plan to use for the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft, including helicopters; all buildings, equipment, facilities, or other property and improvements of any kind or nature located within the bounds of any such land area or structure which are or have been used or which the authority may plan to use for terminal facilities; all facilities of any type for the accommodation of passengers, maintenance, cargo, servicing, and operation of aircraft, business offices and facilities of private businesses and governmental agencies, and the parking of automobiles; and all other activities which are or have been carried on or which may be necessary or convenient in conjunction with the landing and taking off of commercial, private, and military aircraft including all land originally acquired by Pickens County for the establishment of a county airport, and any land to be deeded to the City of Jasper or Pickens County for airport use, including, without limitation, aviation easements, and other real or personal property. 
(2)  "Authority" means the Pickens County Airport Authority created by this Act. 
(3)  "Cost of the project" means and embraces the cost of construction; the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements, and franchises acquired; the cost of all machinery and equipment; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction; the cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal agents, and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing authorized in this Act; the cost of the acquisition or construction of any project; and the cost of placing any project in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act for such project. 
(4)  "Project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, and operation of an airport and the usual facilities related thereto. 
(5)  "Revenue bonds" and "bonds" mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law," and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto and, in addition, shall also mean obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for in this Act. 
(b)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating" if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all facilities used in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the costs of operating, maintaining, repairing, improving, and extending the project and to pay the principal of and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Section 5. - Powers. 
The authority shall have the power: 
(1)  To have a seal and alter the same at its pleasure; 
(2)  To acquire by purchase, lease, or otherwise and to hold, lease, and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its purposes and to plan, acquire, establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, and lease all airports which shall come under the control of the authority under the provisions of this Act or which it may acquire or plan to acquire; to regulate, protect, and police such airports and all related activities and facilities; to enter into any contracts, leases, or other agreements, promulgate any orders, set any tolls, fees, or other charges for the use of the property or services of the authority and collect and use same as necessary to operate the airports under control of the authority; and to accomplish any purposes of this Act and make any purchases or sales necessary for such purposes; except that the authority may not acquire any airport of any county, municipality, or combination thereof unless such county, municipality, or both agree to pay to the authority, so long as it operates such airport, at least the amount of airport operating expenses funded by taxes, fees, and assessments of such county, municipality, or combination thereof prior to such acquisition. Nothing in this paragraph shall give the authority the power of eminent domain and the authority shall not condemn property in order to pursue its lawful purposes; 
(3)  To appoint, select, and employ officers, agents, and employees, including engineering, architectural, and construction experts, fiscal agents, and attorneys, and to fix their respective compensations and terms of service; 
(4)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of the projects which it causes to be constructed, erected, or acquired. Any and all persons, firms, and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the state are authorized to enter into contracts, leases, or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they deem advisable; and, without limiting the generality of the foregoing, authority is specifically granted to municipal corporations, counties, and other political subdivisions and to the authority to enter into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings with each other relating to projects of the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years. Likewise, without limiting the generality of the above and foregoing, the same authority above granted to municipal corporations, counties, political subdivisions, and to the authority relative to entering into contracts, lease agreements, or other undertakings is authorized between the authority and private corporations, both inside and outside this state, and between the authority and public bodies, including counties and cities outside this state; 
(5)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, and manage projects, as defined in this Act, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(6)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(7)  To accept loans and grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require; 
(8)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(9)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, including the power to make short-term loans and approve, execute, and deliver appropriate evidence of such indebtedness, provided no such power is in conflict with the Constitution or general laws of this state; and 
(10)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given in this Act. 
Section 6. - Revenue bonds. 
The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties, and liabilities vested in the authority created by this Act, is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds of the authority for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund provided in this Act for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, be payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 50 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution for the issuance of bonds. 
Section 7. - Revenue bonds; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereon, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company inside or outside the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
Section 8. - Revenue bonds; signatures; seal. 
In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairperson of the authority and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and attested by the secretary of the authority and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairperson and the secretary of the authority. Any coupon may bear the facsimile signatures of such persons and any bond may be signed, sealed, and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such person may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Section 9. - Revenue bonds; negotiability; exemption from taxation. 
All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall have and are declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the laws of this state. Such bonds, their transfer, and the income there from shall be exempt from all taxation within this state. 
Section 10. - Revenue bonds; sale; price; proceeds. 
The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such a price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority. The proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose or purposes provided in the resolutions and proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
Section 11. - Revenue bonds; interim receipts; certificates; temporary bonds. 
Prior to the preparation of any definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates, or temporary bonds, with or without coupons, exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Section 12. - Revenue bonds; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
The authority may provide for the replacement of any bonds or coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Section 13. - Revenue bonds; conditions precedent to issuance. 
Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions, and filings which are specified or required by this Act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this Act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special meeting of the authority by a majority of its members. 
Section 14. - Credit not pledged. 
Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Pickens County nor a pledge of the faith and credit of said county; but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not directly, indirectly, or contingently obligate said county, nor individual members of the authority, to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for their payment. All such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Section 15. - Trust indenture as security. 
In the discretion of the authority, any issuance of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company inside or outside the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues, and earnings providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of the law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair, and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding, and application of all moneys, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor, and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other moneys be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indentures may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation, and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Section 16. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
In the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, the authority shall provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank, or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes of this Act, subject to such regulations as this Act and such resolution or trust indenture may provide. 
Section 17. - Sinking fund. 
The revenues, fees, tolls, and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust instrument may provide. Such funds so pledged from whatever source received, including funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture into a sinking fund which shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of: 
(1)  The interest upon such revenue bonds as interest shall fall due; 
(2)  The principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due; 
(3)  The necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest and other investment charges; 
(4)  Any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as provided in this Act; and 
(5)  Any investment fees or charges. 
The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over the other. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or the trust indenture, any surplus moneys in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds, and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be canceled and shall not again be issued. 
Section 18. - Remedies of bondholders. 
Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights given in this Act may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of this state or granted under this Act or under such resolution or trust indenture and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this Act or by such resolution or trust indenture to be performed by the authority or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Section 19. - Refunding bonds. 
The authority is authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this Act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and any premium. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this Act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Section 20. - Validation. 
Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Revenue Bond Law." The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated, and the state or such municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exists, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the contract or contracts adjudicated as part of the basis for the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, when validated, and the judgment of the validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same and the state and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision, or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the Pickens County Airport Authority. 
Section 21. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this Act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Pickens County, Georgia; and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this Act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Section 22. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties, or existence of said authority or its officers, employees, or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. No other entity, department, agency, or authority will be created which will complete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, nor will the state itself so compete with the authority. The provisions of this Act shall be for the benefit of the authority and holders of any such bonds, and, upon the issuance of bonds, under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Section 23. - Moneys received considered trust funds. 
All moneys received pursuant to the authority of this Act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenue, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this Act. 
Section 24. - Purpose of the authority. 
Without limiting the generality of any provision of this Act, the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, and operating an airport and the usual facilities related thereto, and improving of such facilities, acquiring facilities and parking areas in connection therewith, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and leasing or selling any or all of such facilities, including real property, and doing any things deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient, or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings. 
Section 25. - Rates, charges, and revenues; use. 
The authority is authorized to prescribe and fix rates, to revise the same from time to time, and to collect tolls and charges for the services, facilities, and commodities furnished and, in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertaking or project, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment, or extension of any project and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertaking or project, including the revenues of improvements, betterments, or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Section 26. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed or acquired under the provisions of this Act. 
Section 27. - Tort immunity. 
The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as Pickens County; and the officers, agents, and employees of the authority, when in the performance of the work of the authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents, and employees of Pickens County as when in the performance of their public duties or work for the county. 
Section 28. - Tax exemption. 
It is found, determined, and declared that the creation of the authority and the carrying out of its corporate purpose is in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state and that the authority is an institution of purely public charity and will be performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the power conferred upon it by this Act, and this state covenants with the holders of the bonds that the authority shall not be required to pay any taxes or assessments upon any of the property acquired or leased by it or under its jurisdiction, control, possession, or supervision or upon its activities in the operation or maintenance of the projects erected by it or any rates, fees, tolls, or other charges for the use of such projects or other income received by the authority, and that the bonds of the authority, their transfer, and the income therefrom shall at all times be exempt from taxation within this state. The exemption from taxation provided for in this section shall not extend to tenants or lessees of the authority and shall not include exemptions from sales and use taxes on property purchased by the authority or for use by the authority. 
Section 29. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized by this Act, shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. This Act shall not and does not in any way take from Pickens County or any municipality located therein or any adjoining county the authority to work, operate, and maintain projects or to issue revenue bonds as is provided by Article 3 of Chapter 82 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Revenue Bond Law." 
Section 30. - Liberal construction of this Act. 
This Act being for the welfare of various political subdivisions of the state and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes of this Act. 
Section 31. - Effective date. 
This Act shall become effective upon its approval by the Governor or upon its becoming law without such approval. 
Section 32. - Repealer. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 

 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The ordinances, resolutions and other enactments embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, Pickens County, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the county, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the commissioner of the county, or unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Code. The term "code" shall mean "Code of Ordinances, Pickens County, Georgia," as designated in section 1-1. 
Commissioner. The terms "commissioner" or "commissioner of the county" shall mean the commissioner of Pickens County, Georgia. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The terms "the county" or "this county" shall mean Pickens County, Georgia. 
County manager. The term "county manager" means the county manager of Pickens County, Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the county to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males or any other legal entity when applicable under federal or state law. 
Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of Pickens County" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. A term importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common or tenant in partnership, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
Person. The term "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the clerk of the commissioner's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the commissioner. 
Seal. The term "seal" shall mean the county seal. 
Shall, may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" shall mean the sheriff of Pickens County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the county. 
Tenant, occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week, of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The term "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the commissioner of the county. 
(b)  The style of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Commissioner of Pickens County, as follows:" 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, Pickens County, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Pickens County, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any county officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the county. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the county. 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county. 
(16)  Any comprehensive plan as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-70-2. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this section. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the commissioner that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the commissioner without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the commissioner during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the county to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the commissioner, which will cause the law of the county to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any other ordinance of the county any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision shall be punishable by the imposition of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of time not to exceed 60 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, or up to the limits of any penalty provided by state law for the ordinance. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or other ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
State Law reference— Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e); punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a); payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-5-22 the county has created the office of county manager and has vested in such office powers, duties and responsibilities of an administrative nature. 
Additional administrative regulations pertaining to county employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals are compiled and published separately by the county as the Pickens County Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual which includes the retirement plan for county employees. An official copy of such personnel manual and retirement plan is on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Any administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(13); civil emergencies, ch. 22; administration and enforcement of mobile home park regulations, § 38-431 et seq.; planning, ch. 50; taxation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— County government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-1 et seq.; home rule for counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ I; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the county, Act No. 558, adopted March 18, 2010 repealed ch. 2, art. II, §§ 2-31—2-33 in its entirety. Former ch. 2, art. II, pertained to commissioner of the county and was derived from Res. of 2-22-2002 Res. of 8-1-2002 and Res. of 4-25-2008. 

Secs. 2-31—2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation advisory board, § 46-36 et seq.; board of tax assessors, § 62-31 et seq. 
State Law reference— Code of ethics for members of boards, commissions and authorities, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-66—2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— At the direction of the county, ch. 2, art. III, div. 2, § 2-86 was repealed in its entirety. Former ch. 2, art. III, div. 2, pertained to hospital authority and was derived from Res. of 9-3-1957 and Res. of 4-6-1964. 

Secs. 2-86—2-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; Georgia Development Authority Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-111. - Created. 
The county is hereby authorized to create Pickens County Development Authority referred to in this division as the development authority. The development authority shall have all authority and power and shall conduct its business and duties in accordance with those provisions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-112. - Board of directors. 
The initial board of directors shall consist of seven persons who shall serve for terms of two, four and six years and thereafter for staggered terms of six years. 
(Res. of 9-9-1977, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 2-113—2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - JAIL ADVISORY COMMITTEE BOARD 

Sec. 2-136. - Findings. 
The commissioner has been ordered by the federal court to build a new jail. The commissioner has appointed a jail advisory committee board, consisting of five members who shall be appointed by the commissioner and who shall serve at his discretion. 
(Res. of 7-1-1980) 
Secs. 2-137—2-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-161. - Findings. 
(a)  The chamber of commerce and the development authority of the county recognize the need for improving the economic well-being of the county through the attraction and expansion of business, commercial and industrial development. 
(b)  There is a need for an economic development council to undertake the responsibility and assist the development authority, the chamber of commerce and local governmental entities in seeking new industry and assisting existing industry to expand. 
(c)  Representatives of the development authority, chamber of commerce, and local governments mentioned in this section have met and deliberated at length on these matters. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993) 
Sec. 2-162. - Created; board of directors. 
The chamber of commerce hereby creates an economic development council. The council shall function as an autonomous body under the direction of a nine member board of directors composed of the following members: the commissioner, the Mayor of the City of Jasper, one representative from the development authority, one representative from the chamber of commerce, and five private sector representatives to be selected by the first four named representatives to serve two year terms with no limitation upon reappointment. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993) 
Sec. 2-163. - Powers and duties. 
The council shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  All authority, powers, and duties as set forth in that certain service contract of even date between the development authority and the chamber of commerce, such contract being attached hereto and made a part hereof; and 
(2)  The authority to do what is necessary, proper and convenient to carry out its purpose as stated in this division and in such service contract. 
(Res. of 7-20-1993) 
Editor's note— An official copy of the service contract dated July 20, 1993, referred to in this section is on file in the office of the county clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Secs. 2-164—2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - JOINT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 

Subdivision 1. - Bartow County 

Sec. 2-186. - Activation of the authority. 
It is hereby declared that there is a need for a joint development authority to function in Bartow County and Pickens County. Such authority, to be known as the "Joint Development Authority of Bartow County and Pickens County," is hereby created and activated. Such authority, called the authority in this division, shall transact business pursuant to and exercise the powers provided by the provisions of, the Development Authorities Law, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 12-22-1994, § 1) 
Sec. 2-187. - Joint authority. 
The authority is created and activated by this proper resolution of the governing bodies of Bartow County and Pickens County as a joint authority pursuant to provisions of 1981 Ga. Laws, page 1419 and O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 
(Res. of 12-22-1994, § 2) 
Sec. 2-188. - Directors. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of seven directors. Three directors shall be taxpayers residing in Bartow County and shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Bartow County initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, as their terms expire. Four directors shall be taxpayers residing in Pickens County and shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Pickens County initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, as their terms expire. No director shall be an officer or employee of Bartow County or Pickens County. The directors shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The initial directors shall serve for terms of two and four years. 
(b)  After expiration of the initial terms, the terms of office of all members shall be terms of six years. Successors to persons listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be named by the governing body of the county making the original appointment. If at the end of any term of any member a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed. A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the authority. 
(Res. of 12-22-1994, § 3) 
Sec. 2-189. - Officers. 
The directors shall elect one of their members as chairperson and another as vice-chairperson and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer or a secretary-treasurer, either of whom may, but need not be, a director. 
(Res. of 12-22-1994, § 4) 
Sec. 2-190. - Articles of organization. 
The commissioner of each such county is hereby authorized to execute "articles of organization" for such joint authority, such articles of organization to be entered upon the minutes of the respective commissioners. 
(Res. of 12-22-1994, § 7) 
Sec. 2-191. - Reserved. 
Subdivision 1. - Gilmer County 

Sec. 2-192. - Activation of the authority. 
It is hereby declared that there is a need for a joint development authority to function in Gilmer County and Pickens County. Such authority, to be known as the "Joint Development Authority of Gilmer County and Pickens County," is hereby created and activated. Such authority, herein provided by the provisions, the Development Authorities Law, Codified in the O.C.G.A. Title 36, Chapter 62, as the same now exists and as it may be hereafter amended. 
(Res. No. 07-17, § 1, 1-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-193. - Joint authority. 
The authority is created and activated by this proper resolution of the governing bodies of Gilmer County and Pickens County as a joint authority pursuant to provisions of 1971 Ga. Laws, page 1419 and O.C.G.A. § 36-62-5.1. 
(Res. No. 07-17, § 2, 1-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-194. - Directors. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of seven directors. Four directors shall be taxpayers residing in Gilmer County and shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Gilmer County initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, as their terms expire. Three directors shall be taxpayers residing in Pickens County and shall be appointed by the Commissioner of Pickens County initially, as provided in this resolution and, thereafter, as their terms expire. The directors shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for their actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The following persons have been, and are hereby, appointed by the governing bodies of the county shown by their names for terms beginning with the date of adoption of this resolution and extending for the number of years indicated opposite each name. 
(b)  After expiration of the initial terms, the terms of office of all members shall be terms of four years. Successors to persons listed in subsection (a) of this section shall be named by the governing body of the county making the original appointment. If at the end of any term of any member a successor to such member has not been appointed, the member whose term of office has expired shall continue to hold office until his successor is appointed. A majority of the members of the authority shall constitute a quorum, but no action may be taken by the authority without the affirmative vote of a majority of the full membership of the authority. 
(Res. No. 07-17, § 3, 1-26-2007) 
Editor's note— The complete listing of directors are not set out at length herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the office of the county clerk. 
Sec. 2-195. - Officers. 
The directors shall elect one of their members as chairman and another as vice-chairman and shall also elect a secretary and a treasurer, either of whom may, but need not be, a director. 
(Res. No. 07-17, § 4, 1-26-2007) 
Sec. 2-196. - Articles of organization. 
The governing body of each said county is hereby authorized to execute "articles of organization" for such joint authority, such articles of organization to be entered upon the minutes of the respective governing body. 
(Res. No. 07-17, § 7, 1-26-2007) 
Secs. 2-197—2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - WATER SYSTEM ADVISORY BOARD[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 74. 

Sec. 2-211. - Findings. 
(a)  The county currently owns and operates a county water system. 
(b)  The county water and sewer authority created by 1969 Ga. Laws, page 2764, does not own or operate such system and will require extensive amendments in the Georgia legislature to conform to current county needs and requirements. 
(c)  The commissioner desires to create a water advisory board to serve in the interim to monitor and advise regarding the operation of the county water system. 
Sec. 2-212. - Created. 
(a)  There is hereby created a county water system advisory board ("board") which shall have the duty of monitoring the operation of the county water system and advising the commissioner with regard to the operation thereof. 
(b)  The board shall be composed of five members, each of whom shall be at least 21 years of age and shall reside in the unincorporated areas of the county. Each member shall serve at the pleasure of the commissioner. 
(c)  The board shall meet monthly, or more frequently upon call of the commissioner or upon call of a majority of the members. 
(d)  Board members shall be compensated $30.00 for each meeting attended and shall be reimbursed any actual costs incurred while fulfilling their duties. 
(Res. of 6-13-1997, §§ 1—4) 
Secs. 2-213—2-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LAND BANK AUTHORITY 

Sec. 2-236. - Findings. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 48-4-60 et seq., provides for the creation of interlocal cooperation agreements for the purpose of establishing a land bank authority pursuant to the provisions contained in the Code. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council of the City of Jasper, Georgia, and the Commissioner of Pickens County desire to establish such an authority to accomplish the purposes set forth in the statute. 
(Res. of 8-4-1997) 
Sec. 2-237. - Created; adoption. 
The parties hereto do hereby create the City of Jasper-Pickens County Land Bank Authority, its composition, organization, powers and duties being as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-60 et seq. The interlocal agreement creating the City of Jasper-Pickens County Land Bank Authority attached hereto and made a part hereof is hereby adopted by Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-4-1997) 
Editor's note— An official copy of the referenced interlocal agreement is on file in the office of the county clerk where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
Secs. 2-238—2-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - AREA PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Planning, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Automatic membership of counties and municipalities in regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-33; area planning and development commissions succeeded by regional development centers, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-41. 

Sec. 2-261. - Findings. 
(a)  It appears to be advantageous to the welfare of this county that a comprehensive and continuous planning program be undertaken. 
(b)  The commissioner needs an area planning commission to assist in guiding and accomplishing a coordinated and harmonious development of the county and North Georgia which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(Res. of 1-5-1970) 
Sec. 2-262. - Established. 
The commissioner in cooperation with the governing authorities of other area counties and municipalities, hereby establishes the North Georgia Area Planning and Development Commission, in this section called the commission to be governed by the provisions enumerated in this division. 
(Res. of 1-5-1970) 
Sec. 2-263. - Membership. 
The North Georgia Area Planning and Development Commission shall consist of four members from each of the counties participating in the area planning commission. Of the four members from each county, two shall be appointed by the governing authority of the municipality wherein the county seat is located and the other two to be appointed by the governing authority of such county. 
(Res. of 1-5-1970, § 1) 
Sec. 2-264. - Term of office. 
The term of office for all members shall be for five years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment which has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Res. of 1-5-1970, § 2) 
Sec. 2-265. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
The commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice-chairperson from among its appointive members. The term of office of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be for one year or until reelected or their successors are elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the commission. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the chairperson or board may determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Res. of 1-5-1970, § 3) 
Sec. 2-266. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the planning commission may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state, or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend such funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(b)  It shall be the function and duty of the commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the entire North Georgia area and each political subdivision in the area. In general, the commission shall have such powers and duties and responsibilities as set forth in the General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended (Act No. 358). 
(Res. of 1-5-1970, §§ 3, 4) 
Secs. 2-267—2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - PICKENS COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-271. - Membership. 
The planning commission shall consist of seven members. The terms of the appointed members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission under the terms of this division, one member shall be appointed for four years; one member shall be appointed for three years; two members shall be appointed for two years; and the remaining members shall be appointed for one year. Members of the planning commission may be reappointed for succeeding terms. Any vacancy in the planning commission membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Pickens County Commissioner, which shall also have the authority to remove any members for cause upon written charges. 
All members may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties and may also receive a per diem upon approval by the Pickens County Commissioner. 
All planning commission members are encouraged to attend planning related training opportunities available from such organizations as the Georgia Planning Association, the Regional Development Center, Georgia Department of Community Affairs, universities and similar organizations whenever it is appropriate to the activities of the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 12-10-99, § 1) 
Sec. 2-272. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
The planning commission shall elect its chairman and vice-chairman from among its appointive members. The term of the chairman and vice chairman shall be one year or until they are reelected or their successors are elected. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the county or the planning commission. The planning commission shall make its own bylaws, rules of procedure, and shall determine its time of meeting. All meetings and records of the planning commission shall be subject to Georgia laws regarding open meetings and public records. 
The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from Federal. State, or local, public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations; may expend such funds; and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts or contract receipts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Pickens County Commissioner. 
(Ord. of 12-10-99, § 2) 
Sec. 2-273. - Powers and duties. 
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then said planning commission shall have the following powers, duties, and responsibilities: 
(1)  To make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare amendments or updates to the Joint Comprehensive Plan for Pickens County, which was adopted on July 30, 1993, also known as the official plan, and a short term work program update adopted December 23, 1998; for physical, social, environmental, and economic growth as will promote the development of Pickens County; such plan(s), with accompanying maps, plats, charts, and descriptive materials, shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the physical development and uses of land, shall meet the minimum requirements of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989 and related minimum planning standards and procedures promulgated by the state, and may include other matters of special interest to Pickens County; 
(2)  To prepare and recommend to the Pickens County Commissioner from time to time, such changes in the plan or any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the commissioner or by the planning commission; to prepare and recommend to the Pickens County Commissioner from time to time plans and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance of the official plan; 
(3)  To cooperate with other municipal or regional planning commissions and other agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure harmonious and integrated planning for the area; 
(4)  To prepare and recommend for adoption by the Pickens County Commissioner amendments to the Pickens County Land Development Ordinance, which may deal with such matters as establishing land use districts and regulations, regulations for the subdivision of land, sign controls, flood protection, environmental protection, soil erosion and sediment control, manufactured home development standards, and other regulations that would be for the benefit of managing growth in Pickens County; and to oversee the administration of the regulations that may be adopted or amended; 
(5)  To prepare and recommend for adoption by the Pickens County Commissioner an official map showing the location of existing and proposed streets, public open spaces, and public building sites within Pickens County; 
(6)  To delegate to employees authority to perform ministerial acts, in all cases except where final action of the planning commission is necessary; 
(7)  If deemed advisable, to establish an advisory committee or committees; and, 
(8)  To arrange or conduct any form of publicity relative to planning commission activities for the general purpose of public understanding, 
(Ord. of 12-10-99, § 3) 
Secs. 2-274—2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county or any evidence of the county's indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); any contract or obligation assumed by the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); any appropriation ordinance saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); taxation, ch. 62. 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; county finance generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; establishment of fiscal year required, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; designation of depository, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-14; purchases through state, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq.; power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ II. 

Sec. 2-301. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year for the county shall commence on January 1 and conclude on December 31. 
Secs. 2-302—2-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COUNTY MARSHALS OFFICE 

Sec. 2-321. - County marshal. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A., § 15-10-100, power is given to the office of the county commissioner to enact a marshals office. The county marshal will be subject to standards of the O.C.G.A., ch. 8 tit. 35. The county marshal will have the duty of enforcing the ordinances of Pickens County and prosecuting such ordinances in the county magistrate court. The primary responsibility of the county marshal will be the enforcement of issues pertaining to the environment in the county. 
(Res. of 1-10-2003) 
Chapter 4 - ADVERTISING AND SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Signs in mobile home parks, § 38-407; signs in subdivisions, § 38-229. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1—4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING ALONG PUBLIC ROADS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Mar. 24, 2006, repealed art. II, §§ 4-31—4-49, in its entirety and enacted similar new provisions to read as herein set out. The former §§ 4-31—4-49 derived from a resolution adopted Feb. 26, 1999. 

Sec. 4-31. - Statement of findings. 
The commissioner finds that signs provide an important medium through which individuals, businesses, and government may convey a variety of messages. However, left unregulated, signs can become a threat to the public health and safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and the overall economic growth of Pickens County as an aesthetic nuisance. See, e.g., Scenic America, Billboards & Sign Control available at http://www.scenic.org; Jerry Weitz, Ph.D., AICP, The Public Purpose of Rowell's Sign Ordinance and the Implications of Doing Without It: A Position Paper (December 7, 1999) available at http://roswellgov.com. In particular, based on the cited materials and the studies referenced therein as well as other related studies, the commissioner finds that unregulated signs: 
(a)  Can be a safety hazard to drivers and pedestrians; 
(b)  Can be a detriment to the public health; 
(c)  Can hamper economic growth; 
(d)  Can lower property values; 
(e)  Can adversely impact public investments; 
(f)  Can degrade the utility of public safety signs; and 
(g)  Can adversely impact the aesthetic quality of the community and surrounding environment. 
The commissioner acknowledges that the adverse impact of unregulated signs on the health, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the public as well as the government is a topic of ongoing study and research by various governments, educational institutions, and other public and private organizations. To the extent these studies and research further support the findings contained in this section, the commissioner relies and incorporates by reference said studies and research. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-32. - Statement of purpose. 
By enacting this article, the commissioner intends: 
(a)  To balance the rights of individuals, businesses, and government to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(b)  To afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination; 
(c)  To preserve and promote the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of Pickens County; 
(d)  To improve traffic and pedestrian safety; 
(e)  To maintain and enhance the visual environment, and preserve the right of citizens and visitors to enjoy Pickens County's scenic beauty; 
(f)  To protect property values of nearby public and private property by minimizing possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(g)  To avoid the harmful aspects of the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(h)  To promote economic development; 
(i)  To enable the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations; and 
(j)  To promote the purposes stated in this section by regulating signs based on objective standards, including, but not limited to height and size, and without regard to the content of the sign message. 
This article is adopted under the zoning authority of Pickens County in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the Land Use District Ordinance. This article is adopted and hereafter amended pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the Georgia Planning Act of 1989. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-33. - Applicability. 
The regulations set forth below shall apply and govern in all land use intensity districts. Within the unincorporated portions of the county no sign shall be erected or maintained unless it is in compliance with this article. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-34. - Definitions. 
Sign. A sign is an object, device, display, or structure, or structure, or thereof, displayed outdoors or visible from a public way, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization, business, product, service, event or location; or to express a point of view, by any means including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, advertising flags, fixtures, colors, illuminations or projected images. Each substantially different face of a sign shall constitute a separate sign. 
Sign area. The area of the smallest rectangle within which all elements of a flat sign are contained (a flat sign being one with two display surfaces facing exactly opposite directions, or one display surface if against the wall of a building); or the maximum projected surface area (projected in one direction) of any other sign. 
Supporting structures for signs shall not be counted in the sign area, provided such supporting structures consist of posts, hangers, or brackets of the minimum number and size necessary to support the sign. A wall or fence on which a sign is mounted shall not be counted in the sign area, provided it serves primarily to enclose, divide, or protect an area. 
Supporting structures of natural-finish brick masonry, stone masonry, or wood shall not be counted in the sign area, provided that: 
1.  Such structures do not extend more than one foot above or two feet beyond the ends of the sign; 
2.  The height of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed the maximum height allowed in this article; and 
3.  The area of the combined sign and supporting structure does not exceed twice the area of the sign itself. 
Sign, freestanding. A sign that is not mounted on a principal building. 
Sign, nonconforming. Any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this article at the effective date of this article, or any amendment thereto. 
Sign, portable. A sign which is not permanently affixed by rigid structures to a permanent, concrete foundation or a building; including any sign mounted on a vehicle, trailer, or other device designed to be moved periodically from place to place. 
Sign, roof. A sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or wholly or partially over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and supported by or attached to the roof. 
Sign, temporary event. A sign identifying or announcing a temporary event or function which is displayed no more than 21 days in a six-month period. 
Sign, traffic control. A sign to regulate the safe and ordered flow of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
Sign, wall. A sign which is mounted parallel on the exterior surface of a building in which the activity advertised by the sign is located. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-35. - General provisions. 
(a)  Permit required. A permit shall be required for the erection, alteration or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise noted and shall be issued by the land use officer or his/her designee in accordance with the regulations contained in this article. 
(b)  Design, materials and maintenance. Any sign not meeting the following provisions shall be repaired or rebuilt in accordance with the specifications of this article: 
(1)  All signs shall be designed and constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the uniform building code and the electrical code of Pickens County at all times; 
(2)  The area on private property around the sign on which it is erected shall be properly maintained clear of brush, trees, and other obstacles so as to make signs readily visible; 
(3)  All burned out bulbs or damaged panels must be replaced; 
(4)  All sign copy shall be maintained securely to the face and all missing copy must be replaced; and 
(5)  All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times so that the public and traffic safety are not compromised. 
(6)  It shall be the responsibility of the sign owner to maintain and insure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Maximum height of freestanding signs. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this article, the maximum height of any freestanding sign shall be the following: 
(1)  Twenty feet if located on property with road frontage on State Route 515. 
(2)  Fifteen feet if located on property with road frontage on State Route 5; State Route 5 Business; State Route 53; State Route 108; State Route 136; State Route 136 Connector; and State Route 372. 
(3)  Ten feet if located on any other public road. 
This height shall be measured from the grade at the right-of-way boundary line or the grade of the sign site if such grade is higher than the grade at the boundary line of the street right-of-way to the uppermost part of the sign face, base, or structure. If the sign if located below the grade at the boundary line of the street right-of-way, sign height shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way to the uppermost part of the sign face, base, or structure. 
(d)  Maximum sign areas. Unless otherwise specifically permitted by this article, the maximum area of any sign shall be the following: 
(1)  One hundred square feet if located on property with road frontage on State Route 515. 
(2)  Fifty square feet if located on property with road frontage on State Route 5; State Route 5 Business; State Route 53; State Route 108; State Route 136; State Route 136 Connector; and State Route 372. 
(3)  Thirty-two square feet if located on property with road frontage on any other public road. 
Maximum sign areas shall apply to each face separately, but no freestanding sign shall have more than two faces. Where two sign faces are located in a "V" formation, the angle between the two sign faces shall not be greater than 60 degrees. 
(e)  Maximum sign number. In addition to any sign allowed by section 4-37 of this article, the maximum number of permitted signs per lot shall be one freestanding sign. 
(f)  Minimum sign setbacks. Except as otherwise specifically provided, for any freestanding signs, the minimum set from the right-of-lines shall be ten feet and ten feet from the side and rear lot lines. However, in no case will a sign be allowed to obscure vision at a street or driveway intersection, or railway crossing, as prohibited by ordinance. 
(g)  Illumination. No sign shall be illuminated by lights that flash, move, change in intensity, or turn on intermittently more than once per day. To prevent glare visible from a public street or adjoining property, the beam of any light shall be directed so as not to be visible beyond the sign at which it is directed, and the light source shall not be visible from any point on an adjacent property or the public right-of-way. 
(h)  Movement or animation. No sign or part of a sign shall rotate, oscillate, or otherwise move or change in appearance, whether such motion is driven by wind, mechanical, electrical, or other means. 
(i)  Wall signs. Wall signs attached flat against the exterior surface of a building may extend not more than 12 inches from the wall. Signs attached at an angle to a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than five feet and may be located not closer than 18 inches to a vertical plane at the street curb line. In no case shall signs project beyond property lines. 
(j)  Sign message. In any land use intensity district, any sign, display, or devise allowed under this article may contain any lawful noncommercial or commercial message. No provision of this article shall be construed to allow regulation of signs based on the content of the sign message. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A; Res. Of 3-17-2016(2)) 
Sec. 4-36. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Findings. The county finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic characteristics of the county and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact of said signs on motorists and pedestrians. 
(b)  Grandfathered nonconforming signs. A nonconforming sign that is permanently affixed to the ground or to a building may continue to be used, except that the nonconforming sign: 
(1)  Shall not be enlarged or altered except in conformance with this article, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe condition; 
(2)  Shall not be replaced, expanded or modified by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted; and 
(3)  Shall not be allowed to be increased in height or size or relocated on the property, but may be decreased in height or size. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-37. - Permitted signs. 
A general permit is hereby granted for the following types of signs in any zoning district, provided that such signs are erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable conditions: 
(a)  Traffic control signs; 
(b)  Official notices issued by any court with competent jurisdiction or authorized public agency, department or official; 
(c)  Temporary event sign(s) announcing a temporary use or event that is permitted under this article; 
(d)  Any flag provided that (1) no more than two flagpoles are permitted per lot; (2) no more than two flags are permitted per flagpole; (3) the maximum dimension of the hoist side of each flag shall not exceed 20 percent of the height of the flagpole; (4) all flagpoles shall be set back from each property boundary a distance equal to the height of the flagpole; and (5) all flagpoles shall maintained in good repair, so as not to constitute a threat to public safety. On officially designated county, state, and federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number of flags on display. 
(e)  In addition to any other permitted sign under this section, individual signs of up to ten square feet in sign area, with an aggregate sign area not exceeding 25 square feet per lot. Such signs shall be a maximum height of five feet with a minimum setback of ten feet from side property lines. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-38. - Prohibited signs. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the following types of signs shall be prohibited anywhere in the unincorporated areas of Pickens County. 
(a)  Signs imitating warning signals. No sign shall display intermittent lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that might mislead or confuse an automobile or other vehicular driver; 
(b)  Signs within street or highway right-of-way. No sign whatsoever, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic control signs and signals and information signs erected by an authorized public agency or department, are permitted within any street or highway right-of-way or at any location where, by reason of position, shape, wording or color, it obstructs the view of pedestrians or vehicular traffic; 
(c)  Certain attached and painted signs. Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts and telephone or other utility poles or signs painted on or attached to rocks or other natural features or painted on the roofs shall be prohibited; 
(d)  Fluttering ribbons and banners. Fluttering ribbons and banners and similar devices are prohibited. This restriction shall not apply to flags; 
(e)  Roof signs. No sign shall be permitted that is mounted on or extends into the air above any roof surface of a building. A sign may be mounted against a parapet of uniform height around the perimeter of a building but may not extend above the parapet; 
(f)  Portable signs. No portable sign shall be permitted unless it qualifies as a temporary sign and complies with all applicable requirements for such signs under this article; and 
(g)  Painted wall murals. No painted mural shall be permitted unless it complies with the height and size restrictions contained in this article. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-39. - Sign permits. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a timely and standardized mechanism for reviewing applications for sign permits to ensure signs within the county comply with the objective standards of this article, including, but not limited to, the height and size provisions. 
(b)  Authority. The land use officer or his/her designee is authorized to review and approve or disapprove an application for a sign permit pursuant to the procedures of this section and the standards of this article. 
(c)  Applicability. No sign, except those specified in section 4-37 of this article, shall be erected, placed, reconstructed or structurally altered without the sign owner having first obtained a sign permit from the land use officer or his/her designee, pursuant to the procedures in this section and the standards of this article. 
(d)  Permitted signs by ordinance. Pursuant to section 4-37 of this article, a general permit has been granted for those signs listed therein, and no application for a sign permit is required so long as all applicable standards of this article are met. 
(e)  Procedure. The following procedure shall govern the application for, and the issuance of, all sign permits under this article: 
(1)  Initial submission and review of application. Application for a sign permit shall be made on the form provided by the land use officer or his/her designee, and shall be accompanied by the information and documents listed on the form and the fee as required by the commissioner. An application will only be deemed as complete when all required information and accompanying documents are received. 
(2)  Fee. Each application for a sign permit or for approval shall be accompanied by the applicable fee, which shall be established by the commissioner or his/her designee. 
(3)  Action by land use officer or his/her designee. Within ten working days after the application is determined complete, the land use officer or his/her designee shall review the application in accordance with this section and determine whether the application complies with the standards in this article. 
(4)  Approval. If the land use officer or his/her designee finds that the application complies with the standards of this article, the land use officer or his/her designee shall approve a sign permit. Sign application for which no action has been taken after ten working days after the application is complete shall be deemed approved. 
(5)  Fails to comply. If the land use officer or his/her designee determines the application fails to comply with the standards of this article, the applicant shall be provided a written notification with comments, explaining the specific ways in which the application is deficient. If the applicant resubmits the application with 30 days of the written notification of denial, the resubmitted application does not require payment of the fee. The time for resubmission may be extended an additional 30 days for good cause, if requested prior to the original deadline for resubmittal. 
(6)  Resubmittal. A revised application shall be resubmitted to the land use officer or his/her designee and reviewed by the land use officer or his/her designee within ten working days after its resubmittal. The land use officer or his/her designee shall approve or disapprove the application, based on the criteria in this article. 
(7)  Criteria. A sign permit shall be approved upon a finding that the applicant has demonstrated the application complies with the objective standards of this article. 
(8)  Expiration. If the work described in any sign permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance, the sign permit shall expire and be void. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be submitted and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(h)  Amendments. A sign permit may be amended, extended, or modified only in accordance with the procedures established for its original approval. 
(i)  Maintenance of permit. The owner or lessee of a lot containing signs requiring a permit under this article shall, at all times, maintain in force a sign permit for such property. Sign permits shall be issued for individual lots. 
(j)  Assignment of sign permits. A current or valid sign permit shall be freely assigned or transferred to a successor as owner or lessee of the property or holder of a business license for the same premises, subject only to filing such application as the county may require and paying any applicable fees. The assignment shall be accomplished by filing and shall not require approval. 
(k)  Vested rights. No person applying for a sign permit or erecting a sign under this article shall acquire any vested rights to continue maintenance of such signs. 
(l)  Appeals. The following procedure shall govern the appeal of any decision to deny an application for a sign permit under this article: 
Any applicant aggrieved or affected by the denial of an application for a sign permit may then apply for a variance pursuant to this article. Should that request for variance be denied, then the applicant may appeal the denial of the request to the board of appeals in accordance with the procedures of chapter 67-14.1, et seq. [of this Code]. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-40. - Variance. 
A variance may be granted upon application if an individual case of unnecessary and extraordinary hardship is placed upon the applicant for a sign permit, when such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and the purposes of this article. 
(a)  Authority to grant variances. Pursuant to the provisions set forth in chapter 67-14.2 [of this Code], the board of appeals is authorized to receive, consider, grant, grant with conditions, or deny applications for variances. 
(b)  Variance application. A request for a variance may be initiated by a property owner or his/her authorized agent by filing an application with the land use officer. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and position of the proposed sign in relationship to the surrounding properties as prescribed by section 67-14.3 [of this Code]. The land use officer may require other drawings or materials essential to an understanding of the proposed sign and variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. 
(c)  Fee. Each application for a variance shall be accompanied by the applicable fee, which shall be established by the commissioner or his/her designee. 
(d)  Conditions and criteria for granting variances. The board of appeals, in cases where specifically authorized, may grant a variance only after consideration and adoption of findings of fact that all of the following conditions and criteria have been met: 
1.  There exist extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the property in question resulting from its size, shape, or topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
2.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of the article would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other similar properties; 
3.  Granting a variance requested would not confer upon the property of the applicant any significant privileges that are denied to other similar properties; 
4.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of these regulations and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the general welfare; 
5.  The special circumstances are not the result of actions of the applicant; 
6.  The variance is not a request to permit a sign that exceeds the height and size limitations contained in this article; 
7.  The mere existence of a nonconforming sign or advertising devise shall not constitute a valid reason to grant a variance; 
8.  The variance requested is the minimum variance, which will make possible the logical use of the land and sign. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-41. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement officer. The provisions of this article shall be administered and enforced by the land use officer or his/her designee(s). 
(b)  Notice. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall receive written notice by hand delivery, fax or mail indicating that they must correct the violation within five calendar days of the hand delivered or faxed notice and within seven calendar days of the mail notice. 
(c)  Penalties. If the violation is not eliminated within the required time period, any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by fines in the amount of $250.00 per offense. Each day in which the violation continues to occur shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  Appeal. Any violator may appeal the determination of the land use officer to the board of appeals in accordance with the procedures of chapter 67-14.1 et seq. [of this Code]. 
(e)  Legal proceedings. The land use officer upon a finding that any provision of this article is being violated, is authorized to institute legal proceedings to enjoin violations of this article. The violator shall be liable for court costs and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the county. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Sec. 4-42. - Severability and conflict. 
(a)  Severability. This article is declared to be severable. In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The commission hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this article if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(b)  Conflict. If any part of this article is found to be in conflict with any other ordinance of this county or any state or federal statute, the most restrictive or highest standard shall prevail. If any part of this sign ordinance is explicitly prohibited by state or federal statute, that part shall not be enforced. 
(Res. of 3-24-2006, § 1, Ex. A) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A, repealed the former ch. 6 §§ 6-1, 6-21—6-23, 6-36, 6-40, 6-41—6-47, 6-60, and 6-70, and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. The former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 7-26-2012, Res. of 4-18-2013, and Ord. of 7-16-2015(1). 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, where used in this article, shall have the following indicated meanings: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Brewpub means any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. As used in this paragraph, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food; provided, however, that barrels of beer sold to licensed wholesale dealers for distribution to retailers and retail consumption dealers, as authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36(2)(C), shall not be used when determining the total annual gross food and beverage sales. 
Broker means any person who purchases or obtains an alcoholic beverage from an importer, distillery, brewery, or winery and sells the alcoholic beverage to another broker, importer, or wholesaler without having custody of the alcoholic beverage or maintaining a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
Commissioner means the state revenue commissioner. 
County or municipality means those political subdivisions of this state as defined by law and includes any form of political subdivision consolidating a county with one or more municipalities. 
Department means the department of revenue. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Farm winery means a winery which makes at least 40 percent of its annual production from agricultural produce grown in the state and: 
1) Is located on premises, a substantial portion of which is used for agricultural purposes, including the cultivation of grapes, berries, or fruits to be utilized in the manufacture or production of wine by the winery; or 
2) Is owned and operated by persons who are engaged in the production of a substantial portion of the agricultural produce used in its annual production. 
For purposes of this definition, the commissioner shall determine what is a substantial portion of such winery premises or agricultural produce. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Gallon or wine gallon means a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to the volume of 231 cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Governing authority means the board of commissioners of the county, which shall have the power to act as granted by the state law and this chapter. 
Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of the juice of apples, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to flavored or carbonated cider. For purposes of this chapter, hard cider shall be deemed a malt beverage. The term does not include "sweet cider." 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker, or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of the alcoholic beverage. 
Individual means a natural person. 
License means permit to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Licensing board means a five-member board appointed by the governing authority to screen and review applications for licenses in the county; hold hearings for the approval, disapproval, suspension or revocation of licenses governing the sale of malt beverages, wine, and/or distilled spirits; collect reports to aid and assist it in the determination and collection of excise taxes; collect additional information as needed; and levy a fine, suspend a current license for a specified amount of time, and/or revoke a license for the remainder of its term in the case of a violation. The term of each member of the board will be at the discretion of the governing authority. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than 14 percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Military reservation means a duly commissioned post, camp, base, or station of a branch of the armed forces of the United States located on territory within this state which has been ceded to the United States. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
Premises means the space or area owned, leased or controlled by the licensee and used by him for the purpose of operating under the license. It shall be limited to one location for each license and there shall be a separate license for each premises outlet. 
Resident means a person whose primary residence is within the territorial limits of the county. 
Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, such place being provided with the adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and personnel to serve food, and with regular seating capacity for not less than 50 persons, and which produces, at a minimum, 50 percent of its income from the sale of food and not more than 50 percent of its income from the sale of beer and wine. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term shall have the same meaning as the term "retail package liquor store." 
Retail package means sales of malt beverages and/or wine packaged to go and not for consumption on the sales premises. 
Retail package liquor store means a retail business establishment owned by an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or other business entity: 
(1)  Primarily engaged in the retail sale of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine in unbroken packages, not for consumption on the premises, except as authorized under this chapter; and 
(2)  Which derives from such retail sale of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages at least 75 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of a combination of distilled spirits, malt beverages, and wine. 
Shipper means any person who ships an alcoholic beverage from outside this state. 
Standard case means six containers of 1.75 liters, 12 containers of 750 milliliters, 12 containers of one liter, 24 containers of 500 milliliters, 24 containers of 375 milliliters, 48 containers of 200 milliliters, or 120 containers of 50 milliliters. 
Tasting room means an outlet for the promotion of a farm winery's wine by providing samples of such wine to the public and for the sale of such wine at retail for consumption on the premises and for sale in closed packages for consumption off the premises. Samples of wine may be given complimentary or for a fee. The holder of a farm winery license shall be entitled to a tasting room on the premises and one off of the premises within the county. 
Taxpayer means any person made liable by law to file a return or to pay tax. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-3. - Incorporation of state laws. 
This section incorporates all the minimum laws and regulations relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages and wine in the state as set forth in O.C.G.A. tit. 3. Said code and all regulations and requirements enumerated therein are made a part thereof to the same extent, as if they were quoted herein. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-4. - Posting. 
The holder of a license hereunder shall have the same conspicuously posted in their place of business at all times. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-5. - Minors, provisions of alcoholic beverages to or possession by, unlawful. 
(a)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally act as agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage, malt beverage or wine for or on behalf of a minor, or otherwise procure for or furnish to a minor any alcoholic beverage, malt beverage or wine, except for medical purposes upon the written prescription of a duly licensed physician under the laws of the state. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor falsely to misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever, in violation of this article or applicable laws. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverage, malt beverage or wine as defined herein. 
(d)  Any person found in violation of this section shall be punished pursuant to section 1-11. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-6. - Required; types. 
No person shall engage in the business of wholesaling, retailing or otherwise providing malt beverage, wines, or distilled spirits of any kind in the unincorporated areas of Pickens County without first obtaining a Pickens County license therefor under this article. 
Only the following licenses shall be authorized or licensed under this article: 
(1)  Malt beverages (beer). 
a.  Retail package. 
b.  Sale by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Wine. 
a.  Retail package. 
b.  Sale by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
c.  Farm winery. 
(3)  Combination. 
a.  Malt beverages (beer) and wine retail package. 
b.  Malt beverages (beer) and wine sale by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(4)  Distilled spirits. 
a.  Sale by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-7. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for a license shall be made to the clerk of the licensing board on forms promulgated by said board. 
(b)  At the time of application, the applicant shall, at his or her expense, run a public notice in the official legal organ (newspaper) of Pickens County for four consecutive weeks using language provided by the licensing board. After the notice has been run four weeks, the applicant shall provide proof from the newspaper that the notice has run. 
(c)  All fees for a license shall be pursuant to a schedule established by the licensing board and shall be due in full with the filing of the application. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to a person or entity owned or managed by a person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or a violation of any federal, state, or local statute or ordinance involving alcoholic beverages within the ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Any license holder arrested for said crime(s) shall be required to report the same to the licensing board. 
(e)  No license shall be issued to any person or entity that owes taxes or fines to the county. This prohibition shall not apply for property taxes issued in the year that the application is made. 
(f)  Any application which the governing authority and licensing board determines to satisfy all the qualifications outlined in this article shall be scheduled for review at the next meeting of the licensing board. 
(g)  The denial of a license shall not entitle the applicant to a refund of the application fee. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-8. - Generally. 
(a)  The issuance of a license shall not create any property right in the license holder; the sale of alcoholic beverages in the unincorporated area of the county is a privilege and not a right. 
(b)  No license will be issued for retail package and sale by the drink for the same location and the holder of any license hereunder shall post a conspicuous sign advising the public that there can be no opening of containers or consumption of any malt beverage or wine in the building or on the premises covered under said license. 
(c)  All licenses shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year in which said license was issued. All license applications or renewals thereof for the following year shall be due no later than November 15 of the preceding year, with payment received no later than December 15 of same year. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation resulting in a fine, suspension, and/or revocation/forfeiture per section 6-16. 
(d)  Licenses cannot be transferred. This prohibition includes transfers from the original holder of the license to a new entity or individual as well as transfers from the location referenced in the application to a new location. 
(e)  All licensees shall require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not served or has in his possession distilled spirits while in a licensed establishment. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, or the person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth, and including, but without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license, or state department public safety ID card. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(f)  Sale by the drink for consumption on the premises licenses shall only be issued to restaurants as that term is defined herein. This provision shall not apply to farm winery licenses. 
(g)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any person performing acts of, or acts which constitute or simulate sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law or the touching, caressing, or fondling of the breast, buttocks, anus or genitals or the displaying of any portion of the areola of the breast, or any portion of the pubic hair, cleft of the buttocks, anus, vulva, or genitals, the showing, display or exhibit of any film, still picture, or electronic reproduction or any other visual reproduction or image of any act or conduct described herein. No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any person using artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described above. No licensee shall permit any person to remain in or about the licensed premises who exposes to public view any portion of the areola of the breast, or any portion of the pubic hair, cleft of the buttocks, anus, vulva, or genitals. There shall be no nude or semi-nude or erotic dancing, or the performance of obscene acts or acts which simulate: 
(1)  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; or 
(2)  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; or 
(3)  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; in any outlet that is licensed. 
The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or any other sexual activity is prohibited in any licensed outlet. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-9. - Hours of sale. 
Subject to the restrictions referenced in section 6-10, license holders may sell during the following times: 
(1)  From 7:00 a.m. until 11:45 p.m. Monday through Saturday (all license holders) 
(2)  From 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. on Sunday (retail package license holders only) 
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the sale of alcoholic beverages on an election day. 
Should a holder of a license to sell by the drink for consumption on the premises remain open for more than one hour beyond the prohibited hours of sale, said act shall be construed as prima facie evidence that alcoholic beverages are being consumed on the premises in violation of this chapter. 
In no event shall alcoholic beverages be sold during the prohibited hours based upon the timely sale of tickets, chits, decanters, or other devises. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-10. - Sunday sales; holidays. 
(a)  Sunday sales. Package sales by retailers of both malt beverages and wine on Sundays shall be permitted between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. on each and every Sunday except for Easter Sunday. 
(b)  Holidays. The prohibition of sales of malt beverages and wine on Christmas day shall not be modified by this subsection; therefore, no sales of malt beverages and wine shall be permitted on Christmas day regardless of the day of the week upon which Christmas falls. 
This section shall be further modified to provide for the package sales by retailers of both malt beverages and wine on Thanksgiving Day. The hours for said sales shall be the same as for sales on any other day of the week except for Sunday. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-11. - Distance of business from schools and churches. 
No alcohol license shall be issued for a business located within 600 feet of any church property or within 600 feet of any school property, educational property, school grounds, or college campus property. 
For the purpose of this article, the schools or colleges referred to herein, shall include only such state, county, city, church, or other schools as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and expressly exclude buildings used by school officials solely for administrative purposes in which school children are not regularly taught. 
Unless otherwise provided by law, all measurements to determine distance required under this article for the issuance of an alcoholic beverage license, shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which malt beverages and/or wine are offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest route; 
(4)  To the land line of the school property, educational property, school grounds, college campus property, or church property. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-12. - Special permits license. 
The licensing board may authorize issuance of a special events license that permits the sale of alcoholic beverages on a temporary basis for the purpose of a special event only. Current Pickens County alcohol license holders may obtain no more than 12 special events licenses per calendar year. Non-license holders may obtain no more than three special events licenses per calendar year. The licensing board's authorization may include special terms and conditions and such other exceptions from the requirements of this chapter as the licensing board may deem appropriate in the circumstances; provided, however, that no special events license shall be issued for a period of more than two days. The fees for special licenses shall be as provided by the licensing board and shall not be subject to waiver. In addition to such other conditions as may be imposed for issuance of a special license, caterers issued special licenses shall comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 3-11-2 and all other applicable provisions of state law. Special events licenses shall not be issued for any event occurring on a Sunday. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-13. - Denial of license; hearing. 
If the licensing board denies an application for a license, its clerk shall notify the applicant within five days of said decision by email and certified mail. Said notice shall articulate why the license was denied and provide for a time, date, and place not less than three days and not more than ten days from the mailing of the notice for the applicant to show cause before the licensing board why said denial was in error. Transcription of the hearing shall be optional and shall be at the expense of the applicant. 
Should the licensing board uphold its decision, it shall notify the applicant in writing within three days from the date of the hearing. The applicant shall have ten days from the date of the hearing to file an appeal of that decision with the county board of commissioners. Said appeal shall be in writing, and it shall be filed with the clerk of the county board of commissioners and with the clerk of the licensing board. The clerk of the licensing board shall forward a record of the hearing to the board of commissioners. The applicant may supplement the record with a transcription of the hearing, if available; otherwise, the appeal to the board of commissioners shall be limited to a review of the record transmitted from the licensing board. The board of commissioners shall have 45 days to review said record and render its decision. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
ARTICLE III. - REPORTS 

Sec. 6-14. - Monthly excise reports/returns/taxes. 
Distilled spirits and farm winery license holders shall be required to prepare and deliver monthly reports/returns as determined by the licensing board to aid and assist it in the determination and collection of excise taxes and for the enforcement of this chapter. A monthly excise tax shall be levied upon the sale of purchase of alcoholic beverages for these license holders. The amount of said tax shall be determined by resolution of the county board of commissioners. 
Excise tax shall be collected by the license holder and remitted to the licensing board on or before the 20 th of each month or as set by the county board of commissioners. Each remittance of said tax shall be accompanied by a report/return completed by the license holder upon forms created by the licensing board. 
Failure to remit taxes or file reports/returns when due with the licensing board shall result in a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, license forfeiture, or both; all unremitted taxes shall bear interest at ten percent. 
The licensing board shall be responsible for the collection of said tax, promulgating rules and regulations for said collection, and levying fines and/or license forfeiture. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-15. - Quarterly reports/returns. 
All license holders shall be required to prepare and deliver quarterly reports/returns as determined by the licensing board to aid and assist in the enforcement of this chapter. Reporting information shall include quarterly statistics such as food sales; beer, wine, and distilled spirits sales; total alcohol sales; and/or total retail sales. 
All license holders shall submit quarterly reports/returns using forms created by the licensing board. These reports/returns shall be due no later than the 10 th day of the month following the quarter. As an example, quarterly reports/returns for the first quarter period of January through March shall be due no later than April 10 or as set by the county board of commissioners. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
ARTICLE IV. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 6-16. - Violations. 
If the licensing board receives evidence that establishes probable cause for a violation of this chapter, then it shall notify the license holder within five days of said receipt by email and certified mail. Said notice shall articulate the alleged violation and the evidence that will be presented to substantiate the allegation; it shall also provide for a time, date, and place not less than three days and not more than ten days from the mailing of the notice for the license holder to appear before the licensing board to dispute said evidence and present any evidence it has to the contrary. 
Transcription of the hearing shall be optional and shall be at the expense of the license holder. 
Should the licensing board determine that a violation has occurred, it may levy a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, it may suspend the current license for a specified amount of time, or it may revoke the license for the remainder of its term. 
The licensing board shall notify the license holder in writing within three days from the date of the hearing. The license holder shall have ten days from the date of the hearing to file an appeal of that decision with the county board of commissioners. Said appeal shall be in writing, and it shall be filed with the clerk of the county board of commissioners and with the clerk of the licensing board. The clerk of the licensing board shall forward a record of the hearing to the board of commissioners. The license holder may supplement the record with a transcription of the hearing, if available; otherwise, the appeal to the board of commissioners shall be limited to a review of the record transmitted from the licensing board. The board of commissioners shall have 45 days to review said record and render its decision. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 6-17. - Criminal violations. 
Any person found to be in violation of this chapter (including but not limited to those state laws incorporated in section 6-3) shall be punished pursuant to section 1-11. 
(Res. of 2-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Exchange of free replay for anything of value unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(c); Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 5-21-99, §§ 2—5, 8—11, 28—35, contained provisions that did not specifically amend the Code, and at the editor's discretion, the provisions were codified as §§ 10-51—10-66. For classification purposes, said sections were designated as Div. 2, Adult Entertainment Establishments, and existing §§ 10-31, 10-32, were designated as Div. 1, Generally. Any conflict shall be resolved in favor of the more stringent regulations. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-31. - Preamble and purpose. 
(a)  Based upon the experiences of other urban counties and municipalities, and based upon the community concerns of the county, the county commissioner takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. 
(b)  It is the finding of the county commissioner that public nudity and seminudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances relating to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in so-called "nude bars" or establishments offering so-called "nude entertainment," "adult entertainment," or "erotic entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described in this section, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. 
(c)  The limitation of nude or seminude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcohol for consumption on the premises is in the public welfare and is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity and seminudity. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 1) 
Sec. 10-32. - Enactment. 
The following types of entertainment, attire, and conduct are not permitted upon premises licensed to sell, serve or dispense alcoholic beverages or upon premises licensed under the business and occupational ordinances of the county and in which alcoholic beverages are consumed, allowed or dispensed on the premises: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva or genitals; or 
(2)  Live entertainment in business establishments which provides or features nude or seminude or erotic dancing, or the performance of obscene acts or acts which simulate: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; or 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breast, buttock, anus or genitals; or 
c.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals; or 
(3)  The showing of any film, still pictures, electronic reproduction of other visual reproductions depicting any of the acts described in subsection (2) of this section which are obscene under state law; or its examining boards division and 38 boards within the division, is responsible for licensing a wide variety of professions; and, 
(4)  The holding, promotion or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the prohibited conduct listed in this section; 
(5)  Notwithstanding the prohibitions in subsections (1) through (4) of this section, nothing in this article shall, or is intended to apply to theatrical or motion picture performance houses, museums, or the like where the consumption or service of alcohol is not a primary purpose or mainstream activity of such establishment. 
(Ord. of 8-12-1991, § 2) 
Secs. 10-33—10-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-51. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to regulate certain types of businesses, including but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed; however, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this division represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 2) 
Sec. 10-52. - Definitions. 
The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material, or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult business means either (1) any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business; or (2) any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (3) any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Adult mini-motion picture theater an enclosed building with a capacity for less than fifty persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
Massage parlor means an establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on, depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade in video tapes or movies or other reproductions, for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing, or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
Lingerie modeling studio means an establishment whose primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a felony or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude in the past five years. The governing authority may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor for the purposes of this division shall mean any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piguerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Torture; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(8)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Sec. 10-53. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  An erotic dance establishment shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers and all other employees of the establishment. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall employ or contract as a dancer with a person under the age of 21 years. 
(c)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(d)  An erotic dance establishment shall be closed between 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m., on Monday through Saturday, on Sunday and on December 25th of each year. 
(e)  No erotic dance establishment shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises. 
(f)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the first floor. 
(g)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(h)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(i)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(j)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(k)  All areas of an adult entertainment establishment hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times that patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(l)  If any portion, or subparagraph, of this section of this division, or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 4) 
Sec. 10-54. - Certain activities prohibited. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 5) 
Sec. 10-55. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for an "adult entertainment business" to admit a minor within the premises. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 8) 
Sec. 10-56. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person (absent parental supervision or supervision of a duly appointed guardian) to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. Nothing herein is intended to authorize any parent or guardian to do any act or permit a minor possession of any good or service that is unlawful under any law of the State of Georgia or of the United States. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 9) 
Sec. 10-57. - Location. 
No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(a)  Within 1000 feet of any parcel of land which is used for residential purposes; 
(b)  Within 1000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park, hospital, nursing home or playground is located; 
(c)  Within 2000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(d)  On a tract of land containing less than 200 feet of road frontage. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 10) 
Sec. 10-58. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this division. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any adult entertainment establishment premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well, work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the premises. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 11) 
Sec. 10-59. - Violation; penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this division shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 28) 
Sec. 10-60. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this division shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The governing authority may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a quasi-criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this division. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 29) 
Sec. 10-61. - Cleaning of premises. 
Each premise shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 30) 
Sec. 10-62. - Self-inspection of premises. 
The business owner, or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the governing authority. Each premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 31) 
Sec. 10-63. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
The business, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the governing authority on his finding of a violation of this division resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the governing authority shall serve on the business, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the governing authority may physically seal that portion of the premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the governing authority. The governing authority shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "unsafe", as the case may be. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 32) 
Sec. 10-64. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A business, or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 33) 
Sec. 10-65. - Severability. 
If any portion or section of this division or its application to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 34) 
Sec. 10-66. - Effective date. 
This division shall be of full force and effect at the earliest date after passage the public health, safety and welfare demanding it. 
(Res. of 5-21-99, § 35) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Resolution of June 29, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 14, Art. I, Art. II, §§ 14-31—14-36, and enacted a new Ch. 14 as set out herein. The former Ch. 14 pertained to animals and derived from Res. of 1-3-1989, §§ 1—6. 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 34; poultry houses and swine operations, § 38-581 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-20-2014(1), repealed and replaced art. I, §§ 14-1—14-14, in its entirety. Former art. I pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Res. of 6-29-2009. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
As used hereinafter, the following words and terms shall have the meaning set forth unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
Abandonment shall mean the act by an owner of leaving, deserting, rejecting, or renouncing responsibility of or claim to a domesticated animal. 
Adequate food and water shall mean food and water which is sufficient in amount and appropriate for the particular type of animal to prevent starvation, dehydration, or a significant risk to the animal's health from a lack of food or water. 
Aggressive shall be descriptive of any domesticated animal which appears to have a propensity for attacking persons, or which has in fact attacked a person on at least one occasion, or which threatens persons by growling or barking in such a manner that causes persons of reasonable sensibilities to be apprehensive for his or her safety. 
Animal shall mean all living nonhuman creatures, domestic or wild, including livestock. 
At large shall mean not under the direct physical or voice restraint of the owner, whether on or off the owner's premises. 
Bite shall mean any physical contact with human skin or clothing worn by a human with the teeth, nails, or claws of an animal. 
Board of commissioners shall refer to the Pickens County Board of Commissioners unless otherwise specified. Synonymous with "governing authority." 
Board of health shall mean the Pickens County Board of Public Health. 
Cat shall mean the domestic cat, Felis catus. 
Citation shall mean a written notice issued to a person stating that there is probable cause to believe that the person has committed an infraction of this chapter and directing the person to respond to the charge at a certain date and time in the magistrate court of the county. 
Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as either a dangerous dog or vicious dog pursuant to article III. 
County shall refer to Pickens County unless otherwise specified. Synonymous with "local government." 
County animal control facility shall mean any facility designated by the board of commissioners for animal control and/or the implementation of the provisions of this chapter. 
Court shall mean with regards to article I and article II, the magistrate court of the county. With regards to article III, the probate court of the county. 
Dangerous dog shall mean any dog which, according to the records of the county: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dangerous dog control officer shall mean that individual appointed by the board of commissioners to aid in the enforcement and administration of the dangerous dog control portion of article III by examining and reasonably evaluating whether or not a dog shall be classified as a dangerous dog or as a potentially dangerous dog. Such person may be, but is not required to be, a licensed veterinarian. 
Dog shall refer to the domestic dog, Canis familiaris. 
Domesticated animal shall be limited to dogs and cats or any animal which bears a physical resemblance to a dog or cat. 
Humane care shall mean, but not be limited to, the provision of adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, and wholesome and adequate food and water, consistent with normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed. 
Identification shall mean identification in the form of a tag worn on a collar, subcutaneous chip, or tattoo placed on the animal for the purposes of identification, which shall, at a minimum, provide sufficient information for the contact of the owner of the animal. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. In the case of a dog owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
Person shall refer to any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, organization, or association. 
Potentially dangerous dog shall mean any dog which has, without provocation, bitten any person on public or private property at any time after March 31, 1989. 
Public nuisance shall mean any domesticated animal which unreasonably annoys persons, endangers the life or health of persons or of other domesticated animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than the owner of such animal, to enjoy life and property. The term shall include, but not be limited to, any domesticated animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large; 
(2)  Damages the property of anyone other than its owner; 
(3)  Chases vehicles; 
(4)  Attacks other domesticated animals; 
(5)  Attacks pedestrians or passersby without provocation; or 
(6)  Persistently or continuously barks, howls, or makes noise common to their species which disturbs the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhoods. 
Proper enclosure for a dangerous dog or for a potentially dangerous dog shall mean an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure, suitable to prevent the entry of children or other animals and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such as manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. Any such enclosure shall be locked at all times so as to prevent the unintentional opening of the enclosure. The dog shall not be permitted to come into contact with animals other than those which reside at the owner's residence nor shall the dog be permitted to come into contact with any persons other than the owner and the immediate family. 
Quarantine shall mean the humane confinement of an animal for observation of symptoms of rabies or other disease in a proper enclosure which prevents the animal from coming into unplanned contact with any other animal or person. Severe injury shall mean any physical injury which results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Stray shall mean any domesticated animal which is at large and whose owner is unknown or not readily identifiable. 
Vaccination shall mean inoculation with anti-rabies vaccine given by a licensed veterinarian, the dose of which is sufficient to provide immunity against rabies for at least one year. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-2. - Application of chapter to domesticated animals only. 
Unless this chapter shall specifically state otherwise or unless the context shall clearly provide otherwise, this chapter shall apply only to domesticated animals, as defined hereinabove, and not to all animals. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources, or other appropriate agency, should be consulted regarding non-domesticated animals, including wild animals and migratory birds. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-3. - Purposes. 
The broad purposes of this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  To set forth the minimum standards by which the county shall operate in its enforcement of all state and county laws, ordinances, and resolutions relating to domesticated animals and the care, custody, and control of such domesticated animals; 
(2)  To protect and to promote the health, welfare, and safety of the general public; 
(3)  To educate the general public with regard to proper maintenance and care of domesticated animals, including, but not limited to, educating the public as to the benefits of spaying or neutering such domesticated animals to prevent undesired reproduction; 
(4)  To enforce and to promote the public health requirement that all dogs and cats be properly vaccinated against rabies on an annual basis; 
(5)  To enforce and to promote the public safety requirement that all dangerous dogs and all potentially dangerous dogs be properly confined and that necessary measures be taken to protect the public at large from such animals. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-4. - Contract for enforcement with municipalities within the county. 
The jurisdiction for enforcement of this chapter shall be in the unincorporated portion of the county. However, the board of commissioners shall be authorized to provide its services within any municipality within the county. A prerequisite for the provision of said services shall be the adoption of the substantive provisions of this chapter by the municipality together with an intergovernmental agreement with the board of commissioners. Said intergovernmental agreement shall be subject to any state law which may govern. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-5. - Jurisdiction of magistrate court. 
Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. and the provisions of article III, the county magistrate court shall have jurisdiction to hear and to determine all alleged violations of this chapter unless the accused shall demand a jury trial, in which case the prosecution shall be removed to the county superior court for jury trial as a misdemeanor. The county magistrate court shall have all powers granted to it which are necessary and incident to the hearing and disposition of the matters brought before the court, including but not limited to the authority to issue citations and summons for witnesses. 
The following persons have standing to file complaints for violations of this chapter: 
(1)  The county dangerous dog control officer; 
(2)  Law enforcement officers; 
(3)  Public health officials; 
(4)  Individuals with personal knowledge of the violation upon filing a sworn complaint with the court. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-6. - Enforcement. 
With the exception of article III, the primary responsibility for the enforcement and execution of this chapter shall be vested in the board of commissioners. The dangerous dog control officer shall have the primary responsibility for the enforcement and execution of article III. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-7. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
The punishment for any ordinance violation of this chapter, subject to the provisions of article III, shall be as described in section 1-11. 
Each act or omission of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. Each day that such violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-8. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any animal which is in violation of any portion of this chapter may be impounded. The appropriate enforcement agency shall use discretion in determining whether impoundment shall be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter. 
(b)  All impounded animals not bearing identification shall be designated as strays. 
(c)  All impounded animals shall be provided adequate food and water and shall be provided with humane care while impounded at the owner's expense. 
(d)  Neither the county nor its agents shall be responsible for any diseases, injuries, or other harm to any impounded animal. 
(e)  The fees with respect to services performed in connection with the enforcement of this chapter shall be set by the board of commissioners. A copy of said fees shall be available by request from that office. Fees may change from time to time at the discretion of the board of commissioners. The fees established and collected pursuant to this subsection are not penalties; they are imposed for the sole purpose of defraying expenses born by the county for animal control and welfare. Fees may change at any time and shall include but not be limited to an impounding fee, a per day boarding fee, and rabies vaccinations, if necessary. 
(f)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the killing of an animal when it is determined to be a menace to public safety or a menace to other animals such that it cannot be impounded with reasonable effort. 
(g)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent the humane killing of an animal which is severely sick or injured. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-9. - Detention periods following impoundment. 
(a)  Any stray animal impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be detained for a period of not less than five working days prior to being subject to adoption by a third party or euthanization. 
(b)  Any animal impounded pursuant to this chapter which is bearing identification shall be detained for a period of not less than ten working days prior to being subject to adoption by a third party or euthanization. During such period, the county shall make reasonable efforts to contact the owner, either in writing or by telephone, or both, utilizing any information provided upon the identification. If the only identification is a rabies tag, then the county shall contact the issuing veterinarian for identification information. 
(c)  If at any time during the required detention period set forth above, the owner indicates that he or she intends not to reclaim the animal, the balance of the detention period may be waived. In such instance, the owner shall indicate in writing such intention not to reclaim the animal and such writing shall be maintained by the county. 
(d)  If at any time during the required detention period, examination of the animal indicates that the animal is severely sick or injured, or that such animal is a threat to the health of the other animals detained at the county animal control facility, the balance of the detention period may be waived. In such instance, the person making the determination that the circumstances set forth herein are satisfied shall prepare a written summary to be retained by the county of the conditions which prompted him or her to make such determination. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-10. - Owner reclaims. 
(a)  An owner of an impounded animal may reclaim such animal during normal business hours. 
(b)  The owner shall identify his or her animal. 
(c)  The owner shall provide his or her address. 
(d)  If the animal was not impounded near the address of the person seeking to reclaim the animal, then some further reasonable proof of ownership shall be required. 
(e)  The owner shall provide proof that any animal to be reclaimed is currently vaccinated. If no proof shall be provided, then the owner shall be cited pursuant to this chapter. 
(f)  If an owner indicates that an animal to be reclaimed has been stolen, the county animal control facility shall use discretion in determining whether any fees associated with reclaiming the animal shall be waived if the owner produces a copy of a police report filed regarding the disappearance of the animal. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-11. - Interpretation of chapter. 
(a)  Nothing herein shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any state or federal law, ordinance, rule, or regulation. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any liability upon the county, or any of their employees or agents for the enforcement or failure to enforce any of the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-12. - Incorporation of state law; construction. 
This chapter shall be construed to effectuate its purposes and policies and to supplement such existing state laws as may relate to animals. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-13. - Severability. 
If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unlawful, unconstitutional, or unenforceable, such determination shall not affect the rest and remainder of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-14. - Duties of animal owners and citizens. 
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, it shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of an animal within the county to: 
(1)  Exercise reasonable care and take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people and property from injuries and damage which might result from the animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness, or ferocity. 
(2)  Ensure that the animal is restrained or controlled so as to prevent it from chasing vehicles or chasing, menacing, or attacking persons or other animals. 
(3)  Ensure that the animal is restrained or controlled so as to prevent it from acting or being aggressive. 
(4)  Ensure that the animal is restrained or controlled so as to prevent it from creating a public nuisance. 
(5)  Ensure that the animal bears adequate identification in the form of a tag worn on a collar, subcutaneous chip, or tattoo placed on the animal for the purposes of identification, which shall, at a minimum, provide sufficient information for the contact of the owner of the animal. 
(6)  Domesticated animals are additionally prohibited in those public areas so designated and posted by the county or other governmental entity or private entity (for example, a homeowner's association) having authority to do so. 
Citation under this section shall not replace or be a substitute for enforcement of the section of this chapter dealing with dangerous or potentially dangerous animals, and an owner may be subject to enforcement under both sections. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Secs. 14-15—14-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES AND ANIMAL CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-20-2014(1), repealed and replaced art. II, §§ 14-20—14-33, in its entirety. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Res. of 6-29-2009. 

Sec. 14-20. - Rabies control; vaccination required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog or cat over three months of age within the county unless such dog or cat is vaccinated. This provision does not apply to dogs and cats owned by a licensed research facility or held in a veterinary medical facility or government operated or licensed animal shelter. All dogs and cats shall be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian in accordance with the latest compendium of animal rabies vaccines and recommendations for immunization published by the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians. All dogs and cats shall bear a collar with a tag showing compliance with this provision. 
(b)  No person shall vaccinate dogs or cats against rabies who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person not to comply with the regulations concerning rabies vaccinations as promulgated by the Georgia Department of Health and described in O.C.G.A. §§ 31-5-1 and 31-19-1. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-21. - Domesticated animals disturbing the peace. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or otherwise having a domesticated animal in his or her care, charge, control, custody, or possession to allow any such domesticated animal persistently or continuously to bark, howl, or make noise common to their species or otherwise to disturb the peace and quiet of the surrounding neighborhoods. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit a dog who is trained to defend livestock against predators from performing that function. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-22. - Cruelty to animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the death or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering to any animal, regardless of whether or not said animal is domesticated or not, by an act, an omission, or because of willful neglect. This section shall specifically include, but not be limited to, the following examples of cruelty: 
(1)  An owner's failure to provide adequate medical care, food, water and/or humane care for any domesticated animal; 
(2)  The use of caustic, flammable, boiling, or heated substances upon any domesticated animal; 
(3)  The suffocation or drowning of a domesticated animal; 
(4)  The torture, maiming, or mutilation of any domesticated animal; 
(5)  The infliction of burns, cuts, or lacerations upon any domesticated animal; 
(6)  Leaving an animal unattended in a parked vehicle without proper ventilation; 
(7)  Over working or over loading an animal beyond humane limits. 
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a person from killing or injuring an animal in the defense of his or her person or property, or the person or property of another, including but not limited to the killing of a domesticated animal causing injury or damage to livestock or poultry. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a person from humanely killing an animal which is severely sick or injured. The method used for killing or injuring the animal shall be designed to be as humane as is possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills or injures an animal under the circumstances described herein shall incur no liability for the death or injury of said animal. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-23. - Right of entry. 
An officer charged with the responsibility of enforcing this chapter may use any force necessary to remove any animal confined in a closed vehicle when the ambient temperature is 70 degrees Fahrenheit or above outside the vehicle. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, neither the county, or the officer attempting the removal of said animal shall be liable for any damage to the vehicle or its contents. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-24. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-25. - Abandonment of domesticated animal. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to abandon any domesticated animal upon any public or private property or public right-of-way. No person shall intentionally abandon a dead domesticated animal on any private property belonging to another unless the person so doing shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the dead domesticated animal is being left and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-3 are complied with. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly and intentionally to abandon any dead domesticated animal upon any public or private property or public right-of-way unless the place in which the domesticated animal is being left is a public dump or other facility designed for receiving such and has been designated by the local governmental authorities as a public facility for receiving trash or refuse and the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-5-3 are complied with. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-26. - Animal fighting. 
No person shall own, possess, keep or train any domesticated animal with the intent that such domesticated animal shall be engaged in an exhibition of fighting. 
No person shall build, make, maintain or keep any facility used or to be used for the exhibition of any animal fighting, regardless of whether or not the animal is domesticated. 
No person shall be a spectator, participant, promoter, judge, umpire or be in the presence of any exhibition of animal fighting. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-27. - Clean-up requirement. 
The owner of every domesticated animal shall be responsible for the removal of any excreta deposited by said animal upon public or private property. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-28. - Keeping of sick or diseased animals. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own any domesticated animal which is seriously sick or injured and not provided proper veterinary care. This section shall not be construed to include animals under active veterinary care or veterinary hospitals. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-29. - Shelter requirements. 
An owner may confine his or her dog by a chain, cable, or rope which is no less than 12 feet in length and which permits the dog to reach shade, shelter and adequate food and water. The chain, cable, or rope shall be connected to the dog by a collar of sufficient size and tightness which shall adequately restrain the dog without embedding the collar in the dog's neck or impairing the dog's ability to breathe. Dogs confined by chain or fence shall be provided shelter which shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  The housing facilities shall consist of walls on at least three sides and a roof, shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect the dog from injury and from the elements. 
(2)  Enclosures shall be constructed and maintained to provide sufficient space to allow each dog adequate freedom of movement. 
(3)  Minimum standards of sanitation necessary to provide humanely clean conditions for both indoor and outdoor enclosures shall include periodic cleaning to remove excretions and other waste materials, dirt, and trash, so as to minimize health hazards. 
(4)  When sunlight is likely to cause heat exhaustion of a dog chained or caged outside, sufficient shade by natural or by artificial means shall be provided to protect the dog from direct sunlight. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-30. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
The county animal control facility shall encourage and permit the adoption of any animal which has been impounded and which has been detained the appropriate number of days upon the condition that any animal adopted must be spayed or neutered within seven days of adoption or as soon as medically appropriate. It shall be unlawful for any owner of an adopted animal to fail to have such animal spayed or neutered within seven days of adoption or as soon as medically appropriate, and citation for violation thereof may issue anytime thereafter. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-31. - Duty of motorist to notify. 
Any motor vehicle operator who strikes or runs down any domesticated animal shall immediately give notice to the owner of said animal, the county sheriff's office, or other appropriate law enforcement agency. If the animal needs veterinarian aid, the owner of said animal shall be responsible for costs of said service. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-32. - Obstruction or interference in enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, interfere, or hinder any person in the lawful discharge of his or her duties pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-33. - Willful violation by third party. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to cause any domesticated animal to be in violation of any portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Secs. 14-34—14-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANGEROUS DOG CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 11-20-2014(1), repealed art. III, §§ 14-50—14-58; and enacted a new art. III to read as set out herein. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Res. of 6-29-2009. 

Sec. 14-50. - Classification of vicious or dangerous dog. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the term: 
(1)  "Mail" means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
(2)  "Board" means the Pickens County Board of Health. 
(3)  "Animal shelter" shall mean the Pickens County Animal Shelter or some other animal care and holding facility designated by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog within a dog control officer's jurisdiction, the dog control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog. 
(c)  When a dog control officer determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, the dog control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing from the board on the dog control officer's determination within seven days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the dog control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of a dog control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the dog control officer. 
(d)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (c), such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the board for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the probate court conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the board shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's determination. 
(e)  Within ten days after the hearing, the board shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to section 14-52, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(f)  Judicial review of the board's final decision may be had in the probate court of Pickens County in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. Judicial review of a probate court's final decision shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 5-3-2 and costs shall be paid as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-3-22. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1); Res. of 4-19-2018(1)) 
Sec. 14-51. - Immediate impoundment. 
(a)  A law enforcement officer or dog control officer shall immediately impound a dog if the officer believes the dog poses a threat to the public safety. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-52. - Euthanasia for causing serious injury on more than one occasion. 
A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for hearing as provided by section 14-50, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012, shall count for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-53. - Issuance of certificate of registration. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within this state a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified by this section, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the dangerous dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property; and 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (e) and (f), a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued if the dog control officer determines that the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog on the owner's property, indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of general or specific liability insurance in the amount of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the vicious dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in [O.C.G.A.] § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dogfighting as provided for in [O.C.G.A.] § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in [O.C.G.A.] § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in [O.C.G.A.] §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two years after completion of his or her sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of renewal of a certificate of registration for a vicious dog, a dog control officer shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with provisions of this article. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date or initial classification date shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-54. - Duties and prohibitions for owner of dangerous or vicious dog. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the dog control officer and the county animal control facility within 12 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or has been euthanized. 
(b)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or veterinarian to be euthanized. 
(c)  The owner of a classified dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the classified dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the dog control officer of the jurisdiction from which he or she moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into this state shall register the dog as required in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-55. - Unlawful acts by owner of a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be off the owner's property unless: 
(1)  The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)  Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.  The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet in length and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; or 
b.  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(2)  Unattended with minors. 
(c)  Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article so long as the owner of the dog received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Sec. 14-56. - Confiscation of dangerous or vicious dog; noncompliance with article. 
(a)  A dangerous dog or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation of this article. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated pursuant to this article may recover such dog upon payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article, unless such confiscation is deemed to be in error by a dog control officer or the probate court. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or dog control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(c)  In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 14 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be released to the county animal control facility to be euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner may be required to pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the magistrate court of the county. 
(Ord. of 11-20-2014(1)) 
Secs. 14-57—14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 14-61—14-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STRAY LIVESTOCK 

Sec. 14-70. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the term: 
Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine, or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, horses, hogs, cattle, and other grazing animals. 
Owner means any person, association, firm, or corporation, natural or artificial, owning, having custody of, or in charge of livestock. 
Public roads means any street, road, highway, or way, including the full width of the right-of-way, which is open to the use of the public for vehicular travel. 
Running at large or straying means any livestock which is not under manual control of a person and which is on any public roads of this state or on any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock, unless by permission of the owner of such property. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-71. - Prohibition against livestock running at large or straying. 
No owner shall permit livestock to run at large on or to stray upon the public roads of this state or any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock, except by permission of the owner of such property. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-72. - Impoundment of livestock running at large or straying. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the sheriff, his deputies, or any other county law enforcement officer to impound livestock found to be running at large or straying. Owners or operators of farms may also impound such livestock, provided that the livestock is kept in a suitable place and cared for properly; such owners or operators shall receive the feed and care fee allowed in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-10]. 
(b)  If an owner or operator of a farm impounds livestock, it shall be his duty to notify the owner of such livestock immediately. If the owner of the livestock is unknown and is not determined within three days, the person who impounds the livestock shall notify the sheriff of such impoundment; and the sheriff shall transport the livestock as soon as possible to a county pound as provided for in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-11]. The sheriff shall then follow the procedure set out in this chapter as if he had originally impounded such livestock. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-73. - Notice of impoundment; notice of sale of livestock. 
(a)  Upon the impounding of any livestock by the sheriff, his deputies, or any other law enforcement officers of the county, the sheriff shall forthwith serve written notice upon the owner, advising such owner of the location or place where the livestock is being held and impounded, the amount due as a result of such impounding, and that unless such livestock is redeemed within three days from that date the livestock shall be offered for sale. In the event the owner of such livestock is unknown or cannot be found, service upon the owner shall be obtained by publishing a notice once in a newspaper of general circulation where the livestock is impounded, Sundays and holidays excluded. If there is no such newspaper then service shall be obtained by posting the notice at the courthouse door and at two other conspicuous places within said county. Such notice shall be in substantially the following form: 
"To Whom It May Concern: 
You are hereby notified that the following described livestock (giving full and accurate description of same, including marks and brands) is now impounded at (giving location where livestock is impounded) and the amount due by reason of such impounding is dollars. The above-described livestock will, unless redeemed within three days from the date of this notice, be offered for sale at public auction to the highest bidder for cash. 
Date ;daterule; Sheriff of ____________ County, Georgia" 
(b)  Unless the impounded livestock is redeemed within three days from the date of the notice, the sheriff shall forthwith give notice of sale thereof, which shall be held not less than five days nor more than ten days, excluding Sundays and holidays, from the first publication of the notice of sale. The notice of sale shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county where the livestock is impounded, excluding Sundays and holidays, and by posting a copy of such notice at the courthouse door. If there is no such newspaper, then notice shall be given by posting a copy at the courthouse door and at two other conspicuous places in the county. Such notice of sale shall be in substantially the following form: 
"(Name of owner, if known, otherwise, 'To Whom it May Concern'), you are hereby notified that I will offer for sale and sell at public sale to the highest bidder for cash the following described livestock (giving full and accurate description of each head of livestock) at ;daterule; M. (the hours of sale to be between 11:00 A.M. and 2:00 P.M. eastern standard time or eastern daylight time, whichever is applicable) on the ____________ day of ;daterule; at the following place ____________ (which place shall be where the livestock is impounded or at the place provided by the county commissioners for the taking up and keeping of such livestock) to satisfy a claim in the sum of for fees, expenses for feeding and care, and costs hereof. 
Date ;daterule; Sheriff of ____________ County, Georgia" 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-74. - Owner may redeem impounded livestock prior to sale. 
The owner of any impounded livestock shall have the right at any time before sale thereof to redeem the livestock by paying to the sheriff all impounding expenses, including fees, keeping charges, and advertising or other costs incurred, which sum shall be deposited by the sheriff with the clerk of the superior court who shall pay all fees and costs as allowed in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-10]. In the event there is a dispute as to the amount of such costs and expenses, the owner may provide bond, with sufficient sureties to be approved by the sheriff, in an amount to be determined by the sheriff, but not exceeding the fair cash value of such livestock, conditioned to pay such costs and damages. Within ten days thereafter the owner shall institute an action to have the dispute adjudicated by the court or referred to a jury if requested by either party to the action. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-75. - Disposition of livestock not sold al auction. 
If there is no bidder for the livestock at the sale provided for in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-5], the sheriff shall have the livestock killed and shall dispose of the carcass thereof; and, if there is any money received by him from the disposal, the same shall be disbursed in the manner provided for in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-8]. 
If there is no ready sale for the carcass, the sheriff shall deliver the carcass to a public institution of the county, state, or municipality within the county or to any private charitable institution, in this order, according to their needs. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-76. - Written return by sheriff—Disposition of proceeds of sale. 
(a)  The sheriff, upon making a sale or other disposal as provided for in this chapter, shall forthwith make a written return thereof to the clerk of the superior court of such county, with a full and accurate description of the livestock sold or disposed of by him, to whom, and the sale price thereof, which report shall be filed by the clerk. 
(b)  At the time of making his return, the sheriff shall pay over to the clerk of the superior court the entire proceeds of the sale. The clerk of the superior court shall pay all costs and fees allowed in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-10]. If there is any balance remaining it shall be paid to the owner of such livestock, provided that the owner shall provide satisfactory proof of ownership to the board of county commissioners within 90 days from the date the sheriff reports the sale. If proof of ownership is not made within 90 days from the date the sheriff reports the sale, the clerk shall pay such proceeds into the fine and forfeiture fund of the county. The clerk shall keep a permanent record of all sales, disbursements, and distributions made under this chapter. If the amount realized from the sale or other disposition of the animal is insufficient to pay all fees, costs, and expenses as provided for in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-10], the deficit shall be paid by the county from its fine and forfeiture find. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-77. - Feed and care of impounded livestock—Fees. 
The sheriff shall have feed and water provided for impounded livestock not less than twice a day and shall see that all milk cows and milk goats are milked twice a day. The sheriff shall employ poundmasters, guards, or other persons as are necessary to protect, feed, care for, and have custody of the impounded animals. The sheriff shall be entitled to the fees allowed in [O.C.G.A. § 4-3-10] for such feed and care. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-78. - Fees relating to impounded livestock. 
The fees allowed for impounding, serving notice, care and feeding, advertising, and disposing of impounded animals shall be as follows: 
(1)  For impounding each animal, the sum of $10.00 and mileage as provided by law for the arrest and commitment of prisoners; 
(2)  For serving any notice and making return thereon, the sum of $7.50 and mileage provided by law for executing writs in actions at law and making return upon the same; 
(3)  For feed and care of impounded animals, the sum of $5.00 per day per animal; 
(4)  For advertising or posting notices of sale of impounded animals, the same as provided by law for advertising property for sale under process; 
(5)  For sale or other disposition of impounded animals, the sum of $5.00; and 
(6)  For report of sale of impounded animals, the sum of $2.50. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-79. - County pounds or establishments for impounded livestock. 
(a)  The county commissioners of the several counties of Georgia shall establish and maintain pounds or suitable places for the keeping of any livestock taken up and impounded under this chapter until the same is sold, redeemed, or otherwise disposed of. In any case, the county commissioners shall provide truck transportation for the impounded animals. 
(b)  In those counties having no county commissioners, the judge of the probate court or other governing authority shall perform any functions or duties required of county commissioners under this chapter. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 14-80. - Penalty for allowing livestock to run at large or stray or for releasing impounded livestock. 
Any owner of livestock who intentionally or knowingly permits the same to run at large or stray upon the public roads of this state or any property not belonging to the owner of the livestock unless by permission of the owner of such property, or any person who shall release livestock, after being impounded, without authority of the impounder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Secs. 14-81—14-90. - Reserved. 
CHAPTER 16 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of May 25, 2001, § 2 amended the Code by adding ch. 39. With the county's concurrence the editor has redesignated these provisions as ch. 16, §§ 16-61—16-67. 
Cross reference— Registration of building and repair services during a state of emergency, §§ 22-81—22-90; Land devlopment standards, ch. 38. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Construction of or the owning of private hangers at the Pickens County Airport. 
(a)  The construction and owning of private airplane hangers located at the Pickens County Airport are a detriment and hindrance to the operation of the Pickens County Airport. 
(b)  [Pickens] County Government insists on the fair and equal treatment of all public citizens wishing to make use of the Pickens County Airport. 
(c)  To establish fair and equal treatment of all public citizens wishing to make use of the Pickens County Airport, the county owned airplane hangers shall be leased through a nondiscriminatory lease program. 
(d)  All construction and owning of airplane hangers located at the Pickens County Airport shall henceforth be constructed and owned exclusively by the Pickens County Government. 
(Res. of 1-30-2002) 
Editor's note— Res. of Jan. 30, 2002 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as § 16-1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 16-2—16-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR THE ENFORCEMENT OF STATE MINIMUM STANDARD CODES FOR CONSTRUCTION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 16-31—16-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-61. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as allowed heretofore adopted. Herein after all of the Codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes," as may be adopted by the state or local jurisdiction. 
(b)  Code remedial. 
(1)  General. These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(2)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this Code except as it relates to the purpose stated herein. 
(3)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this Code shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Pickens County, Georgia, nor any employee thereof, shall be liable for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(c)  Scope. 
(1)  Applicability: 
General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
Building. The provisions of the Standard Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. Except in one- or two-family dwellings. 
Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
Gas. The provisions of the Standard Gas Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of consumer's gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this Code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories, except in one- or two-family dwellings. 
Mechanical. The provisions of the Standard Mechanical Code, as amended, shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems. Except in one- or two-family dwellings. 
Plumbing. The provisions for the Standard Plumbing Code, as amended, shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
Fire prevention. The provisions of the Standard Fire Prevention Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
Energy. The provisions of the CABO Model Energy Code, as amended, shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
CABO one- and two-family dwellings. The provisions of the CABO One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, 
equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, of every one- or two-family dwelling or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures. 
The Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this Code provide code enforcement personnel with the necessary tools to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
(2)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of this Code shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of this Code or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(3)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(4)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not by construed as mandatory. 
(5)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards, which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(d)  Building department. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building official. The qualifications for the building official and other code enforcement personnel to be established by the governing body. 
(1)  Restrictions of employees. An officer or employee connected with the department, except one whose only connection is as a member of the board established by this Code, shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work, which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(2)  Records. The building official shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee, or member of the board of adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by Pickens County, Georgia, until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)  Reports. The building official shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. He may incorporate in said report a summary of the decisions of the board of adjustments and appeals during said year. 
(e)  Existing buildings. 
(1)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical or gas system to comply with all the requirements of the technical codes provided that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(2)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing building or structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building official. 
(f)  Special historic buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare regarding any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings within fire districts. 
(Res. of 5-25-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 16-62. - Powers and duties of the building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes. The building official is further authorized to render interpretations of the technical codes, which are consistent with its intent and purpose. 
(b)  Right of entry. 
(1)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this Code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building, structure, or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(2)  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or control of any building, structure, or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building official for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this Code. 
(c)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the building official, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be give to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a permit or approval, issued under the provisions of this Code, in case there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(2)  Violation of code provisions. The building official may revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this Code. 
(e)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are hereby declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the provisions of the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(f)  Requirements not covered by code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this of the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official. 
(g)  Alternate materials and methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate, provided the building official finds that the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Res. of 5-25-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 16-63. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit application. 
(1)  When required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain the required permit for the work. 
Exception: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
a.  Any portable heating appliance; 
b.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
c.  Any portable cooling unit; 
d.  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code; 
e.  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
f.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
g.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten lb. (4.54 kg.) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(2)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work, provided the same are shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where these are not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(3)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building official without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The building permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(5)  Time limitations. Any application for a permit pursuant to this Code section that has not been acted upon by Pickens County within six months of its filing shall be void. 
(b)  Drawings and specifications. 
(1)  Requirements. When required by the building official, two or more copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(2)  Additional data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building official to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(3)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered under the laws of this state regulating the practice of architecture or engineering and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
a.  All Group A, E, and I occupancies. 
b.  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
c.  Buildings and structures 5,000 sq.ft. (465m^2) or more in area. 
For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. 
Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect nor engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(4)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(5)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(6)  Hazardous occupancies. The building official may require the following: 
a.  General site plan. A general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(c)  Examination of documents. 
(1)  Plan review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(2)  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state that the plans conform to the laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and if accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to strength, stresses, strains, loads and stability. The building official may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit, provided the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building official, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed and upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(d)  Issuing permits. 
(1)  Action of permits. The building officer shall act upon completed applications for permits without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application for a permit and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(2)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit, but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal. 
(3)  Special foundation permit. When application for permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such a special permit is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted nor that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
(4)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction of any building, or for the alteration of any building where said building is to be changed and such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has made application at the office of the director of public works for the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building official to see that the street lines are not encroached upon except as provided for in chapter 22 of the Standard Building Code. 
(e)  Contractors responsibilities. It shall be the duty of every contractor who shall make contracts for the installation or repairs of building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, to comply with state or local rules and regulations concerning licensing which the applicable governing authority may have adopted. In such case that the state requires a contractor to have obtained a state license before they are permitted to perform work, the contractor shall supply the local government with their license number before receiving a permit for work to be performed. 
(f)  Conditions of the permit. 
(1)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction, or violations of this Code. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after the time the work is commenced. One or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 90 days each, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing by the building official. 
(2)  Permit issued on basis of an affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that computations shall supervise such work. In addition, they shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and upon completion make and file with the building official written affidavit that the work has been done in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. In the event such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are reviewed by the building official. 
(3)  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall enforce, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans "Reviewed for Code Compliance." One set of drawings so reviewed shall be retained by the building official and the other set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
(g)  Fees. 
(1)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid. Nor shall an amendment to a permit be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the building, structure, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or gas systems, etc., has been paid. 
(2)  Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing, etc., system before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees. 
(3)  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, along with the date and amount thereof. 
(4)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required at the time of filing application, in accordance with the fee schedules as set by the governing body. 
(5)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appears to be underestimated on the application, permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. 
(h)  Inspections. 
(1)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time, during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. He shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(2)  Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official he shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the technical codes. 
(3)  Inspection service. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by section 16-63(h)(6). He may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(4)  Inspections prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy or completion. The building official shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(5)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and located in such position as to permit the building official or representative to conveniently make the required entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
(6)  Required inspections. The building official upon notification from the permit holder or his agent shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code: 
Building. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, all concealing wiring, all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
Electrical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Plumbing. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
d.  Note: See section 311 of the Standard Plumbing Code for required tests. 
Mechanical. 
a.  Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
b.  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
Gas. 
a.  Rough piping inspection: To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. 
b.  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any changes in order to insure compliance with all the requirements of this Code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
Energy. 
a.  Foundation inspection: To be made before slab concrete is poured in place. To verify that perimeter insulation has been installed correctly on any slab on grade foundations, is required. 
b.  Frame inspection: To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board to check installation of exterior walls insulation and to inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner as to restrict air passage. 
c.  Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. To verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation. To verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(7)  Written release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made of each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the foregoing three inspections. 
(8)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, work of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining a release from the building official. 
(9)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
(i)  Certificates. 
(1)  Certificate of occupancy. 
a.  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until after the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Said certificate shall not be issued until all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical code and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the building official. 
b.  Issuing certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans and specifications, and after the final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted, the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes. 
c.  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building, which may safely be occupied prior to final completion of the building. 
d.  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for any existing building may be obtained by applying to the building official and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the technical codes for the occupancy intended. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building official, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon examination and inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the provisions of the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances for such occupancy, a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(2)  Certificate of completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. The certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  Service utilities. 
a.  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes for which a permit is required, until released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
b.  Temporary connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of the building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure of system regulated by the technical codes, in case of emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(j)  Posting floor loads. 
(1)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose, which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. The building official may permit occupancy of a building for mercantile, commercial or industrial purposes, by a specific business, when he is satisfied that such capacity will not thereby be exceeded. 
(2)  Storage and factory industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of Group S and Group F occupancies, or any occupancy where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. The computations and affidavit shall be filed as a permanent record of the building department. 
(3)  Signs required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates or approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner of the building. 
(Res. of 5-25-2001, § 2; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 16-64. - Tests. 
The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Res. of 5-25-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 16-65. - Construction board of adjustment and appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established a board to be called the construction board of adjustment and appeals, which shall consist of seven members and two alternates. The governing body shall appoint the board. 
(b)  Membership and terms. 
(1)  Membership. The construction board of adjustment and appeals should consist of seven members. Such board members should be composed of individuals serving on the board of commissioners with knowledge and experience in the technical codes, such as design professionals, contractors or building industry representatives. In addition to the regular members, there should be two alternate members, one member at large from the building industry and one member at large from the public. A board member shall not act in a case in which he has a personal or financial interest. 
(2)  Terms. The terms of office of the board member shall be staggered so no more than one-third of the board is appointed or replaced in any twelve-month period. The two alternates, if appointed, shall serve on-year terms. Vacancies shall be filled for an unexpired term in the manner in which original appointments are required to be made. Continued absence of any member from required meetings of the board shall, at the discretion of the applicable governing body, render any such member subject to immediate removal from office. 
(3)  Quorum and voting. A simply majority of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying any provision of this Code, the affirmative votes of the majority present shall be required. In modifying a decision of the building official, not less than two affirmative votes shall be required. In the event that regular members are unable to attend a meeting, the alternate members, if appointed, shall vote. 
(4)  Secretary of board. The building official shall act as secretary of the board and shall make a detailed record of all its proceedings, which shall set forth the reasons for its decision, the vote, of each member, the absence of a member and any failure of a member to vote. 
(c)  Powers. The construction board of adjustments and appeals shall have the power, as further defined in section 16-65(d), to hear the appeals of decisions and interpretations of the building official and consider variances of the technical codes. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Decision of the building official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the construction board of adjustment and appeals whenever any one of the following conditions are claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure, or service system. 
b.  The provisions of this Code do not apply to this specific case. 
c.  That an equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case. 
d.  The true intent and meaning of this Code or any of the regulations thereunder have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
(2)  Variances. The construction board of adjustments and appeals, when so appealed to and after a hearing, may vary the application of any provision of this Code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this or this technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure of service system involved and which are not applicable to others. 
b.  That the special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant. 
c.  That granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Code to other buildings, structures or service system. 
d.  That the variance granted is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system. 
e.  That the grant of the variance will be in harmony with general intent and purpose of this Code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
1.  Condition of variances. In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(3)  Notice of appeal. Notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed within 30 calendar days after the building official renders the decision. Appeals shall be in a form acceptable to the building official. 
(4)  Unsafe or dangerous buildings or service systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system, which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for such notice of appeals to a shorter period. 
(5)  Rules and regulations. The board shall establish rules and regulations for its own procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of these procedures. The board shall meet on call of the chairman. The board shall meet within 30 calendar days after notice of appeal has been received. 
a.  Decisions. The construction board of adjustment and appeals shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. Each decision of the board shall also include the reasons for the decision. If a decision of the board reverses or modifies a refusal, order, or disallowance of the building official or varies the application of any provision of this Code, the building official shall immediately take action in accordance with such decision. Every decision shall be promptly filed in writing in the office of the building official and shall be open to public inspection. A certified copy of the decision shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant and a copy shall be kept publicly posted in the office of the building official for two weeks after filing. Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. 
(Res. of 5-25-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 16-66. - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. 
(Res. of 5-25-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 16-67. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the technical codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, install, demolish or move any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a detailed statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such personal shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished within the limits and as provided by state laws. 
(Res. of 5-25-2001, § 2) 
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; commercial solid waste, § 58-36; taxation, ch. 62; telecommunications, ch. 66; utilities, ch. 74. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 18-31. - Business license required. 
(a)  For the year 2001 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the unincorporated areas of Pickens County, shall pay a regulatory fee and shall be issued a business license for said business, trade, profession or occupation; which license and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has permanent business location in Pickens County. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Pickens County, such business registration shall be shown to the licensing official or representatives thereof, or to any law enforcement officer of said Pickens County upon request. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 18-32. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "Pickens County" is used herein, such term shall be construed to mean Pickens County, Georgia; wherever the term "county" is used herein, it shall be construed to mean Pickens County, Georgia. Wherever the term "business" is used herein such term shall be construed to mean a business, trade, profession or occupation or practitioner thereof unless otherwise indicated. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
(1)  Business license means license issued for following a registration with and fee paid to Pickens County prior to conducting or transacting business within the unincorporated areas of Pickens County. For the purposes of this article, the term "business license" shall be a type of "regulatory fees". 
(2)  Regulatory fees means payment, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the county. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by Paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2 or other costs or condition of zoning or land development. 
(3)  Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations. 
(4)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is the one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays a regulatory fee. 
(5)  Clerk means the Clerk of the Commissioner of Pickens County. 
(6)  Licensing official means the county commissioner or his designee. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 2) 
Sec. 18-33. - Regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A regulatory fee shall be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable business, trades, professions and occupations. 
(b)  The regulatory fee schedule or schedules for persons in business, trades, professions, and occupations as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 or other provisions of Georgia law shall be adopted by the Pickens County Commissioner and shall be amended from time to time. Said regulatory fee schedule shall be posted in Pickens County Administration Office and at the planning and development office. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 3) 
Sec. 18-34. - Purposes and scope of fee. 
This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-8 and 48-13-9 and is for regulatory purposes only. This article is not adopted as an occupation tax. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one regulatory fee for each its locations. 
(2)  A business with multiple locations in the county will not be assessed more than $200.00 for their business license for all their locations combined. 
(3)  No business license or regulatory fee shall be required for those businesses and practitioners of professions or occupations which Pickens County is not authorized to subject to regulatory fees pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 4) 
Sec. 18-35. - Paying regulatory fee of business with no location in Pickens County, Georgia. 
A business license shall also be required in those businesses, trades and practitioners of professions or occupations which operate and conduct business within Pickens County even if said business, trade, professions or occupation does not have a location within Pickens County. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 5) 
Sec. 18-36. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
As part of the application process of obtaining a business license, each business operated within the unincorporated areas of Pickens County shall register said business with Pickens County. The business registration of each business operated within the unincorporated areas of Pickens County shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the county and that line of business being noted by the county upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 6) 
Sec. 18-37. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the county. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of this article. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 7) 
Sec. 18-38. - Imposition fee. 
The regulatory fee imposed herein is for regulatory purposes only. Said fee shall be paid before commencing a business, trade or the practice of a profession or occupation as a condition precedent for transacting business or practicing a profession. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 8) 
Sec. 18-39. - When fee due and payable; when license issued; effect of transacting business with no license. 
Each such license shall be for the fiscal year in which it is issued, said fiscal year beginning July 1 of each year unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and fee as described below shall be payable before commencing business and thereafter on July 1 of each year once the business has commenced. 
All licenses shall be issued by the licensing official after the applicant has: 
(1)  Submitted its registration of business on the approved county form, 
(2)  Paid the regulatory fee as described in the schedule posted in the Pickens County Administration Office and at the planning and development office. 
(3)  Obtained all necessary permits required on local, state, and federal levels. 
If any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a business license transacts or offers to transact, in the county any trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said license, such offender shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Payment of such fine may be enforced by the contempt powers of any court having competent jurisdiction. This remedy is in addition to any other remedies available for the collection of regulatory fees due to Pickens County from persons subject to the fee who fail or refuse to pay the fee. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 9) 
Sec. 18-40. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
No business on which a business is imposed by this article shall be exempt from said license requirement on the ground that such business if operated for a charitable purpose, unless said business is registered as a nonprofit organization pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code. In such case, said business shall only be required to register with Pickens County and the fee shall be waived. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 10) 
Sec. 18-41. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 11) 
Sec. 18-42. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a county business license, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 12) 
Sec. 18-43. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
Every person commencing business in the county after July 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the business license and registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the county, any business, trade, profession, or occupation required to be registered without first having so obtained said registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 13) 
Sec. 18-44. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
(a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed a regulatory fee, registration, or other type of regulation pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from and on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-3-8, et. Seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Those business listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). 
(b)  The following persons or businesses are exempted from the regulatory fee imposed by this article: 
(1)  Nonprofit social, charitable, religious or fraternal organizations for the purpose of operating fairs, circuses or carnivals for periods of time not to exceed one week. 
(2)  Individual farmers who raise, grow or cultivate edible food from the soil of the state provided, however, that farm, milk or other farmer cooperatives are not exempted when they engage in selling goods and/or services to the public in competition with persons taxed by virtue of this article. 
(3)  Established churches, religious, charitable and fraternal organizations chartered or operated for nonprofit purposes. 
(4)  Persons exempted from taxation by virtue of the Constitution or any Statute of the United States or State of Georgia. Such persons shall posses and display at their places of business a certificate of exemption that may be obtained from the licensing official by application of a form provided by the same. The applicant for exemption shall clearly state the provision of this article or other provision of law under which the applicant claims exemption. The certificate shall contain sufficient facts for the licensing official to determine whether the applicant is entitled to the exemption. The certificate of exemption shall remain valid and the business need not reapply for an annual certificate of exemption so long as the conditions entitling the business to the exemption remain the same. The application for the certificate of exemption shall be made under oath. The certificate of exemption shall not exempt any business from complying with the duty to register. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 14) 
Sec. 18-45. - Amendment, repeal of provision. 
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time. Said amendment may increase or lower the fee rates, and said amendments to the fee schedule shall be posted as provided in section 18-33 above. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 15) 
Sec. 18-46. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore adopted where fees imposed under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of any ordinance heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance or ordinances, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such regulatory fee, registration fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 16) 
Sec. 18-47. - Enforcement of provisions. 
It is hereby made the duty of the licensing official to see that the provisions of this article relating to business licenses are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court with competent jurisdiction. It is hereby made further duty of the licensing official to inspect all registrations issued by the county, as often, as in his or her judgment, he or she may deem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 17) 
Sec. 18-48. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed by governing body. 
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the Pickens County Commissioner. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 18) 
Sec. 18-49. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 19) 
Sec. 18-50. - Term of certificate or license; transfer. 
Licenses will be issued for one year period, except as otherwise herein specified. A license issued by the licensing official under the authority of this article, may be transferred or assigned, except as otherwise noted in this article, provided the person conducts the business for which the license was issued at the same place and pays Pickens County a transfer fee of $10.00. If the business is moved to a different location, with the same owner and operators, the license may also be transferred to the new location, by notifying the licensing official and payment of the transfer fee. In the event that the proper authorities are not notified, an additional ten percent fee shall be charged for the transfer. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 20) 
Sec. 18-51. - Misrepresentation—Deemed violation. 
No person shall use any deceitful means or misrepresentation in obtaining the license or certificate to do business in the county from Pickens County. 
(Res. of 6-29-2001, § 21) 
Secs. 18-52—18-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT TRADERS 

Sec. 18-70. - Peddlers and itinerant traders. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Itinerant merchant means any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, consignee, or employee, whether a resident of this county or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares, and merchandise within the county, and who in furtherance of such purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, boat or public room in any hotel, lodging house, apartment, or shop within the county for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. 
Peddler includes any person, whether a resident of this county or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden produce, farm products or provisions who offers and exposes the same for sale, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells or offers the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car or other vehicle or conveyance. 
Peddlers and itinerant merchants as defined herein shall be required to pay a regulatory fee and shall be issued a business license for said business by the Pickens County Planning and Development office. The regulatory fee schedule shall be adopted by the Pickens County Board of Commissioners and shall be amended from time to time. Said regulatory fee schedule shall be posted in the Pickens County Planning and Development office. 
The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons under 18 years of age. 
Licenses will be issued for a one-year period. The license is to be kept on-site in the possession of a peddler or itinerant merchant at all times of business operation. The peddler or itinerant merchant shall also maintain in her/her possession a written notarized affidavit from the property owner authorizing the peddler to be engaged in business at the property owner's location. Licenses shall be displayed at the request of any law enforcement personnel. Official photo identification shall also be kept on the person of a peddler or itinerant merchant at all times he or she is conducting business, and shall be presented upon request of any law enforcement personnel. It shall be a violation of this article to fail or refuse to display a license or official photo identification when requested. 
Any violations of the provisions of this section pertaining to peddlers and itinerant merchants shall subject the license to revocation. 
(Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 10-19-2017(1), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 22 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
State Law reference— Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70 et seq.; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Disaster means any natural, technological, civil emergency or threat thereof that causes or has the potential to cause damage of sufficient severity and magnitude to result in a declaration of a state of emergency declared by a county, the governor or the President of the United States. 
Emergency means any natural or man-made event requiring the activation of the local emergency operations plan. 
Emergency Management means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire-fighting services; police services [public safety]; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defenses from radiological, chemical, and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; [nuclear power] plant protection; temporary restoration of public service utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. (Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, as amended December 1992, Chapter 3, Article 1, 38-3-3.) 
Local emergency management director means the person nominated by the local governments and appointed by the state emergency management director to implement the local emergency operations plan. 
State emergency management director means the person appointed by the governor to head the state emergency management agency. 
(Ord. of 4-17-1997, § I; Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-32. - County emergency management agency established; director of emergency management appointed; duties. 
In agreement with the governing officials of the cities within the county, there is herby established the county emergency management agency. The chairman of the county board of commissioners, with the concurrence of officials of the cities within the county, shall nominate, for appointment by the state emergency management director, a director of the county emergency management agency. Upon appointment, the local emergency management agency director shall have direct responsibly for the organization, administration, and operations of the local organization for emergency management, subject to the direction and control of the executive officer or governing body and shall serve at the pleasure of such executive officer or governing body when appointed, the local emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  Represent the governing officials of the county on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  Assist local officials in organizing county departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  Develop, in conjunction with county and city departments, the county emergency operations plan for emergency functions. Such plan will be in consonance with the state emergency operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities within the county for approval, and thence to the state emergency management agency for approval. 
(4)  Maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  Submit reports as required by governmental officials in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activities, etc. 
(6)  Obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the county emergency operations center. 
(7)  Coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating staff during periods of emergency, and under the supervision of the county governing officials. 
(Ord. of 4-17-1997, § II; Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Sec. 22-33. - County emergency management agency. 
The county emergency management agency shall be established around existing county and city departments. The emergency support functions, (ESF's) and department/agency assignments are listed in the county emergency operating plan. 
Heads of the county departments listed in the ESF's are responsible for developing appropriate annexes and standard operating procedures (SOPs) to the emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes and /or SOPs will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Ord. of 4-17-1997, § III; Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Sec. 22-34. - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
In the event of a man-made or natural disaster or any other emergency which may effect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chairman of the board of the county commissioners separately, or jointly with the Mayor of Jasper, Nelson and Talking Rock, or in their absence their legally appointed successors may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such periods as such emergency or disaster continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, execute contracts, and to obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for emergency management purposes. 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of any emergency or disaster resulting form manmade or natural causes or enemy attack and to direct and coordinate the development of emergency management plans and programs in accordance with the policies and plans set by the federal and state emergency management agencies. 
(3)  To appoint, employ, remove or provide, with or without compensation, chiefs or service, warning personnel, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, and 
(4)  To establish a primary and one or more secondary control centers to serve as command posts during an emergency or disaster. 
(5)  Subject to the order of the governor or the chief executive of the political subdivision, to assign and make available for duty the employees, property, or equipment of the subdivision relating to fire-fighting, engineering, rescue, health, medical and related services, and to police, transportation, construction, and similar items or services for emergency management purposes, within or outside of the physical limits of the subdivision. 
(6)  In addition to the heretofore stated powers and authorities, to acquire, temporarily or permanently, by purchase, lease, or other agreements, sites required for installation of temporary housing units for disaster victims; and to enter into what arrangements, including purchase, of temporary housing units and payments of transportation charges, which are necessary to prepare or equip such sites to utilize the housing units. (O.C.G.A. ch. 3, art. 2, 38-3-27) 
(Ord. of 4-17-1997, § IV; Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Sec. 22-35. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. Immunity does not apply in cases of willful misconduct, gross negligence or bad faith. (O.C.G.A. ch. 3, art. 2, 38-3-35) 
(Ord. of 4-17-1997, § V; Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Sec. 22-36. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. of 4-17-1997, § VI; Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Sec. 22-37. - Liberality of construction. 
This chapter shall be construed liberally order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Sec. 22-38. - Effective date. 
This resolution/ordinance from which this chapter is derived is effective immediately and where the provisions of this resolution are in conflict with existing local laws, the provisions of this chapter will govern and such provisions of existing laws which are in conflict are hereby rescinded. 
(Res. of 1-31-2013) 
Secs. 22-39—22-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STATE OF EMERGENCY PROCEDURES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinances (1)—(4) of May 1, 2008, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as Art. III, Divs. 1—4, is at the discretion of the editor. 

DIVISION 1. - AUTHORIZING SUSPENSION OF PORTIONS OF CODE OF ORDINANCES AND OTHER FORMALITIES DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 22-51. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(1)  Meetings. Upon proclamation by the appropriate state official of an emergency or disaster of manmade or natural causes or enemy attack impending on or affecting Georgia or the United States, the affairs and business of Pickens County may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual place thereof, within or outside of the county, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of county, all actions taken by the local governing body shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the county. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(2)  Purchasing and public works contracts. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the county as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein. 
(3)  Code enforcement. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the Pickens County Code of Ordinances, or any portion thereof, where: 
a.  The emergency or disaster is of such nature that immediate action outside this Code is required; 
b.  Such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare; and 
c.  Such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(4)  Fees. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the area impacted by the disaster or emergency. 
(5)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, their designee or the emergency interim successor may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district while the primary dwelling is being repaired provided that such temporary dwellings or parks are designed by an engineer and the plans are approved by the county health department and county building and inspections department. The temporary permit shall not exceed six [months] in duration. In the case of continuing hardship and in the discretion of the governing authority or its designee, the permit may be extended for a period for an additional six months. Upon expiration of the temporary permit or an extension, the temporary dwelling shall be removed. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(1), § 1) 
Sec. 22-52. - Definitions. 
Fees. Any fee or rate charged by the county for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits, and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and clean up of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. "Fees" shall not include those fees collected by the county on behalf of the federal or state government or those fees charged by the county pursuant to a federal or state statute or regulation. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. The period of time that the disaster emergency continues to cause disruptions in the area impacted by the disaster emergency. The "subsequent recovery period" shall not exceed six months the state of emergency declaration by the governor is terminated unless extended by official action of the governing authority of Pickens County. 
Temporary dwelling. Any mobile or easily movable home, trailer recreational vehicle or structure not otherwise permitted by the zoning regulations a particular zoning district. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(1), § 2) 
Secs. 22-53—22-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEWS DURING TIMES OF EMERGENCY OR DISASTER 

Sec. 22-61. - Institution of curfew. 
(1)  Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the governor, or upon the determination by the county governing authority, or its designee, of the existence of an emergency or disaster, the county governing authority, its designee or the emergency interim successor may adopt a resolution instituting a curfew when it is determined necessary to protect and safeguard the people and property of Pickens County. 
(2)  All of the territory of the unincorporated county shall be subject to the terms of the curfew, unless otherwise specified in the resolution. 
(3)  The resolution instituting the curfew shall include the dates and hours that the curfew shall be in effect. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(2), § 1) 
Sec. 22-62. - Definitions. 
Curfew. A regulation requiring the withdrawal from any person not otherwise exempt from this division from appearing in certain public areas during specified hours. 
Exempt individuals. Unless otherwise specified in the resolution implementing the curfew, "exempt individuals" include those individuals engaged in the provision of designated, essential services, such as fire, law enforcement, emergency medical services and hospital services, military services, utility emergency repairs. The resolution may, in the discretion of the governing authority, also exempt regular employees of local industries traveling to and from their jobs with appropriate identification, news media employees, building and repair contractors, properly registered according to division 4 of this article, performing activities related to construction, repair, renovation or improvement of buildings and other structures damaged during the disaster or emergency. 
State of emergency. As defined by O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, emergency, or energy emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(2), § 2) 
Sec. 22-63. - Prohibition. 
It shall be prohibited for any person, other than exempt individuals, to appear in public in the territory subject to the curfew, including but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, sidewalks, vacant lots, parks, public buildings or any other public places in all or a delineated part of unincorporated Pickens County during the stated hours of the curfew. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(2), § 3) 
Sec. 22-64. - Penalties. 
Any individual violating this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(2), § 4) 
Secs. 22-65—22-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OVERCHARGING FOR GOODS, MATERIALS, SERVICES AND HOUSING DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY 

Sec. 22-71. - Overcharging prohibited. 
In order to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property, it shall be unlawful during the duration of a state of emergency or subsequent recovery period in which Pickens County has been designated as a disaster area, for any person, firm, or corporation located or doing business in the county to overcharge for any goods, materials, services or housing sold within the county. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(3), § 1) 
Sec. 22-72. - Definitions. 
Overcharging. Charging prices for goods, materials, services, or housing which are substantially in excess of the customary charges or in applicable cases substantially in excess of the supplier's or provider's costs for such goods, materials, services or housing. 
The existence of overcharging shall be presumed from a substantial increase in the price at which the goods, materials, services, or housing was offered in the usual course of business immediately prior to the onset of the emergency, but shall not include increases in costs to the supplier directly attributable to higher costs of materials, supplies, and labor costs resulting from the emergency. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or emergency is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. That period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed six months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor unless extended by official action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(3), § 2) 
Sec. 22-73. - Penalties. 
Violation of the provisions of this division upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both such line and imprisonment. Each sale shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(3), § 3) 
Sec. 22-74. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this division is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not effect the remainder of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(3), § 4) 
Sec. 22-75. - Effective date; expiration. 
This division shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted but shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(3), § 5) 
Secs. 22-76—22-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REGISTRATION OF BUILDING AND REPAIR SERVICES DURING A STATE OF EMERGENCY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16. 

Sec. 22-81. - Building contractor registration required. 
No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall engage in, undertake or carry on any business in whole or in part within the unincorporated areas of Pickens County, consisting of or relating to building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto without having registered the name of the business with the governing authority of the county and having paid fees as provided by this division. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 1) 
Sec. 22-82. - Definitions. 
Building contractor. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity engaging in, undertaking or carrying on any business consisting of or relating to building construction, repair, renovation or making improvements to real property including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures, or fixtures attached thereto. 
Doing business. Any building contractor shall be deemed to be "doing business" subject to the requirements of this division if: 
(1)  He has or operates an office, agency, project site or place of business located in the unincorporated areas of the county, whether permanently, temporarily, periodically, or otherwise, that provides the following activities in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto; or 
(2)  He performs the following activities or services in the unincorporated areas of the county expressly including but not limited to the construction, renovation or repair of dwellings or buildings or the making of improvements to real property or any fixtures attached thereto regardless of the location of the principal office. 
State of emergency. The term "state of emergency" is defined, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(5), as a condition declared by the governor when, in his judgment, the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster or is of sufficient severity and magnitude as to warrant extraordinary efforts in preventing or alleviating the damage, loss, hardship, or suffering threatened or caused thereby. 
Subsequent recovery period. That period during which the disaster continues to cause disruptions in the disaster area, but shall not exceed three months after the emergency declaration has been terminated by the governor. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 2) 
Sec. 22-83. - Registration; certification. 
All building contractors doing business or proposing to do business in the unincorporated areas of the county during a state of emergency or the subsequent recovery period shall register and file applications with the clerk of the governing authority of the county or such other person designated by the governing authority at the county courthouse or such other place or places designated by the county. The building contractor shall, under oath, provide the county governing authority with a statement describing the general nature of the business to be conducted and give true and correct information as may be called for on the registration form, application or certificate provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 3) 
Sec. 22-84. - Registration fees. 
Building contractor registration fees are hereby fixed under the terms and conditions of this division at $50.00 per annum. Registration fees shall be paid in full at the time of issuance of the registration certification. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 4) 
Sec. 22-85. - Penalties. 
Any building contractor required by this division to pay a registration fee who engages in business without first registering and receiving a registration certification from the county as required shall be in violation of this division. Violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation and/or imprisonment not to exceed 60 days. Each day a building contractor does business in the unincorporated areas of the county without complying with this division shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 5) 
Sec. 22-86. - Transferability. 
Each certification issued under this division is granted to, and shall be accepted by, the building contractor under the condition that the same is not transferable and after issuance no such certification shall be transferred by the county or the building contractor to another individual or entity. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 6) 
Sec. 22-87. - Display of registration certification. 
Each certification issued hereunder shall be posted conspicuously by the building contractor in the place of business of the building contractor or shall be carried on his person or vehicle used in such business. Such certification shall be exhibited to any authorized enforcement officer when so requested. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 7) 
Sec. 22-88. - Revocation; suspension. 
Each certification granted under this division is a mere permit to engage in the business only so long as said business is conducted in a lawful manner. The county governing authority hereby reserves the right to revoke or suspend any certification granted hereunder, if the building contractor, or the building contractor's agent or employee acting within the scope of his employment, violates this division or any other county, state or federal law. If after issuance of a certification, the county desires to revoke such certification, written notice thereof shall be given to the building contractor, which notice shall specify the violation with which the building contractor is charged and a date, time and place at which a hearing shall be held with regard to the violation. The building contractor shall have an opportunity to be heard at such hearing, shall have the right to be represented by counsel, and shall have the right to introduce and submit evidence in opposition to such revocation. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 8) 
Sec. 22-89. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this division is for any reason held by the court to be unconstitutional, inoperative, or void, such holding shall not effect the remainder of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 9) 
Sec. 22-90. - Effective date; expiration. 
This division shall take effect on the date of its being duly adopted and shall apply to all building contractors doing business in the unincorporated areas of Pickens County on that date and doing business on any date thereafter. However, this division and any certification issued pursuant to it shall be operative only during the period of a declared state of emergency and any subsequent recovery periods. 
(Ord. of 5-1-2008(4), § 10) 
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; health and sanitation, ch. 34; land development standards, ch. 38; parks and recreation, ch. 46; planning, ch. 50; solid waste, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 74; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 26-31. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-32. - Purpose and objective. 
(1)  In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Pickens County, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be insured. For this reason it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that Pickens County relies upon as sources of public water. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to insure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(2)  The objectives of this article are: 
a.  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
b.  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
c.  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse affect on groundwater quality. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-33. - Definitions. 
Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone or rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. (Note: the DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility). 
Groundwater recharge area (synonymous with aquifer recharge area) means an area of the Earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby, replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
Pollution susceptibility map(s) means maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that shows the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the State into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of "karst" topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-34. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of Pickens County, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-35. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-36. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
No building permit or subdivision plan will be approved by Pickens County unless the permit, plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed in section 26-43. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-37. - Enforcement. 
Pickens County, its agent, officers and employees shall have the authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their duties under this article and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as Pickens County deems necessary. 
(1)  The land development officer or other person designated by the county commissioner is hereby designated as the administrator and enforcement officer for this article. 
(2)  Pickens County shall have the authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of 
violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(3)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers shall have authority to assist Pickens County in enforcement. 
(4)  Any person who commits, takes part in or assists in any violation of any provision of this article shall be fined not more than $1,000.00 for each offense or 60 days in jail. Each violation shall be separate offense and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
(5)  Pickens County shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified in section 26-44. 
(6)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to remove the structure. 
(7)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator shall be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-38. - Permit review and site plan requirement. 
With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in section 26-9, applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan. The following information is required for all site plans: 
(1)  A map or maps, drawn to scale of 1 inch=50 feet or other approved scale, showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, water courses and drainage ways, water lines, wastewater and storm water facilities, and utility installations, shall be provided by the applicant. 
(2)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on July 8, 1999 on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream of water body. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(6)  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross-sectional drawings. 
(7)  All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm-water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of Pickens County. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-39. - Exemptions to site plan requirements. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
(1)  Single family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-40. - Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the Land Development Officer and will be reviewed within 45 days. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions or disapproval) by Pickens County. The applicant will review written notification of the findings of Pickens County. Decisions of Pickens County may be appealed pursuant to section 26-44. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-41. - Public notice and public hearing. 
Public notice or permit applications, through publication in local newspapers, is required. A public hearing on the application, to be held before the County Commissioner of Pickens County may be scheduled if requested by a citizen. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least seven days prior to the hearing. A record of the proceeding shall be made and kept on file by the county commissioner. Any person may testify at the hearing. Decisions of the county commissioner may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction identified in section 26-44. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-42. - Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within 12 months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire 12 months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit may be issued, but is not required by Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-43. - Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the [name of county health department] first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resource for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual), and sections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table W-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  150 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  125 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  110 percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(e)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(f)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(g)  Permanent storm water infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(h)  Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in sections IV.B. and C.[section 26-43(b)(c)] of this article. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-44. - Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of Pickens County concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the Pickens County Superior Court. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decisions of the court, Pickens County may, within the time specified by the court, elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an easement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-45. - Amendments. 
These regulations may, from time to time, be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Sec. 26-46. - Assessment relief. 
Assessors and boards of assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 1) 
Secs. 26-47—26-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED REGULATIONS 

Sec. 26-61. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Pickens County Water Supply Watershed Ordinance. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-62. - Purpose. 
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Pickens County, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter storm water runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, storm water runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxicant, nutrients, and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated, expensive and rendering water resources unusable. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials results in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
The purpose of the water supply watershed protection overlay regulation is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply for Pickens County; also, to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediments to the water supply, and maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-63. - Definitions. 
Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances. Specific buffer uses may be approved by the Pickens County Land Development Officer consistent with these criteria. 
Corridor means all land within the buffer areas and other setback areas. 
Impervious surface means a man-made structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Perennial stream means a stream, which flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGA Quad Map. 
Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Water supply reservoirs means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Water supply watershed means the area of land upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
Water supply watershed protection plan land use plan prepared and adopted by local governments for the protection of the quality of drinking water obtained from the watershed. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-64. - Watershed designation and delineation. 
The protected water supply watershed are hereby designated, and shall consist of the land areas that drain to the public water supply intake or water supply reservoir. The boundaries of these areas are defined by the ridge lines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius of seven (7) miles upstream of the respective public water supply intakes. These districts shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Protection Map of the Pickens County Land Development Office, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-65. - Natural buffer requirements. 
(1)  Within a seven mile radius upstream of the public water intakes, a natural buffer, 100 feet wide shall be maintained on both sides of the stream, measured from the stream banks. Similarly, outside the seven miles radius, a natural buffer of 50 feet shall be maintained on both sides of the stream. 
(2)  A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 150 feet from the boundary of an existing or future water supply reservoir. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-66. - Impervious surface limitations. 
(1)  No more than 25 percent of the land area of any parcel or lot on which new development is placed may be covered by impervious surface within a designated water supply watershed protection overlay. 
(2)  Within a seven mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150 foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream bank. 
(3)  Outside a seven mile radius upstream of all public water intakes, no impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75 foot setback area on both sides of the stream, as measured from the stream bank. 
(4)  Septic tanks and the drain fields of septic tanks are prohibited in the setback areas of (2) and (3) above. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-67. - Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback requirements if they meet the stipulated condition: 
(1)  Utilities. 
a.  Utilities shall be located as far as reasonably possible from the stream bank and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
(2)  Forestry and agricultural activities. 
a.  Agriculture activities involving the planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
b.  Silviculture activities must conform to the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-68. - Site plan requirements. 
Except for the exemptions listed below all forms of development within the Watershed Protection Overlay shall be required to have a site plan submitted and approved according to this article before any building permits may be approved or any land disturbing activity may take place. Each site plan submitted shall include the following: 
(1)  A site plan drawn to a scale and showing all planned improvements including width, depth, and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads water courses, drainage ways, water wastewater, and storm water facilities, and utility installations. 
(2)  Location, dimensions, and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
(3)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or body of water. 
(4)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
(5)  Erosion and sedimentation control plan. 
(6)  Any facility in the process of expanding shall provide location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic waste. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-69. - Activity compliance. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of vegetation during construction, or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the Pickens County Land Development Office. Minor changes such as realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-70. - Exemptions from site plan requirement. 
(1)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(2)  Construction of minor structures such as sheds, or additions to single-family residences. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-71. - Prohibited uses within the water supply watershed protection district. 
(1)  All sanitary landfills with or without synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(2)  Any facility using hazardous materials. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-72. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Pickens County Land Development Officer as authorized by the Sole Commissioner of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-73. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be liable for a monetary penalty of $250.00 per day, per violation, but not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, per violation, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Secs. 26-74—26-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOUNTAIN PROTECTION PLAN 

Sec. 26-91. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Mountain Protection Plan of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-92. - Purpose. 
The mountains of Georgia are characterized by steep slopes, thin soils, and, because of the natural stresses placed on such environments, they require special protection. Land disturbing potentially threatens the public health, safety, welfare, and economic progress of the state. Such land disturbing activity: 
(1)  May endanger the quality of surface water by increasing erosion and stream sedimentation; 
(2)  Has the potential to induce landslides; 
(3)  Has the potential to adversely affect ground water due to difficulty in providing proper sewage disposal in areas of steep slope and high elevation; 
(4)  May damage the habitat for some species of wildlife (both plants and animal); and 
(5)  May detract from the mountains' scenic and natural beauty which is vital to the local economy through the recreation and tourism industries. 
To protect against these adverse effects, this article is adopted. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 2) 
Sec. 26-93. - Applicability. 
The mountain protection plan shall apply to any "protected mountain" area in Pickens County. A protected mountain is defined as: 
"All land area 2,200 feet or more above mean sea level, that has a percentage slope of 25 percent or greater for at least 500 feet horizontally, and shall include the crests, summits, and ridge tops which lie at elevations higher than any such area." 
The crests, summits, and ridge tops of mountains whose flanks meet the criteria for a protected mountain shall also be included within the protected area, even though the slopes of such crests, summits and ridge tops have slopes of less than 25 percent. 
On an otherwise protected mountain, areas that are at an evaluation of 2,200 feet or more and have a slope of less than 25 percent, exclusive of valley floors, shall be included within the protected mountain area. For the purposes of this plan, a valley floor is defined as a depression of the earth's surface where the slopes of mountains meet at a lower limit to become nearly level, and including such associated areas at the base or toe of a mountain with a 10:1 (10%) slope or less. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-94. - Applicability to state agencies. 
These minimum planning standards and procedures shall also apply to all state owned or administered land that contains a protected mountain within its boundaries. All state agencies shall comply with these minimum standards. Failure by a state agency to comply with such standards shall be considered an indicia of a governmental action which may significantly adversely affect the quality of the environment under the Environmental Policy Act (O.C.G.A. § 12-16-1 et seq.). 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-95. - Reference to existing state and local regulations. 
(1)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control. Proposed land-disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 as amended", and of any applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
Standards and requirements established in the Erosion and Sedimentation Act are not superseded by Mountain Protection standards. 
(2)  Water supply. Where one or more wells are to be used for individual water supply, the proposed land-disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Water Well Standards Act of 1985;" the requirements of the rules and regulations of the Department of Human Resources regarding individual or non-public wells; and any more stringent requirements imposed by the local governing authority. 
If a public water supply system is to be provided, the water supply system shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977". 
(3)  Sewage treatment. Where one or more septic tanks are to be used for individual sewage disposal, the proposed land-disturbing activity shall meet all applicable requirements imposed by the local governing authority. If sewage treatment is to be provided by any means other than one or more individual septic tanks, the sewage treatment shall meet all applicable requirements of the "Georgia Water Control Act". 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-96. - Standards of specific land uses. 
(1)  Hazardous waste disposal and handling. Hazardous waste or solid waste disposal facilities are prohibited from protected mountains. Disposal facilities permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to the adoption of implementing regulations shall be exempt from this criterion. 
Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste are prohibited from protected mountains. 
(2)  Agriculture and forestry. Agriculture and forestry are permitted on protected mountains provided that: Such agriculture and forestry must be consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission; and agricultural and forestry activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws, and all regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(3)  Mining. Mining activity on protected mountains is allowed, if such activity is permitted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(4)  Single-family dwellings. 
a.  Single-family dwellings shall not be constructed at a density of more than one per ten acres. 
b.  The density restriction shall not apply to: 
i.  Any lot of less than ten acres if such a lot was, as of the effective date of implementing regulations, owned and described as a discrete parcel of real property according to the instrument of title of the person or persons owning the lot on the effective date of implementing regulations or shown as a discrete parcel of real property on a plat of survey properly recorded in the real property records of the Clerk of Superior Court by the person or persons owning the lot on effective date of implementing regulations. 
ii.  Any land, or part of any land, which was contained in or subject to any master plan, planned unit development, special approved development plan, or any other development plan if such plan was filed with an approved by the local governing authority prior to the effective date of implementing regulations, pursuant to duly enacted land use regulations. 
c.  There shall be a minimum 110 foot lot width at the building line for single-family dwellings, regardless of water or sewer system types. 
(5)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
a.  Multi-family dwellings shall not be constructed at a gross density of more than one dwelling unit per ten acres. 
b.  There shall be a minimum 150 foot lot width at the building line for multi-family dwellings, regardless of water or sewer system types. 
(6)  Commercial structures. Any proposal to construct a commercial structure on a protected mountain shall submit an application which shall include: 
a.  A detailed landscaping plan which identified all trees which are to be removed that exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on the tree four and one-half feet above the surface of the ground; shall contain a plan for replacement of any such trees that are removed; and 
b.  Such application shall also include a topographical survey of the projected site and as assessment of the effect that the project will have on the environment of the protection mountain after the project has been completed and is in operation. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to require commercial structures to comply with the density limitations for single or multiple-family dwellings. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-97. - General development standards. 
(1)  Tree removal limit without reforestation plan. No person engaging in land-disturbing activity on a protection mountain shall remove more than 50 percent of the existing trees which exceed eight inches in diameter as measured at a point on such a tree four and one-half feet above the surface of the ground unless such person has filed with the application a plan of reforestation developed by a registered forester. 
(2)  Height limitations. Structures shall not extend more than 40 feet, as measured from the highest point at which the foundation of such structure intersects the ground, above the uppermost point of the crest, summit, or ridge top of the protected mountain on which the structure is constructed. This height limitation shall apply to water, radio, and television towers, and electric transmission towers and lines. This height restriction shall not apply to: minor vertical projections of a parent building, including chimneys, flagpoles, flues, spires, steeples, belfries, cupolas, or antennas, poles, wires; or to windmills. 
(3)  Road construction. All roads on protected mountains shall be designed and constructed to minimize the potential for landslides, erosion, and run-off. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-98. - Mountain protection permit and site plan required. 
An approved site plan and mountain protection permit shall be required for any proposed land(s), building(s), sign(s) or other structure(s) to indicate and insure compliance with all provisions of this article and any other county ordinances before any permit is issued or any improvement, grading, land disturbing activity or alteration of land(s), building(s) or other structures commences. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-99. - Conflict with other laws. 
Whenever the provisions of this article impose more restrictive standard than are required in or under any other statue or local ordinance, the provisions of this article shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statue or local ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this article, the provisions of such statue or local ordinance shall govern. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-100. - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Pickens County Land Development Officer as authorized by the Sole Commissioner of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Sec. 26-101. - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be liable for a monetary penalty of $250.00 per day per violation, but not to exceed $1,000.00 per day per violation, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b). Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 3) 
Secs. 26-102—26-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 26-121. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Wetlands Protection Ordinance of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-122. - Purpose and objective. 
In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within Pickens County, it is essential that the quality and well being of wetlands be protected within the county. The wetlands in Pickens County are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the State of Georgia. 
Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-123. - Definitions. 
Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for Pickens County, Georgia. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
Regulated activity means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-124. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of Pickens County, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within Pickens County, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-125. - Protection criteria. 
Requirement for local permit or permission: No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from Pickens County. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the Pickens County Health Department using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-126. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. [The activities listed in this section are exempted from section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.] 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Sec. 26-127. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills; 
(Res. of 12-29-2000, § 1) 
Chapter 34 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; solid waste, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by state department of human resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373; health generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-1-1 et seq.; power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(a)(4); regulations for septic tanks or individual sewerage management systems in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1; power of county board of health to adopt rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; authority to provide public health facilities and services, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
The resolution adopted May 20, 1996, establishing environmental health fees for the county as approved by the county board of health is by this reference incorporated and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full. 
Secs. 34-2—34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 34-51—34-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT AND INSPECTION 

Sec. 34-100. - Title. 
This division shall be known as the On-Site Wastewater Disposal Ordinance of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 4) 
Sec. 34-101. - Purpose. 
In order to insure Pickens County meets the requirements and regulations set forth in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, Pickens County has determined that the only way to ascertain that these requirements are met without placing additional hardships and regulations on property owners is to require an on-site approval and sewage disposal permit, and the only way to effectively determine if a violation of the requirement of an on-site approval has occurred is to prohibit the health department from issuing a sewage disposal system permit to any property owner unless an application has been made to said department. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 4) 
Sec. 34-102. - Site approval and sewage disposal permit requirement. 
No person or business shall construct an on-site wastewater disposal apparatus on property until the property owner obtains a site approval and sewage disposal construction permit from the Pickens County Health Department. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 4) 
Sec. 34-103. - Site approval and sewage disposal permit procedure. 
(1)  Application for the site approval and sewage disposal construction permit shall be made be filing application forms provided by the Pickens County Health Department. 
(2)  Such application shall be made at least ten days prior to the application for a building permit or beginning construction of an individual sewage disposal system. 
(3)  The site approval and sewage disposal system shall be based upon requirements of the Georgia State Rules and Regulations for Individual Sewage Disposal Systems, Chapter 270, pages 5-25, adopted under Georgia Laws (Acts 1964, pages 449, 501), § 31-3-5 and 31-3-5.1 Office Code of Georgia, as amended. 
(4)  In addition to duties set forth hereinabove, the county health officer shall also perform an inspection of each property which has applied for a new on-site wastewater treatment apparatus for the potential of construction activities to negatively impact jurisdictional wetlands protected by federal law (§ 404 of the Clean Water Act). For reference purposes, copies of the most recent National Wetlands Inventory (NWI) Maps shall be maintained at the Land Development Office of Pickens County. Said maps shall be the official reference materials utilized in determining the location of wetland habitats throughout Pickens County. If it is determined by the county health officer that there is potential for detrimental impacts to said wetland habitats as a result of new construction, the county health officer shall refer the applicant to the nearest office of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers where property permit applications for wetland alternations can be obtained. In such event the county health officer shall withhold the on-site wastewater disposal permit until the applicant documents property inquiry with and approval by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If it is determined by the county health officer that no detrimental wetland impact will occur, it is within said official's discretion to issue the appropriate permits if the site meets all other pertinent requirements. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this article shall relieve the landowner of complying with the Wetlands Protection Ordinance of Pickens County (sections 26-121—26-127). 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 4; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 2) 
Sec. 34-104. - Penalties. 
A violation of this division shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000. All alleged violations shall be tried in the Magistrate Court of Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 4) 
Secs. 34-105—34-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ON-SITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES 

Sec. 34-201. - General. 
All wastewater disposal systems within Pickens County shall require a permit from Pickens County. All future on-site wastewater treatment and disposal facilities in excess of 10,000-gallon capacity shall comply with the rules, regulations, and standards as described in the documents incorporated below and within this chapter. 
The only on-site wastewater treatment and disposal facilities in excess of 10,000-gallon capacity which shall be allowed in Pickens County shall be those systems described in The State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Guidelines for Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater by Drip Irrigation, revised February 28, 1996, as amended. 
The following documents are incorporated by reference: 
(1)  The State of Georgia Water Quality Act (Georgia Laws 1965, page 416) as amended; 
(2)  The State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division, Guidelines for Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater by Drip Irrigation, revised February 28, 1996, as amended; 
(3)  The State of Georgia Department of Natural Resources Environmental Protection Division General Land Application System Permit for Large Community Systems General Permit No. GAG278000. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-202. - Permit requirements. 
In order to obtain a permit from Pickens County for the construction of a sanitary sewer system, the applicant must supply the following: 
(1)  The name, mailing address, physical address, e-mail address and two phone numbers for the applicant; 
(2)  The location of the facility which shall include the latitude and longitude and/or GIS coordinates of the facility; 
(3)  Plans and specifications for the construction of said facility and related infrastructure together with any revisions made during construction; 
(4)  An operations manual for the system and individual components which includes but is not limited to maintenance schedules, monitoring schedules, reporting formats, operational schedules, schedule of required on-site inspections, and recommended staffing. It being the intent of this requirement for the applicant to provide to the county all information and documentation necessary to operate and maintain the system; 
(5)  The estimated volume of treated sanitary wastes that will be injected in the subsurface fluid distribution system on an average daily and peak daily basis, and the method of sewage sludge handling and disposal; 
(6)  Information as to the estimated strength of influent and effluent pH, BOD, TSS, oil and grease, and ammonia nitrogen. Upon request from the county development office, information shall be provided on the estimated strength of other relevant wastewater constituents or pollutants that may be of concern to Pickens County; 
(7)  Information showing that the design percolation rate as defined in the Georgia EPD "Guidelines for Land Treatment of Municipal Wastewater by Drip Irrigation" shall be: 
a.  No more than ten percent of the mean saturated vertical hydraulic conductivity of the most limiting layer within the first five feet of the surface for land treatment sites where the seasonal groundwater is at depth greater than five feet from the surface; 
b.  No more than eight percent of the mean saturated vertical hydraulic conductivity of the most limiting layer within the first five feet from the surface for land treatment sites where the seasonal high groundwater or impermeable layers are between two and one-half feet and five feet of the surface; 
c.  Sites with seasonal groundwater or impermeable at depths no greater than two and one-half feet from the surface will not be considered for a permit; 
d.  The design percolation shall consider the horizontal conductivity of the disposal site to adjacent properties and provide the necessary documentation that the horizontal conductivity is adequate to accommodate the additional flow. Existing disposal facilities in the area shall also be considered; 
(8)  A copy of the large community subsurface system engineering submittal for the system bearing the signed seal of a professional engineer (P.E.) who meets the requirements of section 34-204; 
(9)  Satisfactory evidence showing that the proposed system has been successfully constructed and operated in at least five other jurisdictions within the State of Georgia. Said evidence shall be in the form of discharge monitoring reports, location information, contact information for the entity currently in charge of said system and other information as determined by the county development office; 
(10)  Certification from a professional geologist, a soil scientist (soil professional), and a plant specialist that the proposed system is appropriate for the site location; 
The professional geologist shall be registered in the State of Georgia as such. The professional geologist shall certify that he has performed written hydrogeologic determinations in North Georgia for wastewater disposal systems of the type proposed for at least two other facilities. 
The soil scientist (soil professional) shall hold at least a Bachelor of Science degree from an accredited college or university in agronomy, soil science, or related field as approved by the soil classifiers certification advisory committee with approved soil science courses including a course in pedology. The soil scientist shall have four years or more of full time experience as a soil scientist actively mapping, identifying, and classifying soil features and interpreting the influence of soil features on soil uses. The soil scientist shall be on the Georgia Department of Health approved list of soil scientists. The soil scientist shall provide documentation that he has provided soil science services for at least two facilities in North Georgia for wastewater disposal systems of the type proposed. The soil scientist shall investigate the proposed site and certify that the soil is appropriate for the proposed system and will remain viable when the system is in operation. 
The plant specialist shall hold at least a Bachelor of Science degree from an accredited college or university in agricultural, biological, or horticultural sciences. The plant specialist shall have four years or more of full time experience as a plant specialist investigating waste disposal sites and determining if the vegetation on said site is appropriate for waste disposal systems. The plant specialist shall provide documentation that he has provided services for at least two facilities in North Georgia for wastewater disposal systems of the type proposed. The plant specialist shall investigate the proposed site and certify that the vegetation is appropriate for the proposed system and will remain viable when the system is in operation. 
(11)  A perpetual ownership agreement with Pickens County, Georgia. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-203. - Plans and specifications. 
Plans and specifications for the construction of the proposed facility shall: 
(1)  Detail the construction of the facility including but not limited to catalog cuts of all equipment installed; 
(2)  State an estimated time line for completion of each phase of construction; 
(3)  State the name, mailing address, physical address, e-mail address and two phone numbers of the entity constructing said facility; 
(4)  Provide for the incorporation of the facility into existing sanitary sewer systems constructed or being constructed in Pickens County; 
(5)  Incorporate a remote monitoring and control system (SCADA system); 
(6)  Incorporate a system which shall minimize sludge production; 
(7)  Incorporate a system which shall minimize noise, odor, water, and light pollution; 
(8)  Incorporate a system which can be expanded and/or upgraded to meet future needs and environmental regulations; 
(9)  Describe a system similar in design, size, treatment technology, disposal system, and function to at least five other systems within the State of Georgia; 
(10)  Address sanitary sewer needs in the regional area of the proposed system. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-204. - Designing entity requirements. 
The entity designing said facility shall: 
(1)  Provide documentation that it has successfully designed at least two other systems similar in size, treatment technology, disposal system, design and function to the proposed system within at least two other jurisdictions within the State of Georgia which have been in operation for at least five years; 
(2)  Provide a resume documenting a basis for specialized knowledge in the design of this type system which shall include educational and professional designations; 
(3)  Provide the location of each and every sanitary sewer system designed by said entity within the preceding five years; and 
(4)  Provide the contact information for the entity currently in charge of each system designed by applicant's designing entity within the preceding five years together with any required permissions or waivers needed for obtaining information from said entity. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-205. - Constructing entity requirements. 
The entity constructing said facility shall: 
(1)  Provide documentation that it has successfully built at least two other systems similar in size, treatment technology, disposal system, design and function to the proposed system within at least two other jurisdictions within the State of Georgia which have been in operation for at least five years; 
(2)  Provide a resume documenting a basis for specialized knowledge in the construction of this type system which shall include educational and professional designations; 
(3)  Provide the location of each and every sanitary sewer system built by said entity within the preceding five years; and 
(4)  Provide the contact information for the entity currently in charge of each system built by applicant's constructing entity within the preceding five years together with any required permissions or waivers needed for obtaining information from said entity. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-206. - Perpetual ownership agreement. 
In order to obtain a perpetual ownership agreement with Pickens County, Georgia, the following requirements must be met: 
(1)  Upon submission of a permit for the construction of a sanitary sewer system, the county development officer shall set a time for a preliminary construction meeting. Said meeting shall be held not more than ten calendar days from the approval of the permit by Pickens County unless agreed otherwise by the applicant. In the preliminary construction meeting, the county development officer shall design a schedule of inspections to be performed by the county development officer or its designee the purpose of which shall be to provide the county development office adequate assurances that the system is being and has been constructed according to the issued permit and the plans and specifications submitted by the applicant. The county shall be given the opportunity to obtain construction photographs in a digital format prior to work being covered which accurately describes each phase of the construction. 
Because of the uniqueness of each system, the inspection requirements shall be established on a case by case basis as determined by the particular plans and specifications submitted to the county development office. Should the applicant disagree with the proposed schedule, it may appeal the decision of the county development officer as provided in section 38-10 of this Code of Ordinances; 
(2)  The applicant must be able to state without speculation the initial customer base for the system. The initial customer base shall be either new construction in a proposed subdivision which this system is submitted to serve as described on a preliminary plat submission on file with the county development office, or it shall be prospective customers in existing residences who have contractually obligated themselves in a manner deemed sufficient to the county development officer to be served by said system once it is constructed; 
(3)  A contractual relationship between the county and an entity qualified to operate and maintain the facility for a minimum of five years; 
(4)  A contractual relationship between the county and an entity qualified to dispose of sludge generated by the facility for a minimum of five years; 
(5)  The county development officer shall determine a capital assessment fee. This fee shall be the amount estimated to maintain and operate the system until it becomes self-sufficient. Said fee shall include but is not limited to sludge disposal. Should the applicant disagree with the proposed capital assessment fee, it may appeal the decision of the county development officer as provided in section 38-10 of this Code of Ordinances; 
(6)  Upon completion of construction of the system pursuant to the county development officer's satisfactory inspections, the applicant shall transfer ownership of the system, together with the capital assessment fee, any and all warranties, contracts, agreements, or other rights and obligations as required and approved by the county development officer, to Pickens County, Georgia. This shall be a prerequisite to final plat approval. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Sec. 34-207. - Severability. 
Should any part of this division be held to be invalid, said holding shall not invalidate the remaining parts of this division. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Secs. 34-208—34-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS 

Sec. 34-301. - Private water systems prohibited. 
Privately owned water systems which provide drinking water for more than one property owner shall not be permitted within Pickens County. All water systems which provide drinking water for more than one property owner shall be owned and operated by Pickens County. 
(Res. of 8-8-2006, § 1) 
Secs. 34-302—34-320. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH—MINIMUM LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS FOR ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 34-321. - Purpose. 
To provide for the orderly and safe development of properties and creation of new lots, whether residential or commercial, utilizing on-site sewage management systems the following criteria for establishing minimum lot sizes are established for use by the Pickens County Board of Health as authorized by Georgia statute in O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5 to establish minimum lot sizes and other powers. Larger lot sizes may be required to meet these requirements depending on the proposed development of properties and their physical characteristics. 
County planning and zoning authorities may require larger minimum lot sizes than established herein; such establishment of larger minimum lot sizes will take precedence. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-322. - Definitions and criteria. 
Absorption field areas are defined as a minimum of 4,000 square feet useable soils area per bedroom (2,500 square feet per bedroom for initial absorption field plus 2,000 square feet per bedroom for replacement absorption field), or a minimum of 4,000 square feet useable soils per 150 gallons per day of wastewater for commercial and similar structures; these areas may be considered for reduction in size by installing both the initial and replacement absorption fields at the same time, but in no case shall the replacement area be smaller than required for a conventional absorption field system. Where position of structures, width of lots, slope or other characteristics of properties will make future access for replacement or repair of systems very difficult or impossible, both the initial absorption fields and replacement absorption fields will be installed at the same time. Complex slope patterns dissected by rock, deep gullies and ravines are not acceptable for absorption field areas. If larger homes, more bedrooms, swimming pools, tennis courts, outbuildings and other appurtenances are proposed to be constructed or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the Pickens County Board of Health will require larger lots to assure useable soil areas. Absorption field areas must remain undisturbed until septic system installation except for clearing of trees and underbrush; no unapproved grading or similar disturbance of soils is permitted except for foundation footings and other activities associated with home construction. 
Conventional absorption field system means a traditionally used on-site sewage management system whose absorption field is composed of perforated pipe surrounded by gravel or stone. 
Commercial lot means real estate property that is used for business activities whether or not for profit. 
GPAD means gallons of sewage effluent applied per acre per day through on-site sewage management absorption fields. 
Individual water supply system means a system of piping, pumps, tanks or other facilities utilizing groundwater to supply a single-family dwelling. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land, intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or both, and shall not include any part of the right-of-way of a street or road. The following land areas are not considered as a part of any lot when calculating the required minimum lot size: rights-of-way of roads, easements (such as power line, pipe line, other utility or adjacent property egress) that exclude installation of an on-site sewage management system, bodies of water, land within 50 feet of a lake, river, stream, wetland, springhead not used for drinking water, or other bodies of water and similar limiting factors. 
Maximum daily sewage flow means 600 GPAD when a lot is served by an individual water supply system, and 1,200 GPAD when served by a public water supply system. 
Multi-residential means a classification of housing where multiple separate housing units for residential inhabitants are contained within one building or several buildings within one complex and piece of property. A common form is an apartment building or condominium. This definition does not include two-family structures (duplex) or two separate family residential structures on one property. 
Onsite sewage management system means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system, whether serving single or multiple buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. It includes conventional septic tank systems and privies, as well as alternative onsite sewage management systems approved by the local health authority. 
On-site wastewater treatment system means an advanced alternative wastewater treatment system approved by the state department of public health and that produces an effluent meeting the current ANSI/NSF Standard No. 40 for Residential Wastewater Treatment Systems. 
Other lots mean properties not used for family residential, commercial or family multi-residential purposes and may include institutions, schools, camps, churches, rehabilitation or treatment operations, transient facilities and similar. 
Percolation rate is defined as the time, expressed in minutes per inch, required for water to seep into unsaturated soil at a constant rate. 
Public water supply system means a system for the provision of piped water to the public for human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections, or regularly serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily, at least 60 days out of the year as regulated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water, Chapter 391-3-5. 
Slope is defined as the vertical distance, or difference in height, between two points on the ground surface divided by the horizontal distance between these two points expressed as a percentage. The Pickens County Board of Health recognizes that a lot may have different slopes in different areas with varying topography; in this context, the size of a lot is determined by the slope where the initial absorption field and replacement field areas are likely to be or can be located. In questionable circumstances the larger lot size shall be required. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-323. - Required sizes for new residential lots. 
These minimum lot sizes are intended for homes of 3,000 square feet or less with five bedrooms or less with basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees, decks, porches and water supply line. If larger homes, more bedrooms, swimming pools, tennis courts, outbuildings and other appurtenances are proposed to be constructed or if trees would interfere with installation of an on-site sewage management system, the Pickens County Board of Health will require larger lots to assure useable soil area. 
New residential lots outside conservation subdivisions shall have minimum lot sizes per single-family and two-family unit use, in square feet, as follows: 
(1)  With single family structure, public water supply system and on-site sewage management system: 43,560 square feet (one acre). Two family structure, or two separate structures: 87,120 square feet (two acres.) 
(2)  With single family structure, individual water supply system and on-site sewage management system: 65,340 square feet (one and a half acres). Two family structure, or two separate structures: 130,680 square feet (three acres). 
(3)  All residential lots located above 2,200 feet sea level: 435,600 square feet (ten acres) in accordance with county land use ordinances. 
(4)  All residential lots below 2,200 feet sea level, with greater than 25 percent slopes in absorption field areas or soil percolation rates of 60 minutes an inch or more, for one family structure: 
a.  With public water supply system and on-site sewage management system or on-site wastewater treatment system: 65,340 square feet (one and a half acres) with a minimum 150 feet lot width; 
b.  With individual water supply system and on-site sewage management system: 108,900 square feet (two and a half acres) with a minimum 150 feet lot width. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-324. - Required sizes for new lots in conservation subdivisions. 
Lots in conservation subdivisions as defined by Pickens County land use ordinances may be smaller than specified under section 34-323 but not less than 21,780 square feet (one-half acre); a one-half acre lot must meet all the following criteria: 
(1)  No soils exceed a percolation rate of 60 minutes an inch; 
(2)  All soils are suitable for conventional absorption field systems; 
(3)  Lots are only served by a public water supply system; 
(4)  Proposed residential structures do not exceed a foundation footprint of 3,000 square feet, 5,000 heated square feet, and five bedrooms; 
(5)  Lots contain basic appurtenances such as: driveway, minimum number of trees, decks, porches and water supply line; 
(6)  Slopes in absorption field areas do not exceed 25 percent; 
(7)  There are no complex slope patterns dissected by rock, deep gullies and ravines. 
If any of these criteria are exceeded, then the 21,780 (one-half acre) lot size requirement will be increased to 26,136 square feet (six tenths of an acre) or more depending upon number and magnitude of items exceeding these criteria. 
Conservation subdivision lots served by individual water supply systems must be at least 43,560 square feet (one acre) and meet all above criteria (a) through (g); if any of these criteria are exceeded, size requirement will be increased to 54,450 square feet (one and one quarter acres) or more depending upon number and magnitude of items exceeding criteria. 
Applications for on-site sewage system installations within conservation subdivisions will include a site plan at a scale of one inch:20 feet showing the residential structure, driveways, paved walkways, other buildings, easements, pools and all other appurtenances. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-325. - Required sizes for new commercial, multi-residential and other lots. 
Proposed commercial and multi-residential property sizes will be determined by the maximum daily sewage flow for proposed structures on properties and lots with slopes of 25 percent or less and percolation rates of 60 minutes per inch or less. 
Properties served by a public water supply system may apply 1,200 GPAD. 
Properties served by an individual water supply system may apply 600 GPAD. 
Commercial and multi-family residential properties with slopes greater than 25 percent and/or percolation rates greater than 60 minutes per inch shall be increased proportionally in size. Required minimum areas within properties for on-site management absorption fields will be based on 4,000 square feet useable soils per bedroom (2,000 square feet initial and 2,000 square feet replacement area) for apartments and other multi-family residential properties, and 4,000 square feet useable soils per 150 gallons of wastewater for commercial and similar properties. 
Example: A proposed business will have a public water supply system and will generate 5,000 gallons of wastewater per day. With public water the maximum sewage flow is 1,200 gallons per day per acre. To determine the acreage of the lot needed, use the following formula: 
5,000 gal/day divided by 1,200 gal/acre/day = 4.17 acres 
NOTE: This does not mean that four and seventeen one-hundredths acres must be reserved for the septic system but that the entire property must be at least four and seventeen one-hundredths acres. However, enough suitable land area must be left within a property for the initial system and replacement system after buildings, paved areas, and appurtenances; minimum areas within properties for absorption fields equal 5,000 square feet useable soils per bedroom, and 5,000 square feet useable soils per 150 gallons wastewater per day for commercial and similar structures (2,500 square feet/bedroom for initial system plus 2,500 square feet for replacement system.) Reserved areas for initial and replacement systems may be reduced by an approved site plan for the initial and replacement systems, or by installing both the initial and replacement systems. 
Example: A business will be served by an individual well (non-public system) and generates 5,000 gallons of wastewater per day. In this case the maximum sewage flow is only 600 gallons per acre per day. 
5,000 gal/day divided by 600 gal/acre/day = 8.33 acres 
Example: A residential property owner has a lot of eight tenths of an acre served by public water and wishes to build a six-bedroom home. Each bedroom requires 150 gallons per day x six bedrooms = 900 gallons per day. 900 gal/day divided by 1,200 gal/acre/day = seventy-five one hundredths of an acre. The property owner can build a six-bedroom home if soil areas are sufficient and suitable. If the property were served by an individual well or other non-public supply, the lot would have to be one and one half acres. 
Where existing commercial and multi-residential properties are limited by land area, the property owners may propose on-site wastewater treatment systems and nitrogen reduction technologies for consideration by the county environmental health department. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-326. - Exemption for existing residential, commercial, multi-residential and other lots. 
Undeveloped lots recorded before the date of adoption of this article are exempt from these lot size requirements but may not exceed 1,200 GPAD for lots served by a public water supply system and 600 GPAD for lots served by individual water supply system; property owners who wish to exceed these GPAD limits may propose on-site wastewater treatment systems and nitrogen reduction technologies for consideration by the county environmental health office. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-327. - Severability clause. 
If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this article shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause, or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this article, the intent being that the same are severable. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(2), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 34-328—34-347. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH—MOBILE FACILITIES AND ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS 

Sec. 34-348. - Purpose. 
The Pickens County Board of Health recognizes that wheeled mobile facilities are not suitable or safe for permanent residential occupancy and that by their construction are not intended for permanent occupancy. Further, mobile facilities have been found discharging sewage directly onto the ground surface and streams. Nothing in this article is intended to prevent a property owner from occasionally occupying a mobile facility on his or her own property provided the visit does not exceed two weeks, there is no prohibited discharge of sewage, and sewage contained in mobile facilities is properly disposed in a public or private sewage system. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-349. - Authority. 
Under authority of O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5, specifying locations where onsite sewage management systems can be located and used, and specifying the types of residences, facilities and buildings that may be served by onsite sewage management systems, the Pickens County Board of Health adopts these provisions. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-350. - Definition. 
Mobile facilities means a wheeled vehicle designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable and designed not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use by the transient public. This definition includes recreational vehicles, motor homes, truck campers, pop-up campers, dependent trailers, travel trailers and similar by whatever named called. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-351. - Provisions. 
On-site sewage management systems may not be installed for or serve mobile facilities unless such mobile facilities are in properly zoned or approved locations such as recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds constructed on a common piece of property and intended only for use by their owners, tourists, travelers and guests. See exceptions in section 34-332 for single-family home construction, project construction and disaster relief occupation below. 
This section shall not be interpreted to prevent property owners from storing recreational vehicles and similar mobile facilities they own on their residential properties and dumping accumulated wastewater from travel trips into their own septic systems; however, such mobile facilities shall not be used for permanent residential occupation nor permanently connected to a septic system. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-352. - Exceptions. 
(a)  Emergency housing following a disaster. A recreational vehicle or other mobile facility with electricity and flush toilet may be located as a temporary dwelling after a flood or other disaster and may be served by an on-site sewage management system subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The units are on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days unless extensions are granted in writing by the health authority; 
(2)  The unit is fully licensed, approved by Pickens County, and ready for highway use except for tie-downs against strong winds and storms; 
(3)  The recreational vehicle or mobile facility has a safe and sanitary potable water supply under pressure; 
(4)  The unit is removed from the property and disconnected from the on-site sewage management system when emergency temporary occupancy is no longer needed. 
(b)  Construction of a single-family dwelling by property owner. A recreational vehicle or other mobile facility with electricity, flush toilet, bath or shower and kitchen may be located as a temporary dwelling for the property owner during construction of a single-family dwelling on the same lot or parcel subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A valid building permit for the permanent single family dwelling must be in effect during the entire time that the mobile facility is located on the site; 
(2)  The mobile facility is connected to the on-site sewage management system that will serve the single-family dwelling; 
(3)  The mobile facility is disconnected from the sewage disposal system when the single-family dwelling is occupied; 
(4)  The mobile facility has a safe and sanitary potable water supply under pressure; 
(5)  The use of a mobile facility for this purpose shall not exceed one year; and 
(6)  The mobile facility is fully licensed, approved by Pickens County, and ready for highway use. Ready for highway use means that it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and has no permanently attached additions; such units may be tied down against strong winds and storms during use. 
(c)  Temporary construction workers. A mobile facility with electricity, flush toilet, shower or bath and kitchen may be located and served by an on-site sewage management system for temporary construction workers on major construction projects only if mobile facility parks and other approved locations are not available within a reasonable distance from the construction site. The following conditions apply: 
(1)  The mobile facilities are on the site for fewer than 365 consecutive days unless extensions are granted in writing by the health authority; 
(2)  The mobile facility is fully licensed and approved by Pickens County and ready for highway use except for tie-downs against strong winds and storms; 
(3)  The mobile facility has a safe and sanitary potable water supply under pressure; 
(4)  The mobile facility is removed from the construction site or other nearby location immediately after the major project is finished; 
(5)  This exception does not apply to individual residential construction projects. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 34-353. - Severability. 
If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this article shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause, or provision shall not affect any of the remaining provisions of this article, the intent being that the same are severable. 
(Res. of 10-19-2017(3), § 1(Exh. A)) 
Chapter 38 - LAND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 16; environment, ch. 26; planning, ch. 50; roads and bridges, ch. 54; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, O.C.G.A. § 12-4-70 et seq.; Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Georgia Safe Dams Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-370 et seq.; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; stop work orders, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-14; exemptions, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17; local land disturbing activity ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4; minimum standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6; permits for land disturbing activities, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-7, 12-7-9; approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d); construction and operation of watershed and flood control projects by counties, O.C.G.A. § 22-3-100 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; registration and licensing of dealers, manufacturers and persons transporting mobile homes, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-38; The Uniform Standards Code for Manufactured Homes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-130 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5); classification of mobile homes as a separate class of property for ad valorem property tax purposes, Ga. Const. art. VII, § I, ¶ III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access means the right to cross between public and private property, thereby permitting pedestrians and vehicles to enter and leave property. 
Accessory building means a subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to that of a main building and located on the same lot as the main building. 
Alley means a public or legally established thoroughfare, other than a street, which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
Alteration of building means any change in the support members of a building except such change as may be required for its safety; an addition to a building; or any change in use from that of one district classification to another or of a building from one location to another. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
Best management practices (BMP's) means a collection of structural measures and vegetative practices which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
Block means an area of land within a subdivision that is entirely bounded by streets, or by streets and the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision, or a combination of such boundaries with a river or lake. 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Bond means a legal instrument with a clause which establishes a sum of money fixed as a penalty, binding the parties to pay the penalty; conditioned, however, that the payment of penalty may be avoided by the performance by the part of certain acts. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buffer strip means a land area of appropriate design providing a visual and noise separation between incompatible land uses. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls, including tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, mobile homes, and similar structures whether stationary or movable. 
Building setback line means a line delineating the minimum allowable distance between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. 
Campground means a parcel of land used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents, or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
Commission means the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. (To replace earlier definition of Committee. ) 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, intended primarily for pedestrian use, and designed to provide access to adjacent roads and lots. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Design standards means the specifications to land owners or subdividers for the preparation of plats, both preliminary and final, indicating among other things, the optimum, minimum, or maximum dimensions of such items as rights-of-way, blocks, easements, and lots. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
Development officer means a person appointed by the county commission who is charged with the administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys waters from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Dwelling means a building or portion thereof, exclusive of mobile homes as defined in this section, used for residential purposes. 
Dwelling; multiple means an attached building designed for occupancy by two or more families living independently of each other. 
Dwelling; single-family means a detached building designed to be occupied exclusively by one family. 
Dwelling unit means one or more rooms and a single kitchen designed as a unit for occupancy by only one family for cooking, living, and sleeping purposes. 
Easements means a grant by a property owner for the use of a strip of land for the specified purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities; including, but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan". 
Escrow means a legal agreement between a developer and the county or the appropriate agency or utility in lieu of actual performance and intended to assure performance. 
Existing grade means the vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Filling means the placement of any soil or other solid material either organic or inorganic on a natural ground surface or an excavation. 
Final plat means a finished drawing or map of a subdivision, meeting all of the requirements of these regulations in such form as required by the local jurisdiction and showing, completely and accurately, all legal design and engineering information, and certificates necessary for recording. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood means an overflow of lands not normally covered by water that results in significant adverse effects in the vicinity. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated as zone A. 
Floodway fringe areas means areas lying outside the floodway district but within the area which would be flooded by the regional flood. 
Floodways means the natural channel and the portion of the floodplain along the channel which must be retained solely for the passage of floodwaters to prevent an undue increase in flood heights upstream. Water travels at a high velocity in the floodway. 
Frontage means all the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or terminating) measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead ended then all the property abutting on one side between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Hospitals or convalescent homes means any publicly or privately owned medical treatment facility, rest home, or convalescent home. 
Individual sewage disposal system means a septic tank, seepage tile sewage disposal system, or any other sewage treatment device other than a public treatment system approved by the county health department. 
Issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 38-706(1)e. 
Local planning commission means the Pickens County Planning Commission. 
Lot means a piece, parcel, or plot of land in one ownership, which may include one or more lots of record. 
Lot area means the total surface area of land included within lot lines. 
Lot corner means a lot of which at least two adjoining sides abut their full lengths on a street, provided that the interior angle at the intersection of two such sides is less than 135 degrees. 
Lot depth means the average distance from the street line of the lot to its rear line, measured in the general direction of the side lines of the lot. 
Lot, double frontage means a lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
Lot frontage means that dimension of a lot or portion of a lot abutting on a street, excluding the side dimension of a corner lot. 
Lot; interior means a lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines means the boundary dividing a given lot from the street, an alley, or adjacent lots. 
Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the superior court clerk's office, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been recorded in the superior court clerk's office prior to the date of passage of the resolution from which this chapter derived. 
Lot width means the width of a lot at the building setback line measured at right angles to the centerline of its depth. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, useable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor. 
Manufactured home/mobile home/trailer means a detached unit with any or all of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Designed for longterm occupancy with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
(2)  If the metal frame is completely removed from a unit and the unit meets the building codes, it shall be classified as a modular unit. If the entire metal frame cannot be removed, it shall be classified as a trailer (mobile home). 
(3)  Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete unit and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities and the like. 
(4)  Designed to be freestanding and does not require a foundation for occupancy. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Minimum floor elevation means the lowest elevation permissible for the construction, erection, or other placement of any floor including a basement floor. 
Mobile home park means a plot of ground upon which three or more mobile homes occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located regardless of whether or not a charge is made for such accommodations. 
Mobile home space means a plot of ground within a mobile home park designated for the accommodation of not more than one mobile home of single-family occupancy. 
Modular home means a factory fabricated dwelling over 32 feet in length and at least 24 feet wide designed and constructed without carriage of hitch collar as stationary house construction for placement upon permanent foundation, to be permanently connected to utilities, for yearround occupancy. It can consist of two or more components that can be separated when transported but designed to be jointed into one integral unit. Modular homes shall meet the minimum standards for house construction as specified in the Southern Standard Building Code, the FHA Minimum Property Standards, the State Factory Built Housing Rules, and have a roof with at least a 3/12 pitch. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Percentage of grade means on street center line, the distance vertically (up and down) from the horizontal in feet and tenths of a foot for each 100 feet of horizontal distance. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Planning commission means the county planning commission whose membership is appointed by the county commissioner. 
Plat; preliminary and final: 
(1)  Preliminary means a tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision meeting requirements enumerated in this chapter and showing the proposed layout in sufficient detail to indicate unquestionably its workability. 
(2)  Final means the final map or as built drawing and accompanying materials, described in this chapter, on which the subdividers plan of the subdivision is presented to the planning commission for approval and which, if approved by the commission is recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court. 
Poultry house means any type of structure used for the raising and growing of fowl, including, but not limited to, chickens, turkeys, keeping laying hens for commercial or profit making uses. 
Preapplication review means an initial and informal stage of subdivision review at which the developer may make known preliminary plan proposals and the county may respond and/or advise the developer concerning the subdivision regulations. 
Private street means a street over which the general public has no right of use and is not maintained by the county road department. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Property owners association means a legally constituted association of property owners who commonly owns and is responsible for the maintenance of commonly owned property and improvements in a development. 
Protective covenants means contracts made between private parties or conditions recorded with an approved plat and running with the land, specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the view to protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
Public water system means any water distribution system which has 15 or more service connections or serves more than 25 people. 
Recreation park or center means any public property used for recreational activities including, but not limited to ball fields, swimming pools, gymnasiums, tennis courts, walking trails and picnic areas. 
Reserve strip means a strip or parcel of land along, around, or between properties, the purpose of which is to restrict access. 
Residence means any structure used to house any individual who intends this structure to be his place of abode. 
Resubdivision means a change in a map of any approved or recorded subdivision plat altering the number of lots incorporated within the confines of the original plat. 
Right-of-way means a strip of land designated, reserved, dedicated, or purchased for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
Roadway means the actual road surface including necessary road shoulders and drainage facilities including ditches and curbing and guttering, which is utilized to transport motor vehicles. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such materials that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other site. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Setback line (or building line) means a line beyond which no foundation wall, eave, or other part of any building shall project, unless specified exceptions are made elsewhere in these regulations. 
Slope means the degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree. 
Soil and water conservation districted approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other than a mobile home) without a basement or poured footings, the "actual start" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. For mobile homes not within a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision, the "actual start" is the date on which the construction of facilities for servicing the site on which the mobile home is to be affixed (including at a minimum the construction of streets, either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, and installation of utilities) is completed. 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
Storm waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Street means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic whether designated as street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, drive, expressway, boulevard, lane, place, circle, alley, or otherwise. 
(1)  Arterials mean those roads which are designed to carry rapid, continuous traffic to major magnets within the urban area. Routes will usually pass through or near the heart of the city, connecting residential, commercial, industrial and public activity areas. 
(2)  Bypass means a highway designated for fast, continuous movement of all types of traffic between highways and widely separated parts of the urban area. Bypasses generally have limited or controlled access and are usually grade separated at railroads and major crossings. 
(3)  Collector streets mean those streets which bring traffic to arterials, or interconnect arterials. They provide for relatively easy movement at moderate speeds from homes and businesses to arterials. 
(4)  Local streets mean those streets which provide direct access to abutting properties. 
(5)  Alley or service drive means a minor access way used for service access, or property access under specified circumstances, to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(6)  Marginal access street means a residential street parallel and adjacent to major thoroughfares or arterial streets and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. 
(7)  Cul-de-sac means a local street or road with only one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
(8)  Half street means a street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
Street line or right-of-way line means a dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street. 
Structural alterations mean any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls or bearing partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or in the exterior walls. 
Structural erosion and sediment control practices means measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural practices mean soil and water conservation measures, other than vegetation, utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating, or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss; including but not limited to riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having a location on the ground. The term shall include such things as gasoline pumps, signs, mobile homes, and other portable vehicles or structures from which products are vended, and similar objects. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for any purpose, whether immediate or future, including but not limited to divisions for sale, rental, legacy, or building development. This definition shall include resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
(1)  Minor subdivision means a subdivision of land in which there are no new roads developed, no utility extensions and developments which contain seven or less lots. 
(2)  Major subdivision means all subdivisions of land which are not classified as a minor subdivision. 
Substantial improvement means for a structure built prior to the enactment of this chapter, any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration on any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(3)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Swine operation means any type of structure or pen used for the growing, raising, or breeding of swine for commercial or profit making uses. 
Trout streams mean all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sediment control practices mean measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands mean those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upwards, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
Yard; front means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the street line and the front line of the most protruding portion of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard; rear means an open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied except by a permitted accessory building, extending the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the most protruding portion of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard; side means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building located between the side of the most protruding portion of the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. II, art. II; ch. IV, art. II; ch. X, art. I; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 3; Res. of 11-14-2003, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing minimum development standards and administrative procedures for insuring compliance with these standards. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. I, art. I, § 1.100) 
Sec. 38-3. - Authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Ga. Const. art. XI, § IV (O.C.G.A. § 32-6102). 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. I, art. I, § 1.101) 
Sec. 38-4. - Jurisdiction. 
This chapter shall apply to the unincorporated areas of the county and to any incorporated area electing to adopt the chapter. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. I, art. I, § 1.102) 
Sec. 38-5. - Development officer—Position created. 
The county land development chapter shall be administered by the county development officer. The development officer shall be appointed by and report to the county commissioner. The development office shall coordinate his activities with the county planning commission, county sanitarian, tax assessor, county commissioner and all other interested parties. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VIII, art. I, § 8.100) 
Sec. 38-6. - Same—Duties. 
The duties of the county development officer shall be as follows: 
(1)  Review and approve all subdivisions of land as defined in section 38-1 of this chapter. 
(2)  Coordinate the review of all soil erosion and sediment control plans, issue land disturbing permits and inspect the on-site erosion control measures. 
(3)  Review and approve access permits as required in section 38-546 et seq. of this chapter. 
(4)  Review and issue building permits. 
(5)  Review and approve mobile home parks. 
(6)  Issue noncompliance and stop work orders. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VIII, art. I, § 8.101) 
Sec. 38-7. - Same—Powers. 
The county development officer shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this chapter. He shall have the authority to issue stop work orders and to cite violators of the chapter to court. The county development officer shall have the power to conduct investigations as reasonably deemed necessary to carry out his duties of enforcing the chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the site. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VIII, art. I, § 8.103) 
Sec. 38-8. - Development permits required. 
This chapter will be administered through the use of development permits. All of the permits except the septic tank permit will be issued by the county development officer. A permit fee, in an amount established by the county commissioner, shall be charged to partially defray the cost the county incurs in administering this chapter. The permits required in the county are as follows: 
(1)  Minor subdivision certificate; 
(2)  Major subdivision certificate; 
(3)  Land disturbing permit; 
(4)  Access permit; 
(5)  Building permit; 
(6)  Mobile home park certificate; 
(7)  Septic tank permit; 
(8)  Cell tower permit; 
(9)  Sign permit; and 
(10)  Permit for on site wastewater treatment and disposal facilities in excess of 10,000-gallon capacity. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VIII, art. I, § 8.102; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 3; Res. of 8-8-2006, § 2) 
Sec. 38-9. - Fines for noncompliance. 
Any person who violates any provision of the county land development chapter or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. In addition to other penalties set forth in the various chapters, any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a civil monetary fine of up to $2,500.00 for each violation or failure or refusal to comply with such standards, the amount of such fine to be imposed by the land development office as part of its duties to enforce such standards. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VIII, art. I, § 8.104) 
Sec. 38-10. - Administrative appeals. 
Any party aggrieved by any decision of the county development officer may within 30 days thereafter appeal therefrom to the county planning commission. The appellant shall furnish the development officer a written notice of appeal specifying the judgment of decision from which appeal is taken. If any party does not agree with the decision of the county planning commission, he may appeal to the county commissioner. A decision by the county commissioner shall be the final administrative appeal and his decision shall be carried out by the county development officer. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VIII, art. I, § 8.105) 
Sec. 38-11. - Legal appeals. 
Any party, aggrieved by a decision or order of the county commissioner, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VIII, art. I, § 8.106) 
Sec. 38-12. - Variances. 
The developer shall make a request in writing for a variance from the land development regulations described in this chapter 38 to the county development office. The county development office shall make a study of the variance request and make a recommendation to the board of appeals who shall have the authority to grant the variance. 
The county development office shall have the authority to grant variances at the administrative level on matters regarding the distances required between a building and the boundary lines of the property as well as vegetative buffers. A denial of this type of variance request may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. IX, art. I; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-13. - Liability. 
Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law or impose any liability upon the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. IX, art. III) 
Sec. 38-14. - Public notice. 
A public hearing shall be held on the adoption of all proposed amendments to this chapter. The notice of the time, date and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the county. The public hearing must be advertised for at least 15 calendar days prior to the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. IX, art. IV) 
Sec. 38-15. - Adoption and amendments. 
The county commissioner shall have the power to adopt and amend this chapter after the public hearing required by section 38-14 is held. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. IX, art. V) 
Secs. 38-16—38-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

Sec. 38-46. - Scope of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all building, construction, alterations, livability, sanitation, erection, maintenance, occupancy, repairs, moving, removal, demolition and all equipment, materials, and appliances used in connection with the building, construction, etc., within the unincorporated areas of the county, except as may be specifically exempted in this chapter. 
Sec. 38-47. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to provide minimum requirements to safeguard life, health, and public welfare and the protection of property as it relates to these safeguards by regulating and controlling the construction, alteration, repair, livability, sanitation, erection, equipment, occupancy, appliances, maintenance, removal and demolition of all buildings or structures and appurtenances hereto. 
Sec. 38-48. - Adoption by reference. 
(a)  The following technical building and construction codes are adopted by reference and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  Standard Building Code (SBCCI). 
(2)  National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(3)  Standard Gas Code (SBCCI). 
(4)  Standard Mechanical Code (SBCCI). 
(5)  Standard Plumbing Code (SBCCI). 
(6)  Council of American Building Officials' One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code, with the exception of part V—Plumbing (chapters 20—25) of such code. 
(7)  Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings as adopted by the State Building Administrative Board pursuant to 1978 Ga. Laws, page 2212, as such code exists on September 30, 1991. 
(8)  Standard Fire Prevention Code (SBCCI). 
(9)  Standard Housing Code (SBCCI). 
(10)  Standard Swimming Pool Code (SBCCI). 
(11)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code (SBCCI). 
(b)  Official copies of such codes are on file in the office of the chief building official. 
Secs. 38-49—38-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat saved from repeal, § 1-6(11). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 38-81—38-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - APPROVAL PROCESS 

Sec. 38-101. - Definition; compliance; submission; approval. 
A subdivision is defined in section 38-1 as the division of a single parcel of land into two or more parcels. All future subdivisions of land in the county shall comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter. The subdivision approval process and submission requirements vary with the magnitude of the subdivision. All minor subdivisions shall be submitted to and approved by the county development officer as provided for in section 38-102. All major subdivisions of land shall be submitted to the county development officer for review and approval as outlined in section 38-103. All plats shall be submitted to and approved by the county development officer before they can be recorded in the county clerk's office. 
Any subdivision of a tract into two or more parcels, with a subsequent subdivision of one or more of said parcels within a twelve month period may be presumed to be the creation of a subdivision and, if so, shall comply with subdivision standards. Variances may be granted where division of property is due to inheritance or additional residences for immediate family. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. I; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-102. - Minor subdivision approval process. 
All minor subdivisions of land in the county shall be submitted to the county development officer for review and approval. The subdivision of one tract into two tracts does not require the preparation of a plat. All minor subdivisions which contain three or more tracts shall submit a final plat which complies with the provisions outlined in section 38-152. The county development officer shall review the proposed subdivision for compliance with this chapter. Any variance from the standards in this chapter, including only one division of original property, must be approved by the county development office. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. I, § 3.100) 
Sec. 38-103. - Major subdivision approval process. 
All major subdivision proposals shall be submitted to the county development officer for review and approval. The major subdivision approval process is a three-step process. The process is designed to provide a logical sequence of reviews and events in the subdivision development process. The major subdivision review process shall be as follows: 
(1)  Preliminary plat. The process begins with the preparation of a preliminary plat by a surveyor or engineer who is licensed in the state. The preliminary plat shall contain the information outlined in section 38-127 of this chapter and be reviewed and approved as outlined in section 38-128. 
(2)  Construction of improvements. The second step in the subdivision process shall be the construction of the necessary improvements to the subdivision (i.e. streets, lot corner stakes, drainage, water system, on-site wastewater treatment and disposal facilities, if applicable). The improvements shall closely approximate the plan approved on the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Final plat. Upon the completion of the necessary improvements, or following the provisions contained in section 38-301 et seq. of this chapter, the developer shall prepare a final plat which will serve as an "as built" drawing for the subdivision. The final plat shall contain the information outlined in section 38-152 of this chapter and be reviewed and approved as outlined in section 38-153. Upon obtaining approval of the final plat, the developer shall be authorized to record the plat in the county office of the clerk of superior court. No property shall be sold prior to final plat approval. The developer may chose to exercise the provisions of section 38-301 et seq. of this chapter in the second step of the review process. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. I, § 3.101; Res. of 8-8-2006, § 2) 
Secs. 38-104—38-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRELIMINARY PLAT STANDARDS AND REVIEW PROCESS 

Sec. 38-126. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the preliminary plat is to provide the county development officer, the county health department and other reviewing parties an opportunity to review the proposed subdivision for street design standards, utility easements, flood hazard potential, adequacy of the lot size for septic tank use, soil erosion control measures and the adequacy of a potable water supply. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. II) 
Sec. 38-127. - Information required on the preliminary plat. 
The following information is required for preliminary plat review: 
(1)  The proposed layout of lots, streets and utilities shall be shown on a drawing at a scale of 1″=200′ and shall show acreage of lots. 
(2)  The drawing shall contain a graphic scale, north arrow, date, acreage to be subdivided, and the owner/developer's name, address, and telephone number. 
(3)  A location sketch map shall be provided which shows the location of the site in relation to existing public roads, streams, power transmission lines, etc. 
(4)  Topography shall be shown at vertical intervals of not more than ten feet and notation of highest and lowest elevations in subdivision. 
(5)  The names of adjoining property owners shall be shown in relation to the proposed development. 
(6)  The plat shall contain the proposed name of the development and streets and a statement as to whether the streets are proposed as public or private with the percent of grade of the steepest roadway noted. 
(7)  The boundary of any flood hazard areas. 
(8)  An approved plan to control erosion on the site and a detailed drainage plan, including drainage easements. 
(9)  Certificates as outlined in section 38-129. 
(10)  All rights-of-way showing widths of at least 60 feet. 
(11)  A detailed access plan to enter county right-of-way. 
(12)  All parcels under three acres must submit soil classification data with application. 
(13)  All permits and covenants and restrictions which will apply to the property. 
(14)  The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by an impact information statement, completed on forms provided by the land development office, with all sections therein completed by applicant. 
(15)  If the subdivision is to be completed in phases, the preliminary plat must be accompanied by a master plan depicting future lots and streets. 
(16)  A storm water discharge plan for the project. 
(17)  Certification that developer has held a pre-construction meeting of all utility providers and that a construction schedule has been agreed to by all involved utility companies. 
(18)  Certification and copy of a fire flow test performed by a certified PE Engineer of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. II, § 3.200; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6) 
Sec. 38-128. - Preliminary plat review process. 
(a)  The developer shall submit 12 copies of the preliminary plat to the county development office. The development officer shall keep two copies of his review and distribute the other copies to: 
(1)  County sanitarian; 
(2)  County commissioner's office; 
(3)  County highway department; 
(4)  Limestone Valley Soil Conservation Service; 
(5)  Planning staff; 
(6)  Electric utility; 
(7)  Telephone company; 
(8)  Water authority, if applicable; 
(9)  Pickens County Fire Department; and 
(10)  Pickens County 911 Department. 
(b)  The preliminary plat review process shall be undertaken as expediently as possible, criteria for approval dependent upon requirements set forth herein and upon responses to the required impact statements from all involved public departments and authorities as listed in subsection (a) above as well as the Pickens County School Board or its designee, and any other public agency, including, but not limited to, state and/or federal agencies having jurisdiction over water system, watershed and wetlands. 
(c)  The preliminary plat approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. If substantial work has not been done on the development within this time period, the preliminary plat approval shall be null and void. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. II, § 3.201; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-129. - Preliminary plat certificates. 
The following certificates shall be placed [on the preliminary plat], or a cover sheet to the preliminary plat, and be signed by the appropriate authorities prior to submission of the preliminary plat to the county development officer for approval: 
Preliminary Survey and Design Certificate 
I hereby certify that this preliminary plat correctly represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me or under my direct supervision. I further certify that the design of the proposed streets, lots and other improvements comply with the minimum design standards of the Pickens County Subdivision Standards. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Registered Civil Engineer or  Land Surveyor License Number: ____________ 
Name, address and telephone number: 

 
Tentative Approval for Private Subsurface Sewage Disposal 
I hereby certify that the lots proposed hereon are generally suitable for subsurface sewage disposal with the listed and/or attached restrictions. 
This certificate does not constitute final approval of the sewage disposal system for this subdivision. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Pickens County Health Department Representative: ____________ 
Preliminary Plat Approval 
I hereby certify that the preliminary subdivision plat shown hereon has been properly reviewed and approved. The developer is hereby authorized to begin the physical development of the subdivision per this approved plan. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Pickens County Development Officer: ____________ 
Developers Agreement 
I hereby certify that I have met or will meet the requirements found in the Pickens County Land Development Standards. 
Owner or legal agent: ____________ 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. II, § 3.202; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-130—38-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - FINAL PLAT STANDARDS AND REVIEW PROCESS 

Sec. 38-151. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the final plat is to provide an "as built" drawing which accurately reflects the size and layout of lots, streets, water system, easements, and other important information which is necessary for the public record. The approval of the final plat by the county development officer certifies to the developer that all of the provisions of the county subdivision standards have been met and the plat is approved for recording in the county office of the clerk of superior court. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. III) 
Sec. 38-152. - Information required on the final plat. 
The following information is required for final plat review: 
(1)  The final plat shall be drawn in permanent ink on reproducible material at a scale of 1″=100′. The sheet size shall not exceed 17″ × 20″. If more than one sheet is necessary to show the area the sheets shall be edge matched. 
(2)  The plat shall contain sufficient data to enable a surveyor or engineer to duplicate the plat on the ground. 
(3)  The plat shall show: 
a.  Name of subdivision; 
b.  Location map; 
c.  Graphic scale, north arrow, date; 
d.  Total number of acres being subdivided; 
e.  Location and description of monuments and lot numbers, lot lines by bearings and distances, and lot size in square feet; 
f.  Name of streets and a designation as to whether they are public or private; 
g.  Total length of streets in the subdivision by street class (public or private); 
h.  Designation of any flood hazard areas; 
i.  Certifications in section 38-153 which are applicable; 
j.  A statement as to who is responsible for the maintenance of the private roads, if applicable; 
k.  A statement that no lot can be resubdivided without written permission from the county land development office and the county commissioner; 
l.  All drainage details; 
m.  Required right-of-way on streets; 
n.  Existing access to public right-of-way; 
o.  All disclaimers or covenants; and 
p.  A statement of compliance that construction improvements are in place; 
q.  911 address for each lot; 
r.  Description of any and all utility easements; 
s.  Certification by the Pickens County Fire Chief that fire hydrants are functional. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. III, § 3.300; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-153. - Final plat review process. 
(a)  The developer shall submit ten copies of the final plat to the county development office. The development officer shall distribute the copies as appropriate. Along with copies of the final plat, the developer shall provide the development office with all deed work applicable, blanket easements, covenants and restrictions. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to obtain the appropriate signatures on the applicable certificates. These signatures must be obtained before the county development officer can grant final plat approval to the development. 
(b)  The county development officer shall review and take action on the final plat within 20-working days of the developer notifying the county development office that all of the applicable signatures have been secured for the required certificates. Failure of the county development office to take action within this time period shall not constitute approval of the final plat if the developer is in noncompliance with any of the land development standards. 
(c)  No lot can be sold until the final plat is approved and recorded. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. III, § 3.301; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-154. - Final plat certificates. 
The following applicable certificates shall be placed on the final plat, or a cover sheet to the final plat, and be signed by the appropriate authorities prior to submission of the final plat to the county development officer for approval: 
Final Engineering Certificate 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and contains sufficient engineering information to permit the plat to be duplicated on the ground. All monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location, size and type are correctly shown. I further certify that no grades on streets exceed sixteen (16) percent and that sight distance requirements are in compliance. I further certify that all engineering requirements of the Pickens County Subdivision Standards have been complied with. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Registered Civil Engineer or  Land Surveyor License Number: _____ 
Name, address and telephone number: 

 
Certificate of Approval of Property Owners Association 
I hereby certify that I have reviewed the legal document creating the property owners association for (name of development) and I have found that the association is legally constituted and that the covenants, conditions and restrictions incorporated in the association are sufficient to ensure the continued maintenance of the commonly owned property and improvements in (name of development). 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Pickens County Attorney: ____________ 
Certificate of Approval for Private Subsurface Sewage Disposal 
I hereby certify that each lot shown hereon, unless otherwise noted, is suitable for subsurface sewage disposal. 
Before the initiation of construction, plans for the location of the house or other structures and the sewage disposal system shall be submitted to, and approved by, the Pickens County Health Department. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Pickens County Health Department Representative: ____________ 
Certificate of Approval of Streets and Drainage 
I hereby certify that all streets and drainage structures shown on this final plat have been installed in an acceptable manner and conform to the Pickens County Subdivision Standards. I further certify that ownership and maintenance of the streets designated on the plat as private streets are outlined in the attached legal document of the property owners association. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Pickens County Commissioner: ____________ 
Certificate of Approval of Water System 
The central water system in the (name of subdivision) is a (private system/public system) which has been approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division and has been accepted by the (name of public utility) or if private, a copy of the property owners association legal document guaranteeing the operation and maintenance of the system is attached. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Utility System Engineer or Private System Engineer: ____________ 
Final Certificate 
I hereby certify that this plat is true and correct and contains sufficient information to permit the plat to be duplicated on the ground. All monuments shown hereon actually exist and their location, size, and type are correctly shown. I further certify that no grades on streets exceed sixteen (16) percent and that sight distance requirements have been met. I further certify that all requirements of the Pickens County Subdivision Standards have been met. 
Certificate of Developer 
I hereby certify that all requirements of the Pickens County Land Development Standards have been met. 
____________  Developer 
Final Plat Approval 
I hereby certify that the final subdivision plat shown hereon has been properly reviewed and approved as evidenced by the signed certificates. I hereby certify that all of the requirements of the Pickens County Subdivision Standards have been met and the plat is hereby approved for recording in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Pickens County. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Pickens County Development Officer: ____________ 
Certificate of Easements 
All utilities, rights-of-way and all access both private and public have been verified, signed, and recorded in the correct name. 
Date: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Developer: ____________ 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. III, § 3.302; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 3; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-155—38-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN 

Sec. 38-176. - Suitability of the area proposed for subdividing. 
Land which the county development office find to be excessively steep (greater than 25 percent), subject to flooding, poor drainage or having adverse geologic conditions present, shall not be subdivided unless the developer through the use of engineering reports demonstrates that the measures he proposes to undertake will mitigate the adverse natural features and will not endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the land and surrounding areas and meet or exceed all Georgia laws and regulations for mountain protection. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IV, § 3.400) 
Sec. 38-177. - Conformance to other rules and regulations. 
In addition to the minimum standards outlined in this chapter, all proposed subdivisions shall comply with all applicable local and state resolutions and statutes. The county development officer will withhold approval of any subdivision which is known to be in conflict with any known regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IV, § 3.401) 
Sec. 38-178. - Restrictive covenants. 
Restrictive covenants for the subdivision shall be submitted along with the preliminary plat and shall upon approval be recorded on a separate form along with the final plat. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IV, § 3.402) 
Sec. 38-179. - Name of subdivision. 
The name of the subdivision shall be at the discretion of the subdivider so long as the name does not closely approximate the name of a previously platted subdivision in the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IV, § 3.403) 
Sec. 38-180. - Streets. 
The streets in a subdivision may be either public or private. 
(1)  All proposed public streets shall be contiguous to the existing public streets and meet the public street standards which are outlined in section 38-206 et seq. of this chapter. 
(2)  Streets proposed as private streets shall meet the private street standards as outlined in division 6 of this article. All streets which are proposed as private streets shall comply with the ownership and maintenance provisions outlined in section 38-351 of this chapter and be so noted on the final plat. 
(3)  Subdivisions having less than three acre lots must construct rollback or L-back curbing in order to contain water runoff; said rollback or L-curbing designed to channel storm runoff to drainage structures, underground culverts, and to provide adequate discharge of storm waters; all structures to meet Georgia Department of Transportation Standards. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IV, § 3.404; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6) 
Sec. 38-181. - Lots. 
All residential lots which shall hereafter be established in the county shall comply with the following lot design standards: 
(1)  City limits and lot lines. Lots created after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derived shall not be divided by corporate boundary lines. 
(2)  Lot lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines and radial to curved street lines. 
(3)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the building setback lines from both streets. 
(4)  Double frontage. Double frontage lots (i.e., lots having street frontage both in front and rear) shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from railroad or major street rights-of-way or where necessary due to topography. Where a railroad or major arterial right-of-way, as shown on the major thoroughfare plan, abuts or runs through any portion of the subdivision, the subdivision plan shall provide for either a marginal access or lots backing onto such right-of-way having a minimum depth of 200 feet. 
(5)  Building lines. Residential building setback lines shall be at least 55 feet from the centerline of the street or road. A corner lot shall meet the setback requirements of both streets. The building shall be setback from the side and rear lot lines a minimum of 15 feet. Violations of setback lines shall be subject to fines as set forth in section 38-9 and/or be subject to removal of that portion of the structure which is in violation of the setback distance. 
(6)  Lot width. The minimum lot width for residential use at the building setback line shall be as follows: 

 
Single-family ..... 110 
Duplexes ..... 150 
(7)  Panhandle or flag lots. "Panhandle" or "flag" lots, of required width and area will be allowed where terrain makes standard design or frontage impossible or impractical. Where such lots are allowed, the street frontage of each panhandle access shall not be less than 20 feet wide and the panhandle access shall be not more than 300 feet long. Not more than two such panhandle access points shall abut each other, and if so combined, the width of each panhandle may be reduced to not less than 15 feet. All such access points or combinations thereof shall be separated from each other by the frontage of a standard lot required under the other provisions of these standards. 
(8)  Lot area. Subdivision lots shall have minimum lot sizes per single-family and two-family unit use, in square feet, as follows: 

 
(9)  Street access. Every lot created after the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter derived shall have access by one of the following means: 
a.  Have direct access to and from a county maintained road or state or federal highway. 
b.  Have direct access to and from a private road meeting the private road standards set forth in section 38-206 et seq. of this chapter together with an agreement from the owner of said private road permitting the access. 
(10)  Lot depth. Residential lot depth shall not be less than 120 feet or more than four times the lot width at the building setback line. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IV, § 3.405; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6; Res. of 12-29-2000, § 3; Res. of 5-25-2001, § 1; Res. of 3-20-2004; Res. of 8-8-2006, § 2; Res. of 1-26-2007, § 1; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-182. - Easements. 
Easements may be required in subdivisions for the following purposes: 
(1)  Utility easements. When it is found to be necessary and desirable to locate public utility lines in other than the street rights-of-way, easements shall be shown on the plat for such purposes. Such easements shall not be less than 30 feet in width and where possible, shall be centered on rear or side lot lines. 
(2)  Drainage easements. Where a proposed subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, or stream, appropriate provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater and drainage through and from the proposed subdivision. Such easement shall conform substantially with the lines of such watercourse and be of sufficient width or construction, or both, as to be adequate for the purpose. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IV, § 3.406) 
Secs. 38-183—38-189. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5.1. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION 

Sec. 38-190. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this section to enable developers to assist Pickens County in achieving the goals of Pickens County Joint Comprehensive Plan and Green Space Plan by providing flexibility in ensuring preservation of open space within a master-planned residential development. A conservation subdivision design preserves open space while maintaining the pro-rated density of residential units for the overall site area. Neutral density is achieved by allowing smaller individual owned residential lots in neighborhoods that are surrounded by aesthetically and ecologically important areas. The goal of the design process is to identify and set aside conservation open space areas prior to the delineation of transportation and residential pod layouts. Open space areas include wetlands, river buffer zones, woodlands, playing fields, and meadows, depending on the resources of the land. 
(1)  The intent of the conservation subdivision regulations is to: 
a.  Preserve significant areas of land for ecological, recreational, and agricultural purposes in perpetuity; 
b.  Encourage more efficient development of land consistent with public health, safety, and general welfare; 
c.  Afford greater flexibility of design and placement of buildings and structures; 
d.  Preserve and protect exceptional terrain, natural beauty, or sites of historic interest from inconsequential placement of homes, roadways, utilities and appurtenances; 
e.  Preserve all the streams and tributaries in Pickens County as natural resources; 
f.  Prevent flooding, erosion, and water pollution, and protect the quality and quantity of drinking water; 
g.  Preserve wetlands, aquifers, topographical or soil features, marine and wildlife habitat; and other features having conservation values, including views, vistas, and indigenous vegetation; 
h.  Promote a less sprawling form of development. 
(Res. of 1-22-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 38-191. - Procedure. 
Conservation subdivisions are allowed as a permitted right in accordance with the requirements set forth in this division, 5.1, of the Pickens County Subdivision Regulation. Also, the conservation subdivision regulation is a floating zone, which is allowed within residential zoning districts in the presence of any land management regulations for Pickens County. 
(Res. of 1-22-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 38-192. - Housing density determination. 
The number of lots created shall be density neutral. Density neutral is defined as maintaining the number of lots so as not to exceed the number that can be created with the conventional minimum area and width as established in Pickens County Subdivision Regulations and any land management regulations. 
(1)  Number of lots. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the applicant: 
a.  Calculation: The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size as determined by the Pickens County Environmental Health Department (if septic is needed) or land management regulations for Pickens County for a conventional subdivision design plan. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
1.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5000 square feet contiguous area. 
2.  The 100-year floodplain. 
3.  Bodies of open water over 5000 square feet contiguous area. 
4.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act. 
5.  Roads and rights-of-way necessary for the effective movement of vehicles. 
b.  Yield plan: The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan or plat does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan or plat, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Res. of 1-22-2004, § 1; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-193. - Open space. 
(a)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument (see sections 38-193(f) and 38-193(g)). 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least 40 percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this chapter: 
a.  The 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Riparian zones of at least 75 feet width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one-acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from a distance of five feet from ground level; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic vistas such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Prime agricultural lands of at least five acres contiguous area; and 
f.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Above-ground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 25 percent of the open space shall consist of land that is suitable for building. 
(6)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space shall adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(7)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Non-adjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas, such as open fields; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Landscaped stormwater management facilities, community wastewater disposal systems and individual wastewater disposal systems located on soils particularly suited to such uses. Such facilities shall be located outside of primary conservation areas; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; 
(4)  Impoundments; or 
(5)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Disposition and preservation of open space. Open space land shall be preserved and maintained solely for the purposes specified in section 38-190(1). The method for effectuating such preservation and maintenance may be one of the following: 
(1)  Establishment of a mandatory Home Owners Association (HOA) to own and maintain the land in common for the open space purposes intended according to the following provisions (See suggestions for the HOA in Appendix 38-190-I): 
a.  With their application for a permit to build a conservation subdivision, developers will create and submit minimum requirements and structure for the HOA before the first lot is sold; 
b.  The HOA will maintain, pay taxes, and own the open space. (In some communities the local government has agreed to maintain the open space.); 
c.  Membership in the HOA is mandatory for all homeowners, and dues are uniform; and 
d.  The HOA, by law, will stipulate that a third party, such as the local government, may enforce the maintenance of the open space through legally enforceable liens. 
(2)  Dedication of legally described and platted "open space" to a land trust established in compliance with the requirements of Georgia law and shall be for conservation purposes. 
(f)  Open space ownership and maintenance. The Pickens County Commissioner shall require the owner or owners of open space land to execute, acknowledge, and file in the land records of Pickens County, including documents and maps which effectively create a conservation easement or other legal conveyance approved by the county or its designee. These records (see legal considerations in section 38-193(7) and suggestions for open space in Appendix 38-190-I): 
(1)  Will be binding on all future owners of the open space land; 
(2)  May be enforced by the adjoining property owners, the Pickens County Commissioner, or a land trust by appropriate court action for equitable relief in the form of an injunction; 
(3)  Will assure appropriate maintenance by the homeowners' association or as otherwise herein provided, of open space land to the satisfaction of the Pickens County Commissioner; 
(4)  Will provide that if maintenance, preservation, and/or use of the open space land no longer complies with the provisions of the easement, Pickens County may take all necessary action to effect compliance and assess the costs against the owners in default; and 
(5)  Will provide that such easement may not be modified, altered, or amended. 
(g)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following. 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry out its functions; or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this article. 
b.  If the entity accepting the easement is not Pickens County, then a third right of enforcement favoring Pickens County shall be included in the easement. 
c.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity. 
d.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by Pickens County. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions and permitted uses contained in sections 38-193(c) and 38-193(d), as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(h)  Septic systems, wells, and storm water management systems. Easements will allow designated open space to be used for community sewer system drip lines or individual septic system secondary drain lines, wells, and storm water management structures designed to promote on-site infiltration and/or treatment of runoff. 
(i)  Significant structures. Structures of historic, architectural, or cultural significance existing prior to development of the subdivision may be retained within the open space, subject to approval indicating that these structures are compatible with any Pickens County Land Development Regulations. 
(Res. of 1-22-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 38-194. - Road specification. 
Design standards for road construction in a conservation subdivision shall be consistent with those set forth in the Pickens County Road Design and Specifications. 
(1)  Road locations. 
a.  Roads should be located in a way that minimizes adverse impacts to primary and secondary conservation areas. 
b.  To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes over 15 percent shall be strongly discouraged. 
(Res. of 1-22-2004, § 1) 
Sec. 38-195. - Locations of building sites. 
As long as the number of buildings meet the density neutral criterion set in section 38-192 it is intended that developers are given flexibility on building locations based on environmental factors and the types of developments the market will bear. 
(1)  Building locations considerations. The Pickens County Land Development Officer shall evaluate the appropriateness of proposed building locations on conceptual preliminary plans or plats to determine whether the proposed locations satisfy considerations listed in Appendix 38-190-III. 
a.  Building sites should generally not be any closer than 100 feet from primary conservation areas. 
b.  Building sites can be located within 50 feet of secondary conservation areas in order to take advantage of views without negatively impacting primary conservation areas. 
c.  Building "footprint" locations may not be changed more than 50 feet from preliminary plat to final plat without the Pickens County Land Development Officer approval. 
(Res. of 1-22-2004, § 1) 
Secs. 38-196—38-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - STREETS 

Sec. 38-206. - Purpose. 
This division outlines the design and construction standards for public and private roads constructed in subdivisions in the county after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V) 
Sec. 38-207. - Continuation of existing street pattern. 
Wherever topography will permit, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall provide for the alignment and continuation or projection of existing streets in adjoining areas. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.500) 
Sec. 38-208. - Cul-de-sacs. 
Cul-de-sacs shall terminate in a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter and a minimum outside diameter surface width of 80 feet. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.501) 
Sec. 38-209. - Access to arterials and collectors. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed arterial or collector route, as defined on the Georgia DOT Functional Classification Map, the county development officer shall require that access to such street be limited by: 
(1)  The subdivision of lots so as to back on the arterial or collector route and front on a parallel minor route; 
(2)  A series of cul-de-sacs, "U" shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel street, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the arterial or collector route; or 
(3)  A marginal access or service street, separated from the arterial or collector route by a planting or grass strip and having access thereto at suitable points. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.502; Res. of 11-14-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 38-210. - Access from a state highway. 
All developments which are proposed to be accessed from a state maintained highway must submit plans to the Georgia Department of Transportation office in Cartersville, Georgia and have such plans approved before the development will be approved by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.503) 
Sec. 38-211. - Reserve strips. 
The creation of reserve strips adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to such street shall generally not be permitted. However, in extraordinary circumstances the county development officer may allow creation of a reserve strip to enable a more appropriate pattern of lots or streets. Where such is created the county commissioner must agree to any and all future depositions of the reserve strips. A notation to this effect shall be entered on the final plat or approved as an auxiliary instrument attached thereto. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.504) 
Sec. 38-212. - Arrangement of continuing and dead-end streets. 
Where a subdivision will contain temporary or permanent dead-end streets they shall be designed as follows: 
(1)  Arrangement of continuing streets. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of major streets between adjacent properties when such continuation is necessary for convenient movements of traffic, effective fire protection, efficient provisions of utilities, and when such continuation is in accordance with the major street or road plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must be a dead-end street temporarily, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary cul-de-sac, temporary "T", or "Y" shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets as required in the following turnabout standards, with a notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abutting property owners whenever the street is continued. The county development officer may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of this division. 
(2)  Dead-end streets. Where a street does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the county development officer for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the county development officer may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.505) 
Sec. 38-213. - Intersections. 
Intersections of new streets in a subdivision shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be permitted. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the county development officer. 
(2)  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall coincide, wherever practicable, with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Jogs within streets having center line offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected streets have separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect arterial or collector routes, their alignment shall be continuous. Intersections of arterial or collector streets shall be at least 800 feet apart. 
(3)  Minimum curve radius at the intersection of two minor streets shall be 40 feet, and minimum curve radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be 30 feet. Alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
(4)  Where a street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the subdivider shall cut such ground or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the street right-of-way to the extent necessary to provide adequate site distance. 
(5)  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent grade for a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.506) 
Sec. 38-214. - Additional right-of-way on proposed streets. 
The right-of-way widths in section 38-223 are minimums, and in areas of cut or fill the right-of-way must be increased two feet for each one foot of material removed for the cut or added for the fill. This additional right-of-way must be added to the side or sides where the cut or fill takes place. The minimum allowable degree of slope on a back slope shall be 1.5 to 1 and on a fill slope, the degree of slope shall be 2 to 1. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.507) 
Sec. 38-215. - Additional width on existing streets. 
In subdivisions that adjoin existing streets, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the minimum street width requirements as follows: 
(1)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the street. 
(2)  When the subdivision is located on one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.508) 
Sec. 38-216. - Street names. 
Streets or roads that are extensions of, or obviously in alignment with, existing named streets, shall bear that name. The names of new streets and roads shall be subject to the approval of the Pickens County 911 Department and shall not duplicate or be similar in sound to existing names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, circle, way, boulevard, drive, place, or court. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.509; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-217. - Railroads and limited access highways. 
Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways, where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands, shall be treated as follows: 
(1)  In residential areas, a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normally required depth of the lot may be required adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening; the placement of structures hereon is prohibited." 
(2)  In commercial or industrial areas, the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever practical, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to ensure suitable depth of commercial or industrial sites. 
(3)  Streets parallel to a railroad, when intersecting a street which crosses the railroad at grade, shall to the extent practical, be at a distance of at least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradients. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.510) 
Sec. 38-218. - Bridges. 
(a)  Bridges of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the county commissioner, shall be constructed at the full expense of the subdivider without reimbursement from the county. The sharing of expenses for the construction of bridges not of primary benefit to the subdivider, as determined by the county commissioner, shall be fixed by special agreement between the county and the subdivider. The cost shall be charged to the subdivider pro rata as to the percentage of his development so served. 
(b)  The engineering design of all bridges shall be submitted to the county commissioner for review and approval prior to construction. The county commissioner may consult with the county engineer, other consultants, or state agencies on the design of proposed bridges. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.511) 
Sec. 38-219. - Half streets. 
Half streets are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.512) 
Sec. 38-220. - Split level streets. 
Streets which are constructed so as to have two traffic ways, each at different levels within the same right-of-way shall provide a right-of-way of 32 feet and such additional right-of-way as necessary to meet the requirements of section 38-213 and a paved traffic surface of 12 feet. The slope between the two traffic ways would not be less than 2 to 1 and have a minimum shoulder width of four feet on each side. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.513) 
Sec. 38-221. - One-way streets. 
If permitted by the county development officer, one-way streets shall meet the minimum right-of-way and pavement and shoulder widths of a split-level street. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.514) 
Sec. 38-222. - Alleys. 
Alleys or service drives may be required at the rear of all lots used for multifamily, commercial, or industrial developments but shall not be provided in one- and two-family residential developments unless the alley or service drive is to provide secondary access to a lot (lots) whose natural grade is (are) more than 12 feet above the finished street grade, or unless the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the county development officer of the need for an alley or service drive. Subdivisions over five acres in area in which all or some of the lots are located along an existing county road shall be required to place a service drive or alley to access the lots, and if so, this private road shall be maintained by the owners of the lots and shall meet county standards for private roads. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.515; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6; Res. of 11-14-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 38-223. - Geometric design standards for streets. 

 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.516; Res. of 5-25-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 38-224. - Right-of-way, surface width and type, and shoulder requirements for all streets. 
Proposed Pickens County Minimum Paving Requirements 

 
All residential development accessing a county road must meet minimum AASHTO Standards for accel/decel lanes, entrances and paving. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.517; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6; Res. of 5-25-2001, § 1; Res. of 1-26-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 38-225. - Inspections. 
The developer shall coordinate his road construction with the county development office. The base grading, drainage and utilities shall be approved by the county development office before any surface base shall be applied to the road by test roll method or any test necessary to determine compliance. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.518) 
Sec. 38-226. - Minimum surface type; public and private roads. 
All roads shall have a base of six inches of graded aggregate base compacted to a maximum density of 100 percent compaction. The material shall be deposited and spread by means of a spreader box or other approved mechanical equipment and compacted with a roller at the proper moisture content. The base shall be covered with prime coat asphalt. The materials and construction methods shall comply with the latest Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications For Construction of Roads and Bridges. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.519; Res. of 1-26-2007, § 1) 
Sec. 38-227. - Drainage. 
(a)  Water shall be diverted across the road by the use of pipe. Coated corrugated steel pipe is acceptable if properly installed. The pipe shall be a minimum of two feet below the bottom of the road base. The backfill material shall be clean and solidly tamped about the pipe. The discharge end of the cross drain shall be stabilized using rip-rap rock for a distance of eight times the diameter of the pipe. 
(b)  All driveways, roads, entrances or other access points made onto county and private roads must have a properly installed pipe to promote and/or allow proper drainage under such entrance. The pipe shall be of sufficient size to carry expected amounts of runoff. However, it shall in no case be smaller than 15 inches in diameter. The pipe shall be a minimum of 20 feet in length. The pipe shall be installed according to standard industry standards and covered with sufficient fill to support expected loads. 
(c)  The pipe length for entrance roads and other access points will be determined so as to provide a minimum five feet of shoulder on each side of the required roadway width. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.520) 
Sec. 38-228. - Stabilizing the right-of-way. 
The right-of-way shall be stabilized as specified in the soil erosion and sedimentation control plan before final plat approval will be granted. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.521) 
Sec. 38-229. - Signs. 
The developer shall install street name signs, traffic control signs and any other signs deemed necessary by the county development officer. The sign design, material and method of installation shall be approved by the county commissioner. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.522) 
Sec. 38-230. - Monuments. 
The subdivider shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required in this section and as approved by a licensed surveyor. Monuments shall be located and set as follows: 
(1)  Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections and at the beginning and ending points of curves. 
(2)  The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete not less than four feet in length; not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter; and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded. These monuments shall be placed not more than 2,400 feet apart. 
(3)  All lot corners not following on any of the points described in subsection (2) of this section shall be marked by iron rods, pipe, or pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter. 
(4)  The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pins at least 18 inches long and five-eighths inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 18 inches long. Such pins shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream and lot line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
(5)  All monuments and pins shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a surveyor or an engineer engaged in the practice of civil engineering prior to the time the county development officer approves the final plat or release of the bond where bond is made in lieu of improvements. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. V, § 3.523) 
Sec. 38-231. - Maintenance and classification of roads/streets. 
(a)  All subdivision streets shall be deemed private streets or roads until such time as the street or road is accepted by the county commissioner as a part of the county road system and a right-of-way deed is appropriately executed and recorded in the Office of Clerk of Superior Court of Pickens County, Georgia and in the Minutes of the Office of the Commissioner of Pickens County. 
(b)  All public improvements constructed within the subdivision shall be maintained by the developer for a period of two years after final plat approval. Thereafter, the maintenance of such public improvements shall be the responsibility of the property owners association as such associations are provided for in section 38-351. 
(c)  The county shall not be obligated to accept any subdivision road into the county system. No road shall be accepted by the county commissioner as part of the county road system until the following has occurred: 
(1)  The expiration of two years from the date of the final plat approval. 
(2)  A satisfactory inspection by the county engineer of the road construction. Said inspection will not occur until requested by the owner of the road. 
(3)  All taxes assessed against the road are paid. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-232—38-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - UTILITIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 74. 

Sec. 38-251. - Water. 
(a)  When the county development officer determines that public water is within a reasonable distance of the subdivision, the developer shall be required to extend the water system into his development at his expense. The water extension shall be approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division and installed according to the standards set by the utility. Each subdivision which uses public water shall at a minimum have one fire hydrant at the entrance to the subdivision, and more may be required by the county development officer and/or the Pickens County Fire Department as deemed necessary based on density and water line capacity. 
(b)  A private water system shall be approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. All private water systems shall have a minimum of one centrally located fire hydrant per four units or lots, shall comply with the ownership and maintenance provisions outlined in section 38-351 et seq. of this chapter, and shall meet or exceed the county water department standards for materials and installation. 
(c)  When a water main is located in a street right-of-way and it will be necessary to cut into the street surface to serve the abutting lots, a connection shall be stubbed out to the property line to serve each lot before the street base is applied. 
(d)  When an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal facilities in excess of 10,000-gallon capacity is proposed, the requirements of chapter 34, article ii, division 3 must be complied with. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. VI, § 3.600; Res. of 8-8-2006, § 2; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-252. - Electric and telephone systems. 
The developer will contact the electric co-op and telephone company during the design phase of the subdivision to work out the details of where the service lines will be run. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. VI, § 3.601) 
Sec. 38-253. - Underground utility placement. 
All underground utility placement shall comply with the "Utility Placement Detail" as attached hereto and made a part hereof. This shall require a dedicated 13-foot easement between curb line and property line and curbs at final grade before utility placement. 

(Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-254—38-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - MAINTENANCE SECURITY 

Sec. 38-276. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6, repealed § 38-276, which pertained to requirement for security and derived from Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. VII, § 3.700. 
Secs. 38-277—38-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PERFORMANCE SECURITY 

Sec. 38-301. - Purpose. 
In lieu of the completion of the required improvements necessary for final plat approval, the county commissioner may accept a bond or letter of credit in a form and amount satisfactory to him, providing for and securing to the county the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a specified period of time, not to exceed one year. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. VIII, § 3.800) 
Sec. 38-302. - Letter of credit requirements. 
The developer shall provide to the county development officer from a bank or other reputable institution, subject to the approval of the county commissioner, a letter of credit using the forms which follow. This letter shall be deposited with the clerk of superior court and shall certify the following: 
(1)  That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount equal to the cost, as estimated by the developer and approved by the county commissioner, of completing all required improvements. 
(2)  That, in the case of failure on the part of the developer to complete the specified improvements within the required time period, the creditor shall pay to the county commissioner immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. 
(3)  That the letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released by the county commissioner. 
PICKENS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
LETTER OF CREDIT - DEVELOPER'S FORM 
WHEREAS ____________ Principal herein, is the owner and developer of the ____________ Subdivision, Unit ____________ , located in Pickens County, Georgia; and 
WHEREAS the Preliminary Plat plans and specifications of said Subdivision showing the location, construction, and installation of improvements therein have been filed with and approved by the County Commissioner, and which are hereby referred to and made part of this instrument, as if fully copied and set forth herein; and, 
WHEREAS the Principal herein does hereby obligate itself and does agree to complete the construction and installation of said improvements in the said Subdivision in accordance with the said Preliminary Plat plans and specifications now on file, and as bounded and modified by the final plat of ____________ Subdivision, Unit ____________ , approved by said Commission. 
NOW THEREFORE, ____________ , as Principal, does hereby firmly bind itself, its heirs, executors, administrators, and successors and assigns unto the Pickens County Commission in the sum of $ ____________ , conditioned upon Subdivision, Unit ____________ , in the construction and installation of all improvements herein called for, the same improvements to be completed on or before the day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ , and upon the completion thereof this obligation to be null and void, otherwise to remain in full force and effect. 
If the Principal fails to complete the construction and installation of all the improvements of said Subdivision as shown and provided for by said plans and specifications herein referred to or has not obtained an extension of the above completion date prior to the completion date herein above specified, then the County Commissioner shall be entitled to perform the construction and installation of the improvements herein above referred to and the Principal shall pay or cause to be paid to the County Commissioner such sums as may be necessary to complete said improvements, as secured by an irrevocable Letter of Credit, terminating no sooner than ____________ weeks after the completion date for said improvements above mentioned, executed with this instrument, but not to exceed the amount referred to herein. 
WITNESS OUR HANDS this the ____________ day of ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , ____________ 

 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. VIII, § 3.801) 
Sec. 38-303. - Time limits. 
Prior to the granting of final plat approval, the developer and the county development officer shall agree upon a deadline for the completion of all required improvements, such deadline not to exceed one year from the date of final plat approval. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. VIII, § 3.802) 
Sec. 38-304. - Release of guarantee. 
Upon acceptance by the appropriate official of the dedication of the final portion of improvements, the county commission shall authorize the release of the letter of credit. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. VIII, § 3.803) 
Secs. 38-305—38-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - VARIANCES 

Sec. 38-326. - Variances; recommendations and granting. 
The developer shall make a request in writing for a variance from the land development regulations described in this chapter 38 to the county development office. The county development office shall make a study of the variance request and make a recommendation to the board of appeals who shall have the authority to grant the variance. 
The county development office shall have the authority to grant variances at the administrative level on matters regarding the distances required between a building and the boundary lines of the property as well as vegetative buffers. A denial of this type of variance request may be appealed to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. IX, § 3.900; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-327—38-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - PROPERTY OWNERS ASSOCIATIONS 

Sec. 38-351. - Property owners association required for commonly owned improvements in a private development. 
(a)  All commonly owned property (i.e.: private streets, recreation areas, private water systems, and other improvements) shall be owned, managed and maintained by a legally constituted property owners association. The legal document creating the property owners association shall be approved by the county attorney before the final plat will be approved by the county development officer. 
(b)  At a minimum, the legal document creating the property owners association shall contain provisions for: 
(1)  Mandatory membership of all property owners; 
(2)  Provisions for insuring that the necessary revenues are collected from the members to maintain the facilities; 
(3)  A deed from the developer shall be made to the property owners association making the association the sole owner of all private roads, recreation areas, water systems and other improvements; 
(4)  Rules and regulations on how the association shall conduct its business; and 
(5)  Acknowledgement that certain public services may not be provided by the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. III, art. X) 
Secs. 38-352—38-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE HOME PARKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 38-381. - Purpose and intent. 
The regulations and standards established in this article are made for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the community. They are designed to promote desirable living conditions; to sustain the stability of neighborhoods; to protect property against blight and depreciation; to secure economy in governmental expenditures; to prevent overcrowding of land; to secure safety from fires, flooding, and other dangers; and to lessen congestion in the streets. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. I) 
Secs. 38-382—38-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCATION, SITE AND DESIGN CRITERIA FOR MOBILE HOME PARKS 

Sec. 38-401. - Application of article. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to all new mobile home parks throughout the county. Before an applicant initiates any construction or development of a proposed mobile home park, or expansion of an existing mobile home park, such applicant shall first submit a proposed mobile home park plan to the county development office pursuant to the requirements of section 38-431 et seq. The county development officer will subsequently review and approve or disapprove the proposed mobile home park as specifically provided for in section 38-431 et seq. The following sections of this division shall serve as criteria and guidelines upon which the county development officer's review and decision shall be based. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.200) 
Sec. 38-402. - Park planning site designs and development criteria. 
All mobile home parks shall be planned, designed, and developed to meet or exceed conditions and factors conducive to the creation and maintenance of a healthful and safe residential environment. This should be done in such a manner that the quality of the overall environment is optimized and the amenities, facilities, service, and conveniences for the residents are maximized. To achieve these conditions, the design of the park should also be adaptive to the tract of land and its surroundings, especially with respect to topography, trees and vegetation, visual conditions, adjacent land uses, structures and activities. In order to meet these goals, objectives, and purposes all mobile home parks shall meet or exceed the criteria contained in the following sections. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.201) 
Sec. 38-403. - Site grading and drainage. 
Mobile home parks shall be properly graded and drained to provide adequate drainage of each space and the entire park. Any necessary drainage improvements shall be installed according to plans and specifications approved by the county development officer. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.202) 
Sec. 38-404. - Minimum mobile home space and yard requirements. 
(a)  In order to ensure adequate space for privacy, normal and emergency access, natural light, air, and human circulation, and a healthy and safe environment, the following area and yard requirements shall be provided for each mobile home space in a park: 

 
(b)  There shall be a 40-foot clearance between mobile homes, including mobile homes parked end to end. 
(c)  No mobile home shall be located closer than 50 feet to any building or street within the park, or 50 feet of any public rights-of-way and any boundary line of the park. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.203) 
Sec. 38-405. - Improvements to mobile home spaces. 
(a)  Each mobile home space in a park shall have a permanent mobile home stand of suitable material to support the mobile home. The size of the stand shall be equal in length and width to the size of the mobile home located upon it. 
(b)  The chassis of each mobile home shall be supported on adequate masonry foundation which shall meet minimum requirements of the state building code. 
(c)  Each mobile home space shall be clearly delineated on the ground with permanent markers such as steel pipes at the intersection of lot lines. Each space shall be given a lot number and marked accordingly to be visible from the street providing access thereto. 
(d)  Each mobile home shall be anchored to the ground by methods approved by the mobile home manufacturers association. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.204) 
Sec. 38-406. - Parking. 
Each mobile home space shall be provided two offstreet paved parking spaces. Such spaces shall be provided on or adjacent to each mobile home space. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.205) 
Sec. 38-407. - Signs. 
The following nonflashing and nonanimated signs are permitted under the conditions specified: 
(1)  Park identification sign. One park identification sign shall be permitted not to exceed 24 square feet in area for the purpose of denoting the name of the mobile home park; 
(2)  Mobile home identification sign. One mobile home identification sign not exceeding one square foot in area shall be permitted for each mobile home. Such sign shall indicate only the name and address of the occupant of the mobile home. 
(3)  Location of signs. No sign shall be located so as to impede vehicular visibility at any intersection of street lines with one another or the edge of driveways with street lines. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.206) 
Sec. 38-408. - Streets, utilities and refuse collection. 
All mobile home parks shall provide streets, underground utilities, and refuse collection facilities. The quality, design, and location of all such systems shall be done in such a manner so as to maximize the health and safety of occupants and users, and shall conform to the following: 
(1)  Streets and access. All mobile home parks shall be provided a street system designed to provide convenient circulation within the park, and shall have unobstructed access to a public street or highway. 
a.  Streets proposed for dedication to county shall meet the applicable requirements of section 38-207 et seq. 
b.  All private streets within the mobile home park shall meet the applicable requirements of section 38-207 et seq., and shall be maintained in a good state of repair by the owner of the park. 
(2)  Street lighting. All interior drives and walkways within the mobile home park shall be lighted at night with electric lamps spaced at intervals of no more than 300 feet. Such lighting shall meet the minimum requirements of the state building code. 
(3)  Electrical supply. Each mobile home space shall be provided with an electrical outlet supplying a minimum of 120/240 volts AC at 200 amperes. All outlets and connections shall be grounded and weather-proofed, and installations shall meet the requirements of the state electrical code. 
(4)  Water supply. All mobile home parks shall be required to provide an adequate, safe, and potable supply of water that is easily accessible for maintenance and meets the following minimum requirements: 
a.  All mobile home parks shall connect to an existing public water system that is adjacent to or nearby the mobile home park. 
b.  Each mobile home space shall be provided with at least one frost proof water riser located and arranged to permit convenient attachment to the mobile home. Riser pipes shall extend at least four inches above grade and have a minimum inside diameter of three-quarter inches. 
c.  Each mobile home park shall have a minimum of one fire hydrant for every four mobile home spaces. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.207) 
Sec. 38-409. - Sewage disposal and treatment. 
All mobile home parks shall be required to provide a method of sewage disposal and treatment which meets the minimum requirements of the county health department. Where economically feasible, mobile home parks shall connect to an existing approved public or quasipublic sewer system that is adjacent to or nearby the mobile home park. Where such connection is not feasible, the applicant shall provide a treatment system consisting of one of the following: 
(1)  A central treatment system which provides primary, secondary, and tertiary treatment of all effluent from the mobile home park, and meets the minimum discharge requirements of the department of natural resources and environmental protection division in addition to the following requirements: 
a.  Such a system shall have a design capacity or the maximum possible population of the park. Such treatment facility shall also be located, protected, and screened in such a way that it will not create a nuisance, health hazard, or detraction from either the park or surrounding property or activities; 
b.  All sewer lines shall be placed and covered sufficiently below grade to prevent breakage from pressures exerted from above. The entire system shall provide for a minimum disposal and treatment capacity of 350 gallons per day per mobile home space; or 
(2)  Individual septic tank systems which meet the minimum requirements of the county health department and conform to the department of human resources "On-site Sewage Management Systems," Chapter 290-5-26. 
a.  Such systems shall be designed so that mobile homes, driveways, parking spaces, streets, underground utilities, water lines, etc. do not cross septic tank and drain field lines nor come closer than ten feet to the septic tank and drain field lines. 
b.  Prior to approval of such systems, the developer must submit to the county health department a mobile home park plan which shows proposed layout of lots, street locations, wells, if any, and soil percolation test data which is signed by a registered surveyor or engineer. 
c.  The health department, after review of proposed plans, and soil percolation data may require larger lot sizes than the minimum specified in Table 1 of section 38-181. 
(3)  All mobile home spaces shall be provided with at least a three-inch diameter sewer riser pipe which shall extend from the sewer connection to at least four inches above the ground in a vertical position. When lots are unoccupied, the risers shall be securely capped. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.208) 
Sec. 38-410. - General requirements. 
(a)  Service buildings. Service buildings such as shelters, restrooms, management offices and storage facilities are permitted in each mobile home park and are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Such buildings and their parking areas shall not occupy more than ten percent of the gross land area of the park; 
(2)  All service buildings shall be required to conform to the state building codes. 
(b)  Minimum size of mobile homes. No mobile home shall be placed in a mobile home park which has less than 600 square feet of floor space and does not contain a built-in bathroom with water closet, lavatory and shower or tub which are in working condition. 
(c)  Vector control. Mobile home park owners shall be required to exercise vector control to ensure that no disease-transmitting organism is present in the park. The county health officer, may at any time, require a park owner to take certain measures to ensure healthful and safe conditions. 
(d)  Maintenance of mobile homes and mobile home spaces. All mobile homes shall be underpinned, anchored down and be kept in a good state of repair. The area around each mobile home shall be kept clean and free from collections of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles, or other unsightly materials. Unoccupied mobile home spaces shall be kept clear of debris, and shall not be used as temporary storage of damaged mobile homes, automobiles under repair, appliances, or other similar items. 
(e)  Mobile home storage. The temporary storage of mobile homes intended for sale or repair shall be confined to mobile home sales lots or warehouses which are separated from the residential areas of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. II, § 5.209) 
Secs. 38-411—38-430. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 38-431. - Administration and provisions. 
The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the county development office. The provisions of this division are intended as legal guidelines and requirements for the establishment and operation of the administration of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III) 
Sec. 38-432. - Development permits required. 
It shall be unlawful to develop, construct, locate, operate, expand, or enlarge any mobile home park, without first obtaining a mobile home development permit from the county development office. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III, § 5.300) 
Sec. 38-433. - Permits for mobile home parks. 
In order to obtain a development permit for a mobile home park, the applicant shall first submit an application and plan to the county development officer according to the following procedures: 
(1)  Preapplication review. Prior to the submittal of a preliminary plan for the development of a mobile home park, the applicant shall meet with the health department staff for a review of the location, scope, and nature of the proposed mobile home park. 
(2)  Submission of preliminary plan. Prior to making any street improvements or installing any utilities, or other improvements, the developer shall submit five copies of a preliminary plan prepared in accordance to the provisions of this chapter to the county development officer. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet and include the following information: 
a.  Name of proposed park; name and address of owner; and name and address of surveyor or registered engineer. 
b.  Date, north arrow, and scale. 
c.  The boundary line of the tract to be developed with accurate linear and angular dimensions. 
d.  Sketch map showing general location of the proposed mobile home park. 
e.  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than 20 feet. 
f.  The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipe, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on that portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land, and the names of adjoining subdivisions or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land. 
g.  The location and dimensions of proposed streets, mobile home spaces or lots, easements, buildings, parking, recreation areas, yards, and other open spaces. 
h.  Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information required by the county health department to determine that water, sewer, electricity, refuse collection, and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
i.  The location, dimensions, and treatment of all required buffer or screening areas. 
j.  Other information required by the county development officer to insure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III, § 5.301) 
Sec. 38-434. - Approval/disapproval of preliminary plan. 
The county development officer shall have 30 days from the date of preliminary plan submission to approve or disapprove the preliminary plan for the proposed mobile home park. Failure of the development officer to act within 30 days shall be deemed approval of such plan. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III, § 5.302) 
Sec. 38-435. - Submission of final plan. 
(a)  Approval of the preliminary plan by the county development officer shall authorize the developer to proceed with actual construction and development of the proposed mobile home park. Upon completion of all required improvements, the developer shall submit the original and five copies of a final plan to the county development officer. The final plan shall conform substantially to the preliminary plan and shall meet all requirements of this article. The final plan shall be drawn on reproducible material to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name of mobile home park. 
(2)  Name and address of owner. 
(3)  Scale, north arrow, and date. 
(4)  Location sketch map. 
(5)  Sufficient data to determine readily on the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street line, boundary line, and lot lines; and location of each mobile home and buildings. 
(6)  Final plan of sewage treatment system including location and size of sewer lines, septic tanks, drain fields, and points of discharge (if applicable). 
(7)  Final plan of storm sewer system with grade, pipe sizes, and location of outlets. 
(8)  Final plan of the water supply system including location and size of water lines, wells, storage tanks, and pumping stations, if any. 
(9)  Final plan of buffer areas and screening, if required. 
(10)  Final plan of the refuse collection system including size and location of dumpsters. 
(b)  The final plan shall also include the following certifications: 
(1)  Certification by a registered engineer or surveyor attesting to the accuracy of the plan. 
(2)  Certification by the county health department that the water supply and sewerage systems fully meet the requirements of the health department. Any specific lots which do not meet the requirements shall be identified. 
(3)  Certification by the county highway department that all streets, and storm drainage improvements have been installed. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III, § 5.303) 
Sec. 38-436. - Approval of final plan. 
Within 30 days after submission of the final plan together with all required supporting data and certifications, the development officer shall review and approve or disapprove the plan. Failure of the development officer to act within 30 days shall be deemed approval of such plan. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III, § 5.304) 
Sec. 38-437. - Development compliance. 
(a)  At least 100 percent of each phase of all planned spaces, as well as all streets, utilities, and other required improvements necessary to serve them pursuant to these regulations must be completely constructed according to the mobile home park plan approved by the development officer before the first mobile home location permit will be issued. 
(b)  Failure of the developer or applicant to construct this minimum phase within two years after approval by the development officer shall cause such approval to expire. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III, § 5.305) 
Sec. 38-438. - Inspection of mobile home parks. 
(a)  The health officer and/or development officer or their representative are hereby authorized and directed to make annual inspections to determine the condition of mobile home parks located within the county. 
(b)  The health officer and/or development officer or their representative shall have the power to enter at reasonable time upon any private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcements of this article. 
(c)  The health officer and/or development officer shall have the power to inspect the register containing a record of all mobile homes and occupants using the mobile home park. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile home parks, or of the person in charge thereof, to give the health officer and/or development officer free access to such premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of every occupant of a mobile home park to give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such mobile home park or its premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with this article, or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. III, § 5.306) 
Secs. 38-439—38-458. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL MANUFACTURED/MOBILE/MODULAR HOMES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of Aug. 26, 2010, §§ 1—6, repealed the former §§ 38-461—38-464, and enacted new §§ 38-459—38-464 as set out herein. The former §§ 38-461—38-464 derived from Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. IV, §§ 5.400—5.403. 

Sec. 38-459. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the unincorporated area of Pickens County. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the county building official or any of his or her assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this division, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the unincorporated areas of Pickens County, Georgia. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Res. of 8-26-2010, § 1) 
Sec. 38-460. - Conditions. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, et seq. 
(Res. of 8-26-2010, § 2) 
Sec. 38-461. - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy and fees. 
A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
(a)  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the county planning and development office the following items: 
(1)  A valid location decal must be issued by the county tax commissioner. 
(2)  A sanitary permit must be obtained from the county health department for onsite sewage disposal, or in the event that a municipality will provide sewer hook-up, a letter must be provided by that municipality verifying that they will allow public sewer hook-up. 
(3)  Satisfactory pre-move inspection, completed either by a county building inspector or by a Georgia licensed residential home inspector. Such pre-move inspection shall demonstrate compliance with section 38-462 of this division. 
(4)  An affidavit from the owner of the real property upon which the home is to be placed, stating that the placement of the home is agreeable with them and acknowledgement of responsibility for all aspects of having the home placed on said property. 
(5)  An affidavit from the licensed manufactured home mover who moves the home and certifies that the home will be placed in accordance with all applicable rules and laws and that such work will be done in accordance with standard level of care and timeliness that is normally expected of such work. 
(6)  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (d) of this section. 
(b)  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
(c)  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this division have been met. 
(d)  Fee. A permit and inspection fee (see planning and development fee schedule) shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the county to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one followup inspection. The applicant shall be charged (see planning and development fee schedule) for each additional followup inspection that may be necessary. 
(Res. of 8-26-2010, § 3) 
Sec. 38-462. - Minimum health and safety standards. 
All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(a)  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(b)  Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(c)  Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(d)  Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(e)  Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Un-vented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
(g)  Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(h)  Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
(i)  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(j)  Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(Res. of 8-26-2010, § 4) 
Sec. 38-463. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(Res. of 8-26-2010, § 5) 
Sec. 38-464. - Penalties. 
Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00. Each day any violation under this division continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Res. of 8-26-2010, § 6) 
Sec. 38-465. - Location. 
All manufactured homes not in a mobile home park shall comply with section 38-181(5) of this Code. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. IV, § 5.404; Res. of 5-25-2001, § 1) 
Sec. 38-466. - Tiedown requirements. 
All manufactured homes shall be secured in accordance with the tiedown requirements approved by the mobile home manufacturers association. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. V, art. IV, § 5.405) 
Secs. 38-467—38-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of Aug. 26, 2010, Arts. 1—6, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 38-501—38-512, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained floods and derived from Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VI, art. I, art. II, §§ 6.200—6.208, art. III, §§ 6.300, 6.301. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 38-501. - Authorization. 
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the sole Commissioner, of Pickens County, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 1, § A) 
Sec. 38-502. - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Pickens County, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 1, § B) 
Sec. 38-503. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 1, § C) 
Sec. 38-504. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 1, § D) 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 38-505. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Pickens County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § A) 
Sec. 38-506. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 29, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Pickens County are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: 
1266 E. Church Street, Suite 136  Jasper, GA 30143. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § B) 
Sec. 38-507. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § C) 
Sec. 38-508. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § D) 
Sec. 38-509. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § E) 
Sec. 38-510. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § F) 
Sec. 38-511. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § G) 
Sec. 38-512. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 60 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 2, § H) 
Secs. 38-513—38-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 38-521. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
The county land development control officer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 3, § A) 
Sec. 38-522. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the county land development control officer on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 38-532(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The county land development control officer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 3, § B) 
Sec. 38-523. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the county land development control officer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 38-506, then the county land development control officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 38-522(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 38-522(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the county land development control officer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 38-522(1)c. and subsection 38-532(2) or subsection 38-534(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the county land development control officer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the county land development control officer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 3, § C) 
Secs. 38-524—38-530. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 38-531. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  Onsite waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 4, § A) 
Sec. 38-532. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-531(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 38-523(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (Reference subsection 38-531(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a—c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-506, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of division 4. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 4, § B) 
Sec. 38-533. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-506, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 38-506, then the county land development control officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-531(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The county land development control officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 4, § C) 
Sec. 38-534. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-506, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 38-532. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 4, § D) 
Sec. 38-535. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 38-506, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 38-531(4), "elevated buildings". 
The county land development control officer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsection 38-522(1)c. and subsection 38-522(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 4, § E) 
Sec. 38-536. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 4, § F) 
Sec. 38-537. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 4, § G) 
Secs. 38-538—38-540. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 38-541. - Variances. 
(a)  The county board of appeals as established by Pickens County shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the county land development control officer in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals may appeal such decision to the county superior court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The county land development control officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 5) 
Secs. 38-542—38-544. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 38-545. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the county land development control officer's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 38-506. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before July 1, 1987 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 2, 1987 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior; or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after July 1, 1987 [The effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after January 2, 1987 [the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after January 2, 1987. [The effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. 
Note: The market value of the structure should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: 
(1)  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-26-2010, Art. 6) 
ARTICLE VI. - ACCESS CONTROL 

Sec. 38-546. - Purpose. 
In order to expedite the movement of traffic, to promote the safety of the motorist and pedestrian, and to minimize traffic congestion and conflict, it is necessary to regulate the points of vehicular access to public roads. To accomplish this goal the following standards shall apply to access control points in the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VII, art. I, § 7.100) 
Sec. 38-547. - Access plans required. 
All commercial and industrial establishments and residential units must file an access plan with the county development officer when applying for an access permit. The plan shall contain the information required in section 38-548 and shall meet the minimum standards outlined in this article. There shall be a minimum 72-hour review process. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VII, art. I, § 7.101; Res. of 8-6-1999, § 6) 
Sec. 38-548. - Access plan requirements. 
An access control plan shall be drawn to scale and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The street name, right-of-way, surface width and surface type of the road from which access is desired. 
(2)  The desired point of access in relation to property lines, and any existing access points within 500 feet in both directions of the desired access point on both sides of the road. 
(3)  The drainage system of the road from which access is desired within 500 feet in either direction of the point of access and how the proposed access will drain into the road drainage system. 
(4)  The distance of sight in each direction from the point of access for a distance of 500 feet. 
(5)  The design of the access point to include the width, alignment, and surface type. 
(6)  Show an acceleration and deceleration lane or lanes as required. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VII, art. I, § 7.102) 
Sec. 38-549. - General access regulations. 
(a)  The maximum width of all access points shall be 30 feet measured at the property line except when the development requiring access generates high overall or high peak traffic volumes, the county development officer may approve a wider channelized access point to allow various turning movements for greater traffic control and safety. 
(b)  Temporary accessways may be granted by the county development officer at locations other than those specified for permanent access where it is expedient for the purpose of staged development. Temporary accessways shall be closed when permanent access to the property is completed. 
(c)  No off-street vehicular storage or parking area shall be allowed where the arrangement requires that vehicles back directly into a public street right-of-way. 
(d)  In all commercial developments where a lot abuts more than one street, the county development officer may require that the access be from the street of lowest classification when necessary to lessen serious congestion on the major street. 
(e)  Gasoline service stations shall be allowed two access points onto the same street to allow proper circulation past gasoline pumps. This is regardless of lot width or street classification provided the required plan is approved by the county development officer. 
(f)  In order to limit the number of individual access points to an arterial or collector street, the county development officer shall encourage and may require the development of frontage roads and interconnecting interior circulation drives. 
(1)  Frontage roads are those which parallel the existing street and extend across the entire frontage of a particular large property or group of properties. Frontage roads may be required to provide safe and efficient public access to individual properties eliminating the traffic congestion which would be caused if each parcel had its own access onto the arterial or collector street. Access points between the frontage road and the main thoroughfare shall be no closer together than 500 feet and no closer together than 300 feet (measured along the street right-of-way) along collector streets. All frontage roads shall be built to the standards specified in section 38-101 et seq. of this chapter and shall be dedicated as public streets. Access requirements for property served by a frontage road shall be the same as for property fronting a minor street (i.e. at least 100 feet apart) except that the county development officer may also allow a regrouping of access points onto the frontage road in accordance with an approved site plan which does not destroy the intent of these access control provisions. 
(2)  Interior circulation drives are needed in large developments which require large parking areas. These drives interconnect all parking lot access points with all buildings and areas of vehicular traffic, parking, loading and servicing. They are constructed to provide safe and efficient vehicular movement between specified access points of a development or a series of developments. The county development officer shall encourage and may require that the interior circulation drives of adjacent developments be connected to eliminate the need to use the public streets to drive from one to another. All circulation drives shall be clearly defined and marked appropriately with arrows, etc., to assist public circulation into and out of the property and its parking areas. An area of land not less than ten-foot deep shall be provided between the public street right-of-way line and the edge of all proposed frontage roads or interior circulation drives. This area will separate the roadways with a minimum turning radius. Such area shall be landscaped and grassed. The width, placement and design of frontage roads and interior circulation drives shall be approved by the county development officer. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VII, art. I, § 7.103) 
Sec. 38-550. - Specific access points for state highways. 
All lots having between 100 and 300 feet of frontage shall have no more than one point of access to a state highway. For lots with over 300 feet of frontage, additional access points shall be allowed provided they are spaced at least 300 feet apart from each other and from the first access point. For development generating high overall or high peak traffic volumes, the county development officer may lessen the distance between access points to allow improved access provided a carefully planned pattern of internal and external channelization is prepared and approved. When a lot of record fronting a state highway has less than 100 feet of frontage, the county development officer shall first attempt to obtain joint access with either adjacent property or access onto a frontage road. If this is not feasible, one single access point may be allowed, and should be located with consideration to the distance to the access points on the adjacent lots. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. VII, art. I, § 7.104) 
Secs. 38-551—38-580. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - POULTRY HOUSES AND SWINE OPERATIONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 14. 

Sec. 38-581. - Permit authority. 
All permits will be obtained from the land development officer appointed and designated by the commissioner of the county. 
Sec. 38-582. - Distance requirements. 
No poultry house or any type of swine operation shall be less than 550 feet from the residence of another person, recreation park or center, hospital or convalescent home. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. X, art. II; Res. of 12-10-99, § 1) 
Sec. 38-583. - Exemptions. 
Any currently existing poultry or swine building shall be exempt from the 550-foot distance requirement in section 38-582; new structures must comply with the 550-foot requirement. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. X, art. III; Res. of 12-10-99, § 2) 
Sec. 38-584. - Name on building permit. 
(a)  The permit will be in the individual company's name who will be owning such operation. 
(b)  Each individual obtaining such a permit shall furnish proof to the county building permit officer that such provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. X, art. IV) 
Secs. 38-585—38-615. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - LANDFILLS AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 74. 

Sec. 38-616. - Landfills and waste disposal systems and systems affected. 
This article shall apply to all landfills and waste disposal systems and related activities, except that land owned in fee simple by the county wherein landfills and waste disposal systems are owned exclusively by the county and operated solely for the benefit of taxpayers, residents, and businesses operated in the county are exempted from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XI, art. II) 
Sec. 38-617. - Application procedure for new landfills and waste disposal systems. 
(a)  No new landfill or waste disposal system shall be commenced within the county until a landfill or waste disposal permit has been issued by the county commissioner. 
(b)  All permits shall be renewed every year. 
(c)  Renewal does not require rehearing except as to expansions or alterations not included in or contemplated by the original landfill or waste disposal system permit. 
(d)  The cost of a permit shall cover costs of administration and inspection and shall be set by the county commissioner. 
(e)  Putrescible and nonputrescible landfills and waste disposal systems are not permitted in areas in which within 2,000 feet radius of the outer perimeter of the proposed location such surrounding area is predominantly residential in character. Putrescible and nonputrescible landfills and waste disposal systems are permitted only in areas in which within 2000 feet radius of the outer perimeter of the proposed location such surrounding area is predominantly industrial, manufacturing, or agricultural in character. For purposes of this article the determination of whether an area is "predominantly" of a certain character shall be evidenced by a showing that the entire area in question is at least 60 percent utilized or occupied as residential or industrial, manufacturing, and agricultural. Such determination shall be made by the county commissioner on the basis of total acreage utilized or occupied for such use at the time the permit is requested. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XI, art. III; Res. of 11-14-2003, § 1) 
Sec. 38-618. - Application procedure for landfill or waste disposal permit. 
All applicants for a landfill or waste disposal system permit shall submit the following information: 
(1)  A site plan, conforming with the requirements of this landfill and waste disposal article; 
(2)  An operational plan, conforming to the requirements of this landfill and waste disposal article; 
(3)  One copy of all documents submitted or prepared for submission to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR), the Environmental Protection Division and any successor program for the purpose of obtaining a state permitting and continuation process; 
(4)  A statement from the department of transportation identifying any state maintained road within or adjacent to the subject property, and setting out what repaving, repairs, alteration, turning lanes or other additions it finds necessary and will require of the applicant to accommodate the potential increase of traffic volume or weight occasioned by the proposed operation; 
(5)  A statement from the county public works director which shall identify any county maintained road within or adjacent to the property and setting out any repaving, repairs, alterations, turning lanes or other additions necessary and which should be required of the applicant to accommodate the potential increase of traffic volume or weight occasioned by the proposed operation, and setting out any road weight limitations or restrictions which should be posted on nearby roads in order to prevent the use of roads which should not be used by persons hauling materials to or from the landfill or waste disposal system; 
(6)  In addition to state requirements, a plan as to how the landfill or waste disposal system shall be closed, including a statement of what rehabilitation of the landfilled land is planned; detailed projections as to what future uses can be made of the land; what ground cover will be; what landscaping will be used; and a time estimate showing the progression of the rehabilitation and estimated time for completion; 
(7)  A statement from the suppliers of all public utilities and providers of fire protection, assessing the effects upon the provision of such services by the establishment of the proposed project. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XI, art. IV) 
Sec. 38-619. - Requirements for a site plan. 
Each applicant for a landfill or waste disposal system permit shall submit a site plan which shall include: 
(1)  The location of all equipment, roads, buildings, proposed or existing, and all points of ingress and egress. All existing county and state maintained roads within or adjacent to the property shall be clearly identified; 
(2)  The location and identification of all existing or proposed buffers or boundaries, natural or manmade; 
(3)  The location and identification of all existing lakes, ponds, streams, rivers or other waterways and formations with an impact study as to the effect of the landfill and waste disposal article on each; 
(4)  The location of all proposed employee and visitor parking areas and routes and all truck or commercial parking areas or routes; 
(5)  Proposed handling and temporary storage areas for equipment and for waste types which are not permitted but which may incidentally be separated from proper waste and which must be removed daily. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XI, art. V) 
Sec. 38-620. - Requirements for operations and an operational plan. 
Each new applicant for a landfill or other waste disposal permit shall submit an operational plan which shall include: 
(1)  The date proposed for the commencement of the operation and its expected duration; 
(2)  The proposed hours and days of operation. No operation shall be permitted on Sundays, New Year's Day, Independence Day (July 4), Thanksgiving Day, or Christmas Day, nor shall such operation be allowed between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., although routine maintenance is not prohibited; 
(3)  Any phasing of the landfill or waste disposal system and the relationship between the phases and the estimated timing of such; 
(4)  A detailed description of the method of operation, including what equipment will be used; 
(5)  A statement of operational standards, which shall include and indicate compliance with the following: 
a.  Illumination. All work areas shall be sufficiently illuminated, naturally or artificially, in accordance with the form of the operation and the stated hours of operation. No direct artificial illumination utilized shall fall upon any land not covered by the application. This provision does not apply to street lights. 
b.  Noise. There shall be no blasting for construction or other purposes. 
c.  Erosion. Erosion caused by, or increased through, the operation shall be controlled on site by the construction of retarding basins, settling ponds, other waste treatment facilities, ditches, diking and revegetation of slopes. No runoff or pattern of erosion shall pose a danger to adjacent properties. 
d.  Enclosure. The landfill of waste disposal system site shall be totally enclosed by fencing. By "fencing" is meant a minimum of six-foot chain link fence with a security gate. Fencing shall completely surround the landfill or waste disposal system site prior to commencing landfilling. The landfill or waste disposal system shall be fenced in such a manner to prevent the spread of papers and other materials and shall be screened and planted so that it is not visible from any residential, commercial or industrial structure or from any street. Gates shall be provided at all points of vehicular or pedestrian ingress and egress and shall be locked when not in regular use. 
e.  Notices. Notices shall be posted at regular intervals along the outer limits of the subject property which shall warn against trespassing. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XI, art. VI) 
Sec. 38-621. - Other limitations and prohibitions on operations. 
(a)  The location, the boundaries, and the proposed method of operation are required to be approved by the county development office. 
(b)  Truck traffic routes and entrances to the facility be approved by the county development office. Acceleration and deceleration lanes and widening of roads for sight distance shall be required based on the county engineer's report as to what is required for safety. The landfill or waste disposal system shall be accessible without excessive travel over residential streets. 
(c)  No sanitary waste shall be disposed of within 2,000 yards of the public highway, a residence, or gathering place. 
(d)  A minimum of a 100-foot buffer area must be provided between the property line and the waste disposal boundary line. No clearing and grubbing are to take place in these areas except as required for the construction of drainage devices, groundwater monitoring wells and access roads. 
(e)  As a condition of the permit issuance and continuation, and in keeping with government intention that waste be recycled, at any time the following items are separated from waste which is permitted, these items shall not be placed in any landfill or waste disposal system in the county, and certified statements and proof of recycling carried out may be required monthly or less by the public works director: paper products, yard waste and yard trash, aluminum, glass, plastic, vehicle tires, ferrous and nonferrous metal and batteries. 
(f)  Waste of a type which is not permitted at a particular landfill or waste disposal system and which comes onto the site incidentally discovered in waste which is permitted must be removed from the landfill or waste disposal system site daily. 
(g)  No landfill or waste disposal system shall be located within 10,000 feet of any airport runway used by turbo jet aircraft or within 5,000 feet of any airport runway used by only pistoned-type aircraft. 
(h)  No landfill or waste disposal system shall be located in any wetland, or area being designated as 100-year floodplain. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XI, art. VII; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-622—38-650. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CAMPGROUND STANDARDS 

Sec. 38-651. - Physical factors influencing development. 
Certain physical factors influence the quality of recreational facilities that can be developed in an area. Some factors which limit the type of development possible on a given site are set out below: 
(1)  Aspect. The compass direction in which a slope faces dictates its aspect. The east slope receives morning sunshine and afternoon shade and is usually the best aspect for campgrounds. The morning sun will warm and dry the site, and evening shade will cool it. 
(2)  Position on slopes. The lower parts of slopes are exposed to sunshine for a much shorter period than upper portions. Therefore, lower slopes tend to be cooler and damper with poorer air drainage. As a result of poor air drainage, smoke filled and moisture laden air lingers on lower slopes. Upper slopes have the greatest extremes in temperature. They are hot during the day when exposed to the sun and are dryer, because they are more exposed to the wind. Fire is a more serious threat on dry, windswept, upper slopes than on lower slopes. The middle portion of slopes offers the best micro-climatic conditions for campground development. Morning updrafts and evening down drafts produce good ventilation and provide a moderating effect on temperatures. 
(3)  Topography and slope. A site's steepness, or percent of slope, is important in determining use for campground development. Campsites should be located on slopes with less than ten percent gradient. If level places do not exist, they should be constructed. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIV, art. I) 
Sec. 38-652. - Campground in general. 
(a)  All campgrounds, regardless of whether the campsites are offered for sale, developed as rental sites, or let on assignment, are subject to the regulations contained in this article unless separate standards are specified. 
(b)  Plat requirements for subdivisions apply to all campgrounds including all soil and erosion requirements. 
(c)  All proposed and required water sources and sanitary facilities serving campground shall conform with the requirements of the state department of human resources, public health division, and the state department of natural resources, water supply section, as appropriate. 
(d)  Permanent structures other than camp platforms and sanitary facilities shall be prohibited unless the developer or the owner can prove, to the land development office's satisfaction, the necessity or desirability of such a structure. 
(e)  Mobile homes or modular homes shall be prohibited on all rental campsites. 
(f)  In lieu of providing individual parking spaces for each campsite, the developer may widen minor collector roads, rural local roads and cul-de-sacs to accommodate parking on road rights-of-way, provided sufficient width is maintained to allow normal flow of traffic (see section 38-653, subsection (4) for suggested designs). Widening of roads to permit parking of main thoroughfares shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIV, art. II) 
Sec. 38-653. - Campgrounds containing rental sites or lots. 
The following standards shall apply to all campgrounds, containing two or more campsites, or camp lots for rent, including sites for tents, accommodations for backpackers, recreational vehicles (RV's) and camping from automobiles: 
(1)  Rules. Campsites for accommodation of RV's shall meet the requirements of Rules of the Department of Public Health for Tourist Accommodations, Revised 1971. 
(2)  Density. To prevent intensive site use and to maintain an aesthetic camping atmosphere, density should not exceed ten sites per acre. 
(3)  Sites: 
a.  Each recreational vehicle site with individual parking shall contain at least one reinforced surface parking space incorporated into the site itself and should be level from side to side with sufficient crown to provide adequate drainage. 
b.  Parking dimensions vary from single auto trailer attached vehicle back-in or 14×60 feet to side-by-side arrangements of trailer and auto of 29 feet long and 30 feet wide. Various combinations may be used, but dimensions to accommodate trailer width with extended outside awning should be at least 14 feet. 
c.  RV sites should be 50 feet apart, edge to edge, with center of all camping units at least 50 feet from edge of campground road and 100 feet from streams and lakes. 
d.  Camp pads or parking spaces located totally in a floodplain of a stream or drainage way shall be prohibited. 
e.  Continuous camping on rental sites shall be restricted to a period of 90 days. 
(4)  Road system: 
a.  The ideal road circulation pattern is the one-way paved system attached to a main two-way circular thoroughfare. If a loop system is used, it shall contain a pull-through site arrangement or a back-in ranging from a 45-degree to 90-degree angle. 
b.  Road widths on the one-way loop shall be 15 feet; double lane roads should have minimum width of 22 feet. The circulation's system should parallel existing contours as closely as possible and should not exceed a 16 percent slope. The turning radius in loops and turns should not be less than 30 feet; this should include parking spurs at individual RV sites. 
c.  Travel trailer doors are located on the right side. Parking spurs should be located so that trailer doors face away from interior roads and into the site. Utility hookups should be located to the left rear of the RV. 
d.  All roads shall have a base of four inches of aggregate, compacted. The material shall be deposited and spread by means of a spreader box or other approved mechanical equipment and compacted with a roller at the proper moisture content. The base shall be covered with a triple bituminous surface treatment. The materials and construction methods shall comply with the latest Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction of Roads and Bridges. 
e.  All road systems within any campground shall be privately maintained and no road within a campground shall be accepted for maintenance as part of the county road system. 
(5)  Water supply: 
a.  Each campground shall have access to a source of potable water approved by the applicable health authority. It is preferable to provide one water outlet per camping unit. However, a minimum of one outlet for every two units shall be provided with two hose bibs equipped with vacuum breakers. Each unit shall have access to water within 50 feet of the RV pad. All water taps or outlets serving campsites shall be of a type compatible with garden hose connections. 
b.  Water outlets shall be located at least ten feet from sanitary sewer line taps and electrical outlets. 
(6)  Sanitary facilities for accommodation of independent RV's: 
a.  In campgrounds with access to a sewerage system, each campsite shall contain a sewer connection with suitable fittings to permit a watertight junction with the RV outlet. Each sewer connection shall be constructed so that it can be closed and when not in use shall be capped to prevent escape odors. 
b.  In campgrounds which do not have access to a sewer hookup, a sanitary dump station built to recommendations to the local sanitarian shall be provided at the entrance to the campground or other location convenient to all campsites. The dump station shall be located so that the left rear of vehicles will slope slightly toward the dump station when connected for emptying. (See figure 31 for design—Refer to editor's note located at the end of this section.) 
c.  Sites which do not have access to a sewer hookup shall have a convenient access to a suitable place for disposal of sink or tub water. A design for construction of an inexpensive unit is shown in figure 30 (refer to editor's note located at the end of this section). 
(7)  Sanitary facilities for accommodation of dependent RV's: 
a.  All campgrounds for the accommodation of dependent RV's and tents shall provide sanitary facilities connected with a sewage system. 
b.  Toilets, lavatories, and bathing facilities shall be provided as follows: A minimum of one toilet stool per four camping units or fraction thereof, and one urinal for each toilet facility designated for men; one lavatory and one tub or shower head for every ten persons or fraction thereof, with a minimum of one stool, one lavatory, and one tub or shower head for each sex. 
c.  Toilet facilities shall be plainly marked, separate for each sex, lighted at night, and shall be located no further than 200 feet from any camp pad. 
d.  Toilet facilities may be located in a central building or in two or more buildings according to size of the campground and location of the campsites in relation to the facilities. 
e.  Adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of dishwater according to the size of the campground. A suggested ration is one disposal unit per ten campsites. (See Figure 30—Refer to editor's note at the end of this section.) 
(8)  Solid waste. All campgrounds shall be provided with fly-proof, water-tight, rodent-proof containers for disposal of refuse. Containers must be sitting on concrete or asphalt pads. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. Refuse should be collected at least once a week. 
(9)  Electrical outlets. Each RV site shall have access to a minimum of one 110 volt electrical outlet supplying 30 amperes of electrical current. 
(10)  Campfires. All campfires should be contained and controlled. Stoves, grills, fireplaces, pits and fire rings are recommended. Facilities should either be provided for campsites or fire restricted to designated locations. No fire shall be allowed within ten feet of a bottled gas container or other combustible source of fuel, and no open fire shall be left unattended. 
(11)  Campsites for tents: 
a.  Each tent site shall contain a minimum space of 30 × 30 feet. Density shall not exceed ten sites to the acre. Tent sites with individual parking arrangements should contain one automobile parking space 20 × 10 feet. 
b.  Each site shall contain a reinforced, fairly level tent pad. The pad should be approximately 16 × 16 feet to provide maximum flexibility of use. However, all tent pads shall contain a minimum of 12 × 12 feet. The tent pad shall be a minimum of six-inches high and constructed of gravel, crushed aggregate, or equivalent material which will allow runoff from precipitation to flow the pad. Pads constructed of tamped earth, asphalt, or other impervious materials shall be prohibited. Tent pads in excess of ten percent slope should be leveled. A three to five percent slope is preferable. 
c.  Provisions of water, solid waste disposal, electricity, and fires apply to campsites for tents. 
d.  Sanitary facilities for tent sites are the same as those required for dependent RV's. 
(12)  Walk-in campgrounds: 
a.  Camping shall be prohibited in areas where a source of potable water and access to sanitary facilities are not provided. 
b.  Walk-in campgrounds shall have access to a source of potable water within 75 feet of all sleeping areas. In locations where a water supply system is not possible, potable water may be supplied by an approved well with a hand pump or by water from pickup stations. 
c.  All walk-in campgrounds shall have access to the use of a toilet facility containing a minimum of one seat for every 15 campers and a minimum of one facility for each area. A toilet facility shall be located within 300 feet of each camping area. 
d.  Walk-in campgrounds shall provide a safe method of containing and controlling all campfires. Fires shall be restricted to facilities provided in each camping site. Stove, grills, fireplaces, pits, and fire rings are recommended. No open fires shall be left unattended. 
e.  All walk-in campgrounds shall be provided with fly-proof, water-tight, rodent-proof containers for the disposal of refuse. Containers shall be provided in sufficient number and capacity to properly store all refuse. Refuse from walk-in camping area should be collected at least once a week. 
(13)  Campsites for mixed uses. Campgrounds may be developed to provide more than one type of camping site in the same area. When uses are mixed, the highest, or most strict, standards shall apply to development of the entire campground with the exception of walk-in camping area in a campground designed for mixed use. In such a development, areas for walk-in campers should be separated from other types of campsites and located so that camp fire smoke or noise from group activities will not constitute a nuisance to other campers. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIV, art. III) 
Sec. 38-654. - Campground design. 
Various designs for campgrounds as well as detailed designs for specific features are shown in the section. The ideal design is one which will be compatible with the natural features and topography of the tract undergoing development; one which will provide safe, healthful, and convenient camping facilities for campground users; and one which can be developed at a low enough cost to provide safe, healthful, and convenient camping facilities for campground users; and one which can be developed at a low enough cost to provide a suitable margin of profit for the owner. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIV, art. IV) 
Editor's note— The drawings illustrating campground designs and specific features have been omitted from this codification but are available for reference and review from the Pickens County Land Development Office, 213 North Main Street, Suite 202, Jasper, Georgia, 30143. 
Secs. 38-655—38-685. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Res. of 4-23-2010, § 1, amended Art. X in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. X, §§ 38-686—38-694, pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Res. of 3-20-2004, § 1. 

Sec. 38-686. - Title. 
This article will be known as "Pickens County Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-687. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board. The board of natural resources. 
Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Commission. The state soil and water conservation commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department. The state department of natural resources (DNR). 
Design professional. A professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District. The Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division. The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 38-689(c) of this article. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of. planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 38-688(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8. 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Limestone Valley Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self- sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with. 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-688. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 38-689(c)(15) and (c)(16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1) through (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United states engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-689. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (c)(16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments onsite or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-690. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the county without first obtaining a permit from the county planning and development office to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the county planning and development office and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 38-689 (b)and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 38-689(c)(15) and (c)(16) of this article, has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 38-689 (b)and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsection 38-689(c)(15) and (c)(16) of this article are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-691. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The county planning and development officer will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The county land development office shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  the division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-692. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 38-690(b)(6) of this article. The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-693. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-694. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the county board of appeals within 20 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the county superior court. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-695. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 23rd day of April, 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Amd. of 4-23-2010, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 38-696—38-849. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 38-850. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing minimum development standards for commercial property. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 38-851. - Definition. 
Commercial development is defined as the construction of any structure for use as a commercial, business, industrial, or manufacturing facility. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 38-852. - Conformance to other rules and regulations. 
In addition to the minimum standards outlined in this chapter, all proposed commercial development shall comply with all applicable local and state resolutions, regulations and statutes. The county development officer shall withhold approval of any commercial development which is known to be in conflict with state and/or local regulations or statutes. For all developments abutting a state or interstate highway, no building permit shall be issued until the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation has been obtained by the applicant on entrances and exits, turn radii, drainage and other matters that are the appropriate concern of that department. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 38-853. - Commercial development approval process. 
All commercial development in the unincorporated areas of Pickens County shall be submitted to the county development officer for review and approval. All commercial development shall submit a site plan which complies with the provisions of section 38-854. The county development officer shall review the proposed development for compliance with this chapter. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 38-854. - Information in commercial site plan. 
The following information is required to be included on the commercial site plan: 
(1)  The drawing shall contain a graphic scale, north arrow, date, acreage, and owner/developers name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  The names of adjoining property owners shall be shown in relation to the proposed development. 
(3)  The names of all streets or roadway abutting or crossing the property with width of all rights-of-way shown. 
(4)  The boundary of any flood hazard areas. 
(5)  A detailed access plan to enter county or state right-of-way. 
(6)  A location sketch map shall be provided which shows the location of the site in relation to existing public roads, streams power transmission lines, etc. 
(7)  A detailed and scaled drawing of the location of the commercial building on the property, together with all other improvements which will not be attached to the main structure. 
(8)  A detailed and scaled drawing of all public parking spaces provided as well as access lanes for emergency vehicles. 
(9)  A detailed and scaled drawing of buffers if buffers are required. 
(10)  Approval of the county sanitation office showing site meets requirements for sewage treatment. 
(11)  Utility and drainage plans shall be provided which shall include all information necessary for the appropriate county official to determine that the water, sewer, sanitary disposal and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with county requirements, and, where applicable shall also contain soil erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 38-855. - Building lines. 
Commercial building setback lines shall be at least 40 feet from the front property line. A corner lot shall be at least 40 feet from each property line. The building shall otherwise be at least 15 feet from the side and rear property lines. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-856. - Buffer requirements. 
(1)  If the proposed commercial development adjoins residential property, appropriate buffers shall be erected to protect the enjoyment of the residential property. 
(2)  Buffers shall be located within and along the outer perimeter of the parcel which abuts the residential property. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of existing, dedicated or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
(3)  No building permit shall issue for any development requiring a buffer until such time as that buffer, as specified herein, shall be substantially in place. 
(4)  All buffers required by this section shall conform to the following specifications: 
(a)  Prior to development, a buffer plan shall be required to show the types and location of all screening devices within a required buffer. 
(b)  Screening is a method of visually shielding or obscuring one use from another by fence, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. Screening shall provide a year round visual screen from the ground to a minimum of six feet in height. The fence or wall shall be placed on the other edge of the buffer. 
(c)  Landscaping within buffer areas shall be used to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units and transformers. 
(d)  A buffer shall have not less than a 12-foot base width and shall consist of plantings having a year round foliage, or a fence, or a wall, or a berm, or any combination thereof, with a total minimum height of six feet. The required buffer shall provide not less than 90 percent visual blockage. If a buffer consists of plantings only, then said planting shall be an evergreen species which under normal growing conditions will attain a minimum height of six feet. 
(5)  Responsibility for maintenance of a required buffer shall remain with the owner of the commercial property. Maintenance is required to ensure the proper functioning of a buffer as a landscaped area which reduces or eliminates nuisances and/or conflict. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5) 
Sec. 38-857. - Access to county roads; interior streets; design standards. 
(1)  All commercial development accessing a county road must meet minimum AASHTO standards for accel/decel lanes, entrances, and paving. 
(2)  All streets established in connection with the commercial development must meet minimum AASHTO standards. 
(Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 38-858. - Penalties. 
Violations of this section shall be subject to penalties as set forth in section 38-9. 
(Res. of 8-6-1999, § 5) 
Chapter 42 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - RESERVED 

Sec. 42-1. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS 

Sec. 42-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following acts or things within the unincorporated area of Pickens County, Georgia, shall be guilty of disorderly conduct and shall be punished in accord with the provisions of this section. Such acts or things which shall constitute disorderly conduct are more particularly described as follows: 
(1)  Fighting or quarreling or acting in such a manner as to annoy or disturb the peace, quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, school building, hospital or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(2)  Using any indecent, vulgar, obscene, threatening or abusive language in or near a public place that has a direct tendency to cause acts of violence by the person to whom or of whom the remarks are addressed. 
(3)  Striking or attempting to strike another. 
(4)  Assemble or congregate with another or with others to cause, provoke, or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(5)  Collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities and fail to withdraw from the assembly on being lawfully commanded to do so by a peace officer. 
(6)  Create by or in any manner loud noises which disrupt, disturb, or otherwise interfere with the peace and tranquility of the public. 
(7)  Interfere, by acts of violence, with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(8)  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(9)  Defecating or urinating or exposing genitals or female breast; on or adjacent to any street or sidewalk or in any public or quasi-public parking lot or in the halls, elevators, stairways, or any other area designated for public passage within any public or commercial buildings or on any property open to public view. 
(10)  Knowingly and willfully harass or attempt to harass or mislead any E-911 operator or law enforcement officer or firefighter or emergency medical technician by false alarms or repeatedly dialing 911 and hanging up or any unauthorized use of any device of whatever nature to summon law enforcement, firefighters, or emergency medical provider aid without reasonable cause. 
(11)  Knowingly and willfully strike, fight, oppose, interfere or prevent the lawful discharge of official duties of the county sheriff, his or her lawful deputies, the county marshal, his or her lawful deputies, a county code enforcement or land development officer, animal control officer, animal shelter staff, firefighter, emergency medical technician, paramedic or other arresting officer. 
(12)  Knowingly and willfully provide a false name, address, date of birth or social security number or any personal identification information in an effort to mislead as to his or her identity or personal identification the county sheriff, his or her lawful deputies, the county marshal, his or her lawful deputies, a county code enforcement or land development officer, animal control officer, animal shelter staff, firefighter, emergency medical technician, paramedic or other arresting officer. 
(13)  For any person to peddle or sell door to door his or her service or the services of another or any item without a county, state, business, professional or other legal and binding license or permit; unless said individual is raising money for a local not for profit event such as for his/her school, church, etc. 
(14)  Knowingly invite, allow, permit, a person(s) under the age of 21 to gather collect, assemble in any building or upon any land for the purpose of consuming alcoholic beverages in violation of state law and or any person(s) to keep and maintain a common, ill-governed, disorderly place which encourages gaming, drinking, misbehavior or disturbance any neighborhood or orderly citizen(s). 
(15)  Any person who shall throw any bottle, paper, can, glass, stick, stone, missile or any other debris on public property. 
(16)  Any person who shall commit an act of public indecency tending to debauch the morals of any person. 
(17)  Any person who shall be found in a state of drunkenness or intoxication upon the public rights-of-way, county or other publicly owned property or any public park. 
(18)  Any person who commits any act against public safety, morality and decency, or who exhibits any other conduct that is manifestly disorderly that tends to disturb other persons anywhere in the county. 
(b)  Upon conviction of a violation of a section of this chapter, a person shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 1-28-2010; Res. of 6-23-2011, § A) 
ARTICLE III. - TRUANCY 

Sec. 42-3. - Purposes. 
The commissioner of the county has determined that an increase in juvenile violence and crime by persons under the age of 16 in the county can be avoided. It is known that persons under the age of 16 are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful activity and to be victims of older perpetrators of crime; and that there has been a significant breakdown in the supervision and guidance normally provided by parents for minors resulting in crimes and other unacceptable behavior, such as illiteracy, juvenile pregnancy, increased school drop-out rate. The county has an obligation to provide for the protection of minors from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of parental control over and responsibility for children, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile criminal activities which are not easily controlled by existing laws and ordinances. The commissioner of the county has determined a truancy ordinance for those of school age will be in the interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare and will help to attain the foregoing objectives and to diminish the undesirable impact of such conduct on the citizens of the county and will promote the public good, safety and welfare. Parental responsibility for the whereabouts of children is the accepted norm and legal sanctions to enforce such responsibility have had demonstrated effectiveness in many communities. The commissioner of the county has determined that a truancy ordinance will increase parental responsibility for minors within their control and decrease minor delinquency. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.1)) 
Sec. 42-4. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Emergency errand. A mission that results from an unforeseen combination of circumstances that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Minor. Any unemancipated person under the age of 17. 
Public place. Any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, alleys or rights-of-way, to include sidewalks, parks, playgrounds, malls, or other places or buildings open to the public; any cemeteries, school yards, bodies of water or watercourses; any privately or publicly owned places of amusement, entertainment or public accommodation including parking lots, and any vacant lot or land. 
School day. Any day of the week in which school is in session and students are normally expected to attend. This term does not include any religious holidays for which a student's professed religion prohibits such student from school attendance. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.2)) 
Sec. 42-5. - Minors prohibited from being upon streets and other public places at certain daytime hours; exceptions. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 16 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon any public place unsupervised by a parent, guardian or other adult 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor and having the lawful authority to be at such places between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day; provided, however, that the provision of this section shall not apply in the following incidents: 
(a)  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his/her parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(b)  When the minor is traveling directly from home to lawful employment or returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in above referenced places during the proscribed period of time; 
(c)  When the minor is engaged in interstate and intrastate vehicular travel through the county with parental consent; 
(d)  When the minor is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, and has written consent from a parent or legal guardian to be outside the home; 
(e)  When the minor has graduated from high school; 
(f)  When the minor is married pursuant to state law; 
(g)  When the minor has written proof from school authorities that he/she is excused from school attendance at that particular time; or 
(h)  When the minor is participating in an approved school or study activity which requires the minor to be off school property. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.3)) 
Sec. 42-6. - School attendance required. 
It shall be unlawful for any child who is subject to compulsory school attendance requirements as established under O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690.1 to be absent from school without a valid excuse. Such excuse must be provided to a school official within five school days of the absence. This section shall also apply to those persons who are required to attend school as part of a court order. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.4); Ord. of 5-18-2017) 
Sec. 42-7. - Parental responsibility. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of a minor under the age of 16 years to permit, or by insufficient control, to allow a minor to violate a section of this chapter. A person charged with a violation of this subsection (a) for the first time shall be issued a citation and upon appearance, the court may inquire as to the cause of the violation and take such action that may be necessary to aid the parent or guardian in addressing the cause. Such action may include but is not limited to the making of referrals to social service agencies or other entities who can provide resources for addressing the cause(s) of the violation. If appropriate and in the best interest of the child, the court may withhold adjudication on a first offense and require reviews with the parent or guardian for a period of the remainder of the school year in which the violation occurred. The school district shall notify the court if there are no further violations during the period of absence and if none occur, the court shall dismiss the case with no further action. Upon any subsequent violation in the same school year, the person shall be issued a new citation for each such violation. Each subsequent violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished in accordance with section 42-12. Citations for this subsection can be served upon the parent(s) by the sheriff or a lawful deputy, the marshal or a lawful deputy or by a constable of the magistrate court. 
(b)  All parents or legal guardians seeking to enroll a student in the county school district shall be required to provide the following information to the district: 
(1)  Proof of residency in a form acceptable to the district; 
(2)  Copy of student's birth certificate, passport, or other proof of age acceptable to the district; 
(3)  Copy of social security card and/or notarized waiver form; 
(4)  Completed state public health immunization form and/or notarized religious objection form as supplied by the district; 
(5)  Completed state eye, ear, dental, and nutrition form as supplied by the district; 
(6)  Such other information that the district has requested in writing. 
Failure to provide said information within 30 days of enrollment or notice by the district shall be punishable pursuant to section 42-12. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.5); Ord. of 5-18-2017) 
Sec. 42-8. - Responsibility of parent or guardian for supervision of minors expelled or suspended from school. 
If a minor is suspended or expelled from school, that minor's parent or legal guardian, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion, shall: 
(a)  Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the minor at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he/she not been expelled or suspended; and 
(b)  Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he/she not been suspended or expelled unless: 
(1)  The minor is accompanied by his/her parent or legal guardian or a responsible adult, 21 years of age or older, selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or 
(2)  The minor is actually and lawfully employed or traveling directly to or from the job site. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.6)) 
Sec. 42-9. - Jurisdiction of juvenile and magistrate courts. 
Any minor under the age of 17 who violates a section of this chapter is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. Any person who has attained the age of 17 and violates any section of this chapter shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the magistrate court. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.7)) 
Sec. 42-10. - Disposition of violating minors. 
A law enforcement officer shall transport any minor found in violation of this chapter to a designated school district facility. A minor transported to the school district facility will be released to the custody of the school officials or to the custody of his/her parent or legal guardian. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.8)) 
Sec. 42-11. - Each violation deemed separate offense; affirmative defense for violation of section of this chapter. 
Each violation of any section of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. It shall be an affirmative defense if the parent or legal guardian has initiated a petition of delinquency in the juvenile court against the minor under age 17, prior to the time that the minor was found in violation of section 42-5. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.9)) 
Sec. 42-12. - Punishment for violation of chapter. 
Upon conviction of a violation of a section of this chapter, a person shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011, § B(42-3.10); Ord. of 5-18-2017) 
Sec. 42-13. - Educational incentive fund. 
(a)  There is created a special fund by the county. The fund shall be known as the "educational incentive fund." Said fund shall be for the educational benefit of school aged children of the county who are deemed indigent and are found in need of basic educational supplies, basic personal supplies or special educational incentives while enrolled in the county schools. Monies from said fund may also be used to aid in meeting the objectives of the attendance protocol committee as they relate to compulsory school attendance. 
(b)  All fines and administrative fees for violations of this article shall be collected by the clerk of court charged with the duty of collecting moneys arising from fines and forfeited bonds and shall be paid over to the governing authority upon receipt of the fine and assessment if paid in full at the time of sentencing or upon receipt of the final payment if the fine is paid in installments. Those sums paid over to the governing authority shall be deposited thereby into a special account to be known as the "educational incentive fund." All monies paid into the special fund shall be segregated from the general funds of the county and shall be subject to audit as required by law. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any court from directing monies to be paid into this fund for violation of any part of the Code of Ordinances or as a result of the buy-out of any community service. The clerk of court shall transmit with the monies showing the style of the case and the case number from which the monies were collected. 
(c)  Monies may be paid from the fund only upon request and approval. All requests for use of said funds must be either endorsed by or made by the county school district or its agent. For purpose of this section, the agent of the schools shall be considered the school superintendent, school attendance officer or the school social worker. Upon endorsement of the request for said funds, the application shall be transmitted to a judge of a court of competent jurisdiction. Upon review, the judge may approve in whole or in part the application and shall issue an order directing the governing authority to pay out approved expenditures. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a court of competent jurisdiction shall be any court with jurisdiction to try offenses involving section 42-3 of this Code. 
(Res. of 6-23-2011) 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted June 23, 2011, did not specifically amend the Code and has been included herein as § 42-13 at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 42-14—42-16. - Reserved. 
Chapter 46 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— State parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; recreation boards, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-5; Georgia state games commission, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, or serve any alcoholic beverage within a county park or county recreational area. 
Sec. 46-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Res. of July 1, 2010, repealed § 46-2 which pertained to firearms prohibited and bore no history notes. 
Sec. 46-3. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
The resolution adopted September 12, 1977 which created the Pickens County Park and Recreation Board is not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the county. 
Secs. 46-4—46-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-66 et seq. 

Sec. 46-36. - Department of parks and recreation created; duties. 
There is hereby created a Department of Parks and Recreation for Pickens County, referred to in this article as the department of parks and recreation, to be organized and funded through and under the office of commissioner of the county. The department of parks and recreation shall have the responsibility and duty of providing and maintaining a parks and recreation program for the citizens of the county. The department of parks and recreation shall consist of a director of parks and recreation and a parks and recreation advisory board. 
Sec. 46-37. - Office of director created; duties. 
There is hereby created the office of director of parks and recreation; such director of parks and recreation to be employed by the commissioner of the county and to serve at the discretion of such commissioner. 
(1)  The director of parks and recreation shall organize and manage a parks and recreation program. 
(2)  The director of parks and recreation may employ personnel necessary for maintenance of the program with the approval of the commissioner. 
(3)  The director of parks and recreation shall prepare and submit to the commissioner an annual budget for the program and a quarterly report of all income and expenditures for such program. 
(Res. of 2-1-1993, § II) 
Sec. 46-38. - Parks and recreation advisory board created; duties. 
There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Advisory Board for Pickens County, Georgia, referred to in this article as the parks and recreation advisory board. 
(1)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall consist of nine members, appointed by the commissioner of the county, who shall serve one-year terms beginning January 1 and ending December 31 and who can be reappointed. 
(2)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall meet regularly, and at the call of the director of parks and recreation, to advise and assist in planning and implementing the parks and recreation program; to advise and assist in the preparation of the annual budget and the quarterly reports of income and expenditures; to assist in maintaining an inventory and accounting of all property utilized or owned by the department of parks and recreation; and to do such other things as necessary for the department of parks and recreation. 
(3)  The parks and recreation advisory board shall select from its members a chairperson to preside and a secretary to keep accurate minutes and records. The director of parks and recreation shall act as treasurer. The parks and recreation advisory board may select other officers and committees from its members or the general public as it deems necessary. 
(Res. of 2-1-1993, § III; Res. of 2-12-98) 
Sec. 46-39. - Monies regulated. 
Any accounts maintained by the department of parks and recreation separate from the general fund of the office of commissioner shall be in a banking institution designated by the commissioner and shall require the signatures of the director of parks and recreation and one other member of the parks and recreation advisory board. Any such account shall be in the name of "Department of Parks and Recreation of Pickens County, Georgia" and have an address of the office of commissioner. 
(Res. of 2-1-1993, § IV) 
Chapter 50 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-70-3 the county adopted on July 30, 1993, the 2015 Joint Comprehensive Plan for Pickens County, Jasper, Nelson, and Talking Rock as prepared by the North Georgia Regional Development Center. Official copies of the comprehensive plan are on file in the office of the county clerk. 
Cross reference— Any comprehensive plan saved from repeal, § 1-6(16); administration, ch. 2; area planning and development commission, § 2-261 et seq.; environment, ch. 26; land development standards, ch. 38; roads and bridges, ch. 54; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Chapter 54 - ROADS AND BRIDGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the county saved from repeal, § 1-6(15); land development standards, ch. 38; planning, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 70; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Probate court's jurisdiction involving the removal of obstructions from roads, O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.1; damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; governmental authorization for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; county road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-40 et seq.; grants for construction and maintenance of county roads, O.C.G.A. § 36-17-20 et seq.; inspection of and reports on roads and bridges by county police, O.C.G.A. § 36-8-6; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENCROACHMENTS ON PUBLIC ROADS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Forms referred to in this article for an application for encroachment on public road and a land disturbing permit have been omitted from this codification but are available from the Pickens County Land Development Office, 213 North Main Street, Suite 202, Jasper, Georgia, 30143. 
State Law reference— Damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 

Sec. 54-31. - Requirements of encroachment; applicability. 
Any person, firm, company, sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, organization, individual or government who desires to encroach and/or cross any public road/right-of-way in the unincorporated areas of the county, maintained by the county, shall be required to follow the procedures and fulfill the conditions set forth in this article. This article shall apply to all land disturbing activities, including, but not limited to, installation of utility pipes and lines, and any activities which are conducted upon the public roads/rights-of-way of the county. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIII, § I; Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Sec. 54-32. - Procedures and conditions. 
(a)  A permit for such activity must be obtained from the county planning and development office prior to any land disturbing activity. 
(1)  Applications for permits shall be in writing, shall contain a detailed description of the project, shall state the beginning and completion dates for such project, and shall have sketch drawings attached. 
(2)  Applications for permits shall be made at least 72 hours prior to the time the encroachment is to be made. 
(b)  Applicants shall be required to make a damage deposit/bond with each application unless waived by county due to applicants prior good work and repair record. Deposit/bond amounts for the following operations shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges: 
(1)  To cut a plant mix road when cutting is necessary. 
(2)  To bore under a roadway. 
(3)  To cut a surface treatment road when cutting is necessary. 
(4)  To install along the side of county road. 
(5)  To install a meter. 
(6)  Additional bonds may be required for major projects. 
(7)  Deposits/bonds are partially or fully refundable upon proper repair as determined by county inspection. 
(c)  All installations other than crossing a roadway must be a minimum of 48 inches from the edge of existing pavement or edge of existing gravel roadbed. 
(d)  Cutting of roads will be permitted only if it cannot be bored; the final determination of whether the road can be bored or not being in the sole discretion of the county. 
(e)  Any cut or disturbance across or on paved roadway, if approved, and any other disturbance of a county road/right-of-way must be repaired in accordance with the most current department of transportation regulations and specifications of the county. 
(f)  Applicant must call for an inspection by the county planning and development office during the repair when the: 
(1)  Road is cut. 
(2)  Cut is backfilled. 
(3)  Concrete is poured. 
(4)  Job is completed. 
(g)  Applicants must complete all repairs and submit completed job for inspection by county planning and development office in not more than 14 days after the work is commenced unless an extension is granted. 
(h)  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked upon finding by the planning and development office and/or county commissioners that the holder is not in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIII, § II; Res. of 8-13-1999; Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Sec. 54-33. - Indemnify and hold harmless the county. 
All permits issued under this article shall require a signed acknowledgement by the holder of the permit that: 
(1)  The holder shall indemnify and hold harmless the county from any claim, suit, damage or legal action for damages to any third party as a result of the work performed under such permit; and 
(2)  The county shall not be responsible, financially or otherwise, for future relocation cost in the event of future road widenings or upgrades, and that applicant has no vested right to permanent location of the land disturbing activity regulated in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIII, § III; Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Sec. 54-34. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, firm, company, sole proprietorship, corporation, partnership, organization, individual or government who violates this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XIII, § V; Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Secs. 54-35—54-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TIMBER HARVESTING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Damaging public property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 

Sec. 54-66. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of county or county-maintained roads in the county by those transporting commercially harvested timber, whether such timber is harvested in the county, any adjoining county or from any other location. It is not the intent of this article to regulate timber harvesting in any environmental context. A county governing authority may by ordinance or resolution require all persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any unincorporated area of such county for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state to provide notice of such harvesting operations to the county governing authority prior to entering onto the property and in no event later than 24 hours after entering onto the property. Such persons shall give notice of cessation of cutting within 24 hours after the job is completed. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XII, art. I, § 1.1; Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Sec. 54-67. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County-maintained road means any road which is used for U.S. Postal delivery or school bus routes and is maintained on a regular basis by the county whether or not such road is officially a county road. 
County road means any road which is shown on the most current state department of transportation maps as a county road of Pickens County, Georgia. 
Letter of credit means a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or other financial institution. 
Person means any individual or corporation transporting logs for commercial purposes in the county. 
Property owner means the person or persons who own the property from which the transported timber is harvested. 
Surety bond means either a cash bond or a bond posted by a licensed bonding or insurance company. 
Timber means pulpwood or logs. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XII, art. II, § 2.1; Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 54-68. - County permit and surety bond or letter of credit. 
(a)  Prior written notice shall be required of any person or firm harvesting such timber for each separate tract. The application form shall be maintained in the planning and development office of Pickens County and shall conform to the following: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber; 
(b)  Notice may be submitted in person, by transmission of an electronic record via fax, email, or such other means as approved by the governing authority, or by mail; 
(c)  Persons or firms subject to such notice requirement shall be required to deliver a bond or letter of credit as provided by this paragraph, in which case notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the governing authority a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the county, against any damage caused by such person or firm in the amount of $5,000.00 or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or financial institution, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. Pickens County shall require no more than one bond from each person or firm harvesting timber regardless of the number of tracts harvested in unincorporated Pickens County by each such person or firm so long as the bond remains in effect. Otherwise, a valid replacement bond must be obtained and delivered to the governing authority no later than the close of business on the fifth business day following the day that Pickens County filed a claim to recover damages against the then-existing bond. Upon filing such claim, Pickens County shall immediately provide notice thereof, including the date such claim was filed, to the person or firm causing the damage. Such notice may be given in person, by transmission of an electronic record via fax, or by email. For purposes of this paragraph, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered; 
(d)  Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract within such unincorporated area of the county upon receipt of the same by the governing authority and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract; provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the governing authority within three business days after such change. 
(e)  Pickens County shall not require a fee of any kind for receiving a notification of timber harvesting. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XII, art. III, §§ 3.1—3.4; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Sec. 54-69. - Liability for damages; violations. 
(a)  The timber harvester/transporter and/or the property owner shall be liable to the county for damage to county or county maintained roads caused by the transport of timber in an amount necessary to return such roads to their normal and usual condition, together with all court costs in the event such issue is litigated in any manner. 
(b)  Violation of the notice requirements of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XII, art. IV, §§ 4.1, 4.2; Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Sec. 54-70. - Safety regulations. 
Any person harvesting or transporting timber in the county shall adhere to the following safety regulations: 
(1)  No equipment, trucks, trailers or machinery shall be allowed to park on the county road or its right-of-way. 
(2)  Any logging operation in the county, or within 1,000 feet of the county line if outside the county but utilizing a county road for access to the property, shall post at least two signs in both directions of the truck road entrance as follows: one sign 500 feet from such entrance stating "SLOW, TRUCK ENTERING HIGHWAY" and one sign 1,000 feet from such entrance stating "WARNING LOGGING OPERATION AHEAD." Each of the four signs shall be 42 inches × 42 inches, orange in color, and posted at least three feet from the travel surface of such road. Such signs shall be maintained in such a manner so as to be easily visible by approaching traffic. 
(3)  Each logging operation shall furnish their own signs, which must be in substantial compliance with the regulations stated in this section. 
(Ord. of 8-8-1997, ch. XII, art. V, § 5.1; Res. of 2-26-2009, § 1(Exh. A); Res. of 4-19-2018(2)) 
Sec. 54-71. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The second resolution adopted on April 19, 2018, repealed § 54-71, which pertained to revenue generated by policy in this article and the distribution thereof and derived from an ordinance of August 8, 1997, ch. XII, art. VI, § 6.1. 
Chapter 58 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 34; landfills and waste disposal systems, § 38-616 et seq.; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local, multijurisdictional and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1; solid waste management education program, establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Findings. 
The Constitution of the State of Georgia grants the county authority to regulate, monitor and control of solid waste management facilities. 
(Res. of 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 58-2. - Regulations authorized. 
The commissioner of the county may establish regulations and guidelines in the construction and operations of solid waste management facilities located in the county. 
(Res. of 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 58-3. - Permits. 
Any solid waste management facility constructed shall be required to obtain approval and permit from the governing authority of the county. 
(Res. of 10-9-1990) 
Sec. 58-4. - Enforcement. 
These rules shall be enforced by authorized officers of the law or designees of the county commissioner. 
(Res. of 10-9-1990) 
Secs. 58-5—58-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - YARD TRIMMINGS DISPOSAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2. 

Sec. 58-36. - Commercial solid waste. 
All types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1) 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
Sec. 58-37. - Composting. 
The controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 58-38. - Leachate collection system. 
A system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 58-39. - Municipal solid waste. 
Any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 58-40. - Municipal solid waste disposal facility. 
Any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 58-41. - Municipal solid waste landfill. 
A disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 58-42. - Yard trimmings. 
Leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1) 
Sec. 58-43. - Same—Placement and disposal; prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the county. 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any municipal waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the county. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1(2)) 
Sec. 58-44. - Same—Sorting, storing, composting and collecting. 
Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: 
(1)  May be composted on owner's property or carried to a permitted public composting site. 
(2)  Yard trimmings may be taken to a permitted inert landfill for disposal. 
(3)  Yard trimmings may also be chipped into mulch to be reused. 
(4)  Yard trimmings may also be incinerated in compliance to EPA Clean Air Act. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1(3)) 
Sec. 58-45. - Same—Penalties. 
Any person violating section 58-44 shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 9-2-1996, § 1(4)) 
Secs. 58-46—58-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 

Sec. 58-76. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Res. of 3-5-1990) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-77. - Littering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this state or any waters in this state, unless: 
(1)  The area is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to so use such area; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a nondisposable litter receptacle or container designed for the temporary storage of litter and located in an area designated by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(b)  (1)  Any person who violates subsection (a) of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of this Code; 
(2)  In addition to the punishment provided under paragraph (1) of this subsection: 
a.  In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
b.  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public beach, public park, private right-of-way, or, with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(c)  The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  Any county, municipality, consolidated government, or law enforcement agency thereof of this state which is empowered by [O.C.G.A. § 16-7-45] or other law to enforce the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances may, in its discretion, appoint any person who is a citizen of the United States, is of good moral character, and has not previously been convicted of a felony to enforce the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances within the county, municipality, or consolidated government in which the appointing agency exercises jurisdiction. Each person appointed pursuant to this section shall take and subscribe an oath of office as prescribed by the appointing authority. Any person appointed and sworn pursuant to this subsection shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances in the same manner as any employee or law enforcement officer of this state or any county, municipality, or consolidated government of this state subject to the limitations provided in subsections (e) and (l) of this section. 
(e)  No person appointed pursuant to subsection (d) of this section shall be deemed a peace officer under the laws of this state or: 
(1)  Be deemed to be an employee of or receive any compensation from the state, county, municipality, consolidated government, or appointing law enforcement agency; 
(2)  Be required to complete any training or be certified pursuant to the requirements of [O.C.G.A.] ch. 8 of tit. 35; 
(3)  Have the power or duty to enforce any traffic or other criminal laws of the state, county, municipality, or consolidated government; 
(4)  Have the power to possess and carry firearms and other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the littering laws; or 
(5)  Be entitled to any indemnification from the state, county, municipality, or consolidated government for any injury or property damage sustained by such person as a result of attempting to enforce the littering laws of this state or any local government. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, neither the state nor any county, municipality, or consolidated government of this state or any department, agency, board, or officer of this state or any county, municipality, or consolidated government of this state shall be liable or accountable for or on account of any act or omission of any person appointed pursuant to this section in connection with such person's enforcement of the provisions of this section or local littering ordinances. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, resist, impede, or interfere with any person appointed pursuant to this section in connection with such person's enforcement of this section or local littering ordinances or to retaliate or discriminate in any manner against such person as a reprisal for any act or omission of such person. Any violation of this subsection shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Res. of 3-5-1990; Res. of 1-28-2010) 
Sec. 58-78. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of section 58-77, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of section 58-77 is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person on the letters, bills, publications, or writings in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttal presumption that such person has violated section 58-77. 
(Res. of 3-5-1990) 
Sec. 58-79. - Enforcement. 
All law enforcement agencies, officers, and officials of this county or any enforcement agency, officer, or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision of this state is authorized, empowered, and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Res. of 3-5-1990) 
Sec. 58-80. - Receptacles to be provided; notice to public. 
The commissioner of the county shall establish and maintain receptacles for the deposit of litter at appropriate locations where the property is frequented by the public, post signs directing persons to the receptacles and serve notice of the provisions of this article and to otherwise publicize the availability of litter receptacles and requirements of this article. 
(Res. of 3-5-1990) 
Secs. 58-81—58-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOLID WASTE AND SCRAP TIRE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 58-101. - Definitions. 
Commercial solid waste shall mean all types of solid waste and/or recovered materials generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, multi-family residential properties, and other non-manufacturing activities as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(4.1). 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes but is not limited to land-filling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(8). 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
Industrial solid waste shall mean waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations. Such waste includes, but is not limited to, fertilizer, agricultural chemicals, food and food-related products and other by-products as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(12.1). 
Inert waste shall mean wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition excludes industrial and demolition waste not specifically listed above (Section 391-3-4-.06 of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management). 
Litter shall mean discarded materials of every kind as defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-42(1). 
Municipal solid waste shall mean any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks and means solid waste from single-family and multi-family residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or industrial process or operations as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(18). 
Open dump or dump site means a disposal site, location or facility at which solid waste from one or more sources is left to decompose, burn or to otherwise create a threat to human health or the environment as defined in Section 391-3-4-.01(44) of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management. 
Person is any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, group, entity or organization of any kind. 
Public or private property shall mean the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests, as defined in O.C.G.A. 16-7-42(2). 
Recovered materials shall mean those materials which have known use, reuse, or recycling potential and have been diverted or removed from the solid waste stream for sale, use, reuse or recycling as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(25). 
Recovered materials processing facility shall mean a facility engaged solely in the storage, processing, and resale or reuse of recovered materials as defined in O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(26). 
Scrap tire shall mean a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect, or one that cannot be retreaded or otherwise recycled. O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(31). 
Scrap tire carrier shall mean any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted under Section 391-304-.19(5.g) for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user, or disposal facility. O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(32). 
Scrap tire generator shall mean any person who generates scrap tires as defined in Section 391-3-4-.19(2.i) of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge for a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution contract facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product materials as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(33). 
Solid waste handling means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing or disposal of solid waste, or any combination of such activities. O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(34). 
Tire retailer shall mean any person engaged in the business of selling new, retreaded or used replacement tires. O.C.G.A. 12-8-22(39). 
Waste shall mean all discarded substances and materials whatsoever exceeding ten pounds in weight or 15 cubic feet in volume, or any such substance in any weight or volume if biomedical waste, hazardous waste (as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 12-8-62), or any such substance or material dumped for commercial purposes. With the exception of non-hazardous, low-impact animal bi-products classified by DNR, "waste" includes without limitation, bottles, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, tires, dead animals including their bedding and other wastes from such animals, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from a wastewater treatment facility, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, air contaminants from any source or facility, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, mining, or governmental operations, including household, commercial, construction and demolition waste, or industrial solid waste by which is nonhazardous, nonmedical, and in a form classified as solid waste by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. O.C.G.A. 16-7-51. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § 1; Res. of 5-18-2017, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-102. - Waste disposal—General. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposing of all litter, scrap tires, and municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste on the premises used or occupied by such persons. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to dump, or permit the dumping of litter, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place in Pickens County including, and without limitations, any public or private property in the county or any waters in Pickens County unless such litter or waste originates in Pickens County or other areas authorized by the sole commissioner of Pickens County; and 
(1)  The property is designated by the sole commissioner or the duly designated agent for the disposal of litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, scrap tires or recovered materials and the person is authorized to use such property. 
(2)  The litter, municipal, commercial or industrial solid waste, recyclables or scrap tires is place into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property; and 
(3)  The property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by EPD. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or place waste unless authorized to do so by law or by a duly issued permit: 
(1)  In or on any public highways, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; 
(2)  In or on any fresh water lake, river, canal, stream, or creek, or; 
(3)  In or on any public or private property unless such dumping will not adversely affect the public health and is not in violation of any other local, state or federal law, rule or regulation. 
(d)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, tire retailers, shall be subject to rules as defined in Section 391-3-4-.19 and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. 12-8-20, et. seq. and the Rules for Solid Waste Management, Chapter 391-33-4, 392-3-4-.19 applicable to solid waste and tires. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § II) 
Sec. 58-103. - Transporting solid waste and litter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in Pickens County hauling municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste that leaks, flows freely or spills from said vehicle. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the county unless such truck or other vehicle is so constructed or loaded or covered so as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown, scattered or in any manner deposited in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property within the county. Any litter or municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste hauled on a moving vehicle shall be covered in such a manner that litter will not blow or escape from said vehicle while moving or parked on public or private property in Pickens County. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to transport litter or waste on any public streets, or roadways, in Pickens County without suitable coverings or other restraint devices securely fastening such litter or waste to the vehicle so as to prevent any materials from being deposited onto other motor vehicles, pedestrians, or the roadway and its adjoining areas. However, this section shall not prohibit the necessary and permitted spreading of any substance in public road maintenance or public road construction operations. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a business or private person(s) engaged in waste hauling or transportation for hire from businesses or private residences to a county landfill or lawfully permitted dump site to dispose of materials as solid waste that have been intentionally sorted as recyclables by the business or private residence customers, rather than placing the materials in the location designated by the county or appropriate authority for said recyclables. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the county, the wheels or tires of which carry unto or deposit in or upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place or upon private property within the county, mud, dirt, sticky substance, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § III) 
Sec. 58-104. - Regulation of all solid waste or litter containers and receptacles. 
(a)  All solid waste or litter containers or receptacles shall be maintained in as sanitary a manner as is reasonably possible consistent with its use for solid waste and litter disposal. 
(b)  Persons using solid waste and litter containers or receptacles shall deposit only authorized solid waste and refuse in the container or receptacle. 
(c)  No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any container or receptacle unless authorized by the owner of the receptacle or the sole commissioner of Pickens County or his or her designee. 
(d)  No person shall deposit any burning or smoldering material in such container or receptacle. 
(e)  No person shall set fire to the contents of any such container or receptacle. 
(f)  No person shall deposit large non-compatible articles in containers or receptacles such as, but not limited to, stoves, refrigerators, bed springs, automobile parts, boat parts, large tree limbs or air conditioning units, except containers or receptacles designated for that purpose only. 
(g)  No person shall deposit any flammable or explosive materials in any such container or receptacle. 
(h)  No dead animals, livestock or poultry shall be deposited in any such container or receptacle, except receptacles designed for such purpose and so designated by the sole commissioner of Pickens County. 
(i)  No person shall willfully damage or alter the location of any such container or receptacle without the written consent of the sole commissioner of Pickens County. 
(j)  No salvage or scavenging operations shall be conducted in or around such containers or receptacles except by written consent of the sole commissioner of Pickens County. 
(k)  No person shall deposit any solid waste at a county solid waste collection and recycling center unless such solid waste is contained in such a manner that it can be handled by the attendant. Solid waste shall be deposited only during the official hours of operation, unless express written permission is given by the sole commissioner of Pickens County or designee. 
(l)  No person shall deposit solid waste, water or litter of any kind at any county solid waste collection and recycling center into county owned receptacles or containers designated for the collection of recovered materials. Only authorized materials such as a glass, aluminum, newspaper, cardboard, plastic, and tin or other accepted material may be deposited in the appropriate container designated for said material. 
(m)  Commercial solid waste refuse areas (dumpsters) and trash. Storage of commercial solid waste and/or recovered materials outside shall be prohibited for new commercial and multi-family residential developments as of May 18, 2017, except within appropriate enclosures. Refuse areas (dumpsters) shall be placed in the least visible location from public streets, and shall be enclosed on all sides by opaque walls, with one or more opaque closing gate(s). The height of opaque walls and opaque closing gates shall be at least as high as the receptacle. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § IV; Res. of 5-18-2017, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 58-105. - Regulation of municipal solid waste landfills, inert landfills, construction and demolition landfills, and solid waste collection and recycling centers. 
(a)  No landfill shall be operated in Pickens County, Georgia other than a landfill designated by the sole commissioner as the county landfill, and no private municipal solid waste landfill shall be operated in Pickens County, Georgia without a solid waste handling permit issued by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, with the exception of inert construction and demolition landfills having been properly permitted as such by the Georgia DNR/EPD. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit solid waste of any kind outside the gate of a solid waste collection and recycling center. 
(c)  No scavenging operation of any kind shall be allowed at a solid waste collection and recycling center, without express written permission from the sole commissioner. 
(d)  No person shall move, remove, or cross any fence, gate, barrier, or sign at a solid waste and recycling center. 
(e)  Price on solid waste brought to said center will be set to defray total cost of solid waste and recycling operations. 
(f)  Hours of operation of said centers will be set to maximize convenience to residents of that area. 
(g)  All recovered materials (recyclables) brought to collection centers will be accepted free of charge provided, it is separated under current market specifications and likewise uncontaminated. 
(h)  Attendant on duty will have full authority of said center consistent with this ordinance. 
(i)  All rules listed above shall apply to all public and/or private property in said county, all waters and/or waterways of Pickens County, and all Pickens County Solid Waste Collection and Recycling Centers. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § V) 
Sec. 58-106. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No owner or occupant of any such property shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and written permission from the sole commissioner or applicable regulatory agency, including but not limited to, the Environmental Protection Agency, Environmental Protection Division and/or the Georgia Forestry Service. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state or federal law. 
(b)  No owner or occupant of any property shall allow the accumulation, on his or her premises, of garbage, litter or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any containers used for the storage or dumping of litter or waste. 
(d)  The conduct described in subsections (a)—(c) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of the article for each day the garbage or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § VI) 
Sec. 58-107. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Any person(s), firm, or corporation violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, in the magistrate court of Pickens County, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense: By a fine of not less than $100.00 and not more than $1,000.00 or up to 30 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. O.C.G.A. 16-7-43. However, this section shall not preclude the county from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, it being the intent of the county to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area; 
(2)  For the second or more offense(s): The violator shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature punishable by a fine of not less than $750.00 and not more than $1,000.00, or up to 60 days imprisonment, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. O.C.G.A. 16-7-53-B; and/or 
(b)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the offender(s) may also be directed to pick up and remove litter from any public streets or highways and/or other public right of way or private areas for a distance not to exceed one mile, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution or sentence as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 16-7-43(b); and/or 
(c)  In the sound discretion of the judge of the court with jurisdiction, the person may be directed to pick up and remove litter from any public park, private right of way, or with the prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter thereon, and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and/or 
(d)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this article; and/or 
(e)  The court may order the violator to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation; and/or 
(f)  In the case of an improper garbage or waste disposal site, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this article. Pickens County shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; and/or 
(g)  The expense incurred by the county for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the violator, including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this article. 
(h)  In addition to actions filed by Pickens County for violations of this article, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § VII) 
Sec. 58-108. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the sole commissioner of Pickens County, the environmental education and enforcement officer or his/her designee, and/or the Pickens County Marshal's Office and/or the Pickens County Sheriff's Office. 
(b)  Any person or persons authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this article, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this article must be visible from a public road or right of way, or upon said officer(s) having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this article, or by a judge's order upon said officer(s) having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(c)  Appeals for violation of this article may be made to the magistrate court of Pickens County, or higher court if the offender so chooses. The offender always has the right to consult his/her attorney at any time before the hearing is scheduled for court. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § VIII) 
Sec. 58-109. - Civil remedies and abatement of nuisance. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this article, the county or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, clean-up or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, lien on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. O.C.G.A. 16-7-52, 16-7-53. In addition, the county may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other county issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer(s) in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court as defined in subsection (a)(2) of section 58-107 of this article. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this article, the court and/or the sole commissioner may cause written notice to be given, or incorporate into the court to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this article for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violators last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within 20 days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the sole commissioner is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of, including but not limited to, any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this article, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article on behalf of the county. The expenses incurred by the county shall be chargeable to the violator and a statement of the amount due for said expenses shall be sent by the sole commissioner and/or the court by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the sole commissioner shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the county, the dates of county action, the location of the property for which action was taken and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recordation of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by laws for the collection of taxes. 
(f)  In the event that waste(s) or hazardous materials in a dump site cannot be removed from public or private property without causing further endangerment to the environment and/or public health, whether legal or illegal, caused with intent or by accident, acts of God or force of nature, or where a permit for such long-term or permanent disposal has been issued by the proper authority as defined in section 58-105 of this article, the county may attach or otherwise affix a permanent addendum to the deed of real property wherein the dump site exists, stating the approximate size and location of the dump on the property and an approximate description of the materials contained therein, as well as the approximate dates such dumping occurred, to be recorded on the property plat as a fill area O.C.G.A. 12-8-30. The purpose of said attachment is to preserve the health and safety of current and future landowners and users of said properties, to promote the integrity of property description and values, and to record the location of said dump sites. The county's exercise of subsection (f) of this section shall in no way be mandatory, and Pickens County or its agents shall not be held liable for exercise of action or inaction for implementation of this subsection nor for the costs of such action or inaction, (Section 391-3-4-.06 of the Georgia Rules of Solid Waste Management). 
(g)  This section shall apply with full force and effect regardless of the provisions of any order of the court in which the violator was convicted. This action should not be construed as an excuse for failure on the part of the violator to perform any cleanup ordered by the court, nor shall it be considered as a mitigating factor in any contempt action against a violator who has failed to obey the order of the court. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § IX) 
Sec. 58-110. - Evidence of violations. 
(a)  Whenever litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this article, is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped by any person(s) or, from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima-facie evidence that said person(s) or the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Whenever any litter, or any type of waste(s) as defined in this article, which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of the article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § X) 
Sec. 58-111. - Yard trimmings. 
Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with solid waste. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at any solid waste disposal facility having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion within the county. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. Any yard trimmings to be collected by any entity other than the property owner shall be sorted and stored in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § XI) 
Sec. 58-112. - Recycling. 
The sole commissioner of Pickens County hereby finds that it is in the best interest of the citizens of Pickens County, in order to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, to recycle as many waste materials as possible in order to reduce the accumulation of litter and garbage and solid waste materials which must be properly disposed of, therefore, it is the policy of the sole commissioner of Pickens County to encourage recycling wherever practicable. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003, § XII) 
Sec. 58-113. - General procedures for handling scrap tires. 
All scrap tires generated in Georgia must be disposed of properly. The proper way to dispose of scrap tires is to make sure that they end up at an approved handling facility. An approved handling facility is any end user, sorter or processor which is approved by the Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
Anyone who ends up with scrap tires is called a scrap tire generator. All scrap tire generators must have a generator identification number issued by the EPD. Anyone who hauls scrap tires for profit must have a scrap tire carrier permit. However, scrap tire generators can haul their own scrap tires to an approved handling facility. In order for anyone to accept scrap tires as an approved handling facility, they must be permitted by EPD. 
The Environmental Protection Division has developed a procedure for tracking the scrap tires from the generator until they end up at the proper handling facility. A three-part document, called a manifest, is used to verify that the scrap tires are handled correctly. The scrap tire generator fills out part I of the manifest. It is important that the generator list the amount and eventual destination of the tires. The carrier is to fill out part II of the manifest and sign it before the scrap tires are hauled away. The carrier then takes the tires to an approved handling facility which is responsible for filling out part III of the manifest. The completed manifest must then be returned to the generator within 30 days. It is the responsibility of the generator to make sure that the manifest is returned within the required time period. Most of the approved handling facilities have their own scrap tire carriers. In this case, the carrier can sign both part II and part III of the manifest and leave it with the generator. The generator is required to keep the manifest on location where it is available for inspection for a time period of three years. 
The responsibility for keeping up with this procedure has been placed on the generator. Therefore, it is the generators responsibility to make sure that the carrier is permitted, that the carrier fills out part II of the manifest and that the manifest is returned within 30 days. If the above procedure has been followed correctly, we can be assured that the scrap tires are properly disposed of and no one will be in violation of the law. 
(Ord. of 5-8-2003) 
Chapter 62 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(9); any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-6(14); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-301 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18. 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-66 et seq. 

Sec. 62-31. - Findings. 
O.C.G.A. § 48-5-295 as amended by 1996 Ga. Laws, page 190, Section 2 provides that the county governing authority shall select the length of terms of office for members of its county board of tax assessors for not less than three years nor more than six years and for the staggering of such terms of office. 
(Res. of 3-14-1997) 
Sec. 62-32. - Authority. 
Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-295, the provisions of this article are adopted. 
(Res. of 3-14-1997) 
Sec. 62-33. - Members; terms. 
The county board of tax assessors shall consist of five members whose terms shall be as follows: 
(1)  Position A shall have a term of six years, the initial term beginning January 1, 1997 and ending December 31, 2002, and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified; 
(2)  Position B shall have a term of five years, the initial term beginning January 1, 1997 and ending December 31, 2001, and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified; 
(3)  Position C shall have a term of four years, the initial term beginning January 1, 1997 and ending December 31, 2000, and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified; 
(4)  Position D shall have a term of six years; however, the initial term beginning August 18, 1997, and ending December 31, 2002, and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified; 
(5)  Position E shall have a term of five years; however, the initial term beginning August 18, 1997, and ending December 31, 2001, and until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. 
(Res. of 3-14-1997, § 1; Res. of 8-18-1997, § 1) 
Sec. 62-34. - Vacancies. 
Subsequent to the adoption of this article all new appointments and reappointments to the county board of tax assessors shall be for the term lengths specified in this article. In the event of a vacancy on the board at any time, whether caused by death, resignation, removal or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by appointment of the county governing authority. Any person appointed to fill a vacancy shall be appointed only to serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of office and shall possess the same qualifications required for regular appointment to a full term of office. 
(Res. of 3-14-1997, § II) 
Sec. 62-35. - Change of term length prohibited. 
The county governing authority shall not be authorized to again change the term length until the expiration of the term of office of the first appointment or reappointment following the resolution that last changed such terms of office; and, in no event shall the resolution from which this article is derived be amended so that a change in the terms of office would result in a voting majority of the board of tax assessors having their terms expire in the same calendar year. 
(Res. of 3-14-1997, § III) 
Sec. 62-36. - Reappointment. 
Any number of the county board of tax assessors shall be eligible for reappointment after review of his service on the board by the appointing authority. 
(Res. of 3-14-1997, § IV) 
Secs. 62-37—62-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JOINT COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL SALES AND USE TAX 

Sec. 62-66. - Findings. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-85, a referendum election was held in Pickens County, Georgia, on June 4, 1985, and a majority of the votes cast were in favor of levying a retail sales and use tax of one percent within the special district whose boundaries are conterminous with the boundaries of Pickens County, Georgia. 
(b)  The county of Pickens County, Georgia, a qualified county as defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-8-81, desires to impose the joint municipal and county sales and use tax within the special district whose boundaries are conterminous with those of Pickens County, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-86. 
(Res. of 7-1-1985) 
Sec. 62-67. - Levied. 
The commissioner of the county does hereby levy a joint county and municipal sales and use tax within the special district whose boundaries are conterminous with the boundaries of Pickens County, Georgia, and that the effective date of this levy shall be October 1, 1985. 
(Res. of 7-1-1985) 
Secs. 62-68—62-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— County hotel/motel occupancy tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 62-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means the unincorporated area of Pickens County. 
Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy by one or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. The term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention building or other building in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Occupancy means the use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of such premises, a lessee, sublessee, mortgagor in possession or licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guestroom in a hotel for at least ten consecutive days next preceding such date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit, excepting the United States of America and the state, and any political subdivision of either the United States and the state upon which the county is without power to impose the tax provided for in this article. 
Private sector nonprofit organization shall be the Pickens County Chamber of Commerce or any other private group organized for similar purposes which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy, valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Supervisor means the supervisor of the county clerk's office, or any office of the county which may in the future be designated as the administrative entity to collect the hotel/motel occupance tax. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § I; Res. of 11-18-2005, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-102. - Administration and enforcement; records. 
(a)  Authority of county clerk. The county clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Additional rules and regulations. The county clerk shall have the power and the authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the county and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of taxes under this article. 
(c)  Required records. Every operator renting guestrooms in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the supervisor may require. 
(d)  Examination of records. The county clerk, or any person authorized in writing by the clerk, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax, and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports. In administration of the tax, the county clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in his or their possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the county clerk when required by the clerk, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, and such other information as the county clerk may require. 
(f)  Confidentiality of information. The county clerk or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known, in any manner whatever, the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditure, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof, to be seen or examined by any person not having administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, and interest and penalties. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § II) 
Sec. 62-103. - Levy; rate. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(3.4), there shall be paid a tax of six percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the county. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid upon any occupancy on and after January 1, 1998. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § III; Res. of 11-18-2005, § 2) 
Sec. 62-104. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this county is liable for the tax imposed by this article. His liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the county, except that a receipt is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers, provided such receipt is from an operator maintaining a place of business in this county or from an operator who is authorized by the supervisor of the county clerk, under such rules and regulations as he may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purpose of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this county. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § IV) 
Sec. 62-105. - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed under this article upon: 
(1)  A permanent resident. 
(2)  A corporation or association organized and operated exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes, or for more than one of such purposes, no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual. 
(3)  An occupant whose rent will be paid directly by warrant on funds of the federal, state or county government, or any other government within the state or the United States. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § V) 
Sec. 62-106. - Registration of operators; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register with the county clerk, on a form provided by the clerk. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business, the location of the place of business, and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the county clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in the case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; and in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or someone specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The supervisor of the county clerk shall, within ten days after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate of the certificate for each additional place of business of such registrant. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable, and shall be prominently displayed in the place of business so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. Such certificate shall be nonassignable, and shall be returned to the county clerk upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § VI) 
Sec. 62-107. - Collection by operator. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the county as provided in section 62-104, and renting guestrooms in the county, shall collect the tax imposed by this article at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant, and on demand shall give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on thereof. The commissioner shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of the tax. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § VII) 
Sec. 62-108. - Unlawful advertising regarding tax. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax imposed by this article or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § VIII) 
Sec. 62-109. - Returns; payment. 
(a)  Due date for payment. The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this county. All amounts of such taxes collected by an operator are due and payable to the county clerk between the first and 20th day of the calendar month next following the calendar month or fiscal period for which the return is being filed. 
(b)  Filing of return. Each operator or person liable for payment of the tax shall file a return monthly with the county clerk in such form as the clerk may prescribe. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, rents exempt from tax, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period, and such other information as required by the county clerk. 
(d)  Collection allowance. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction for submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the Georgia Retailers and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act, approved February 20, 1951, as amended. 
(e)  Extension of time for filing return or paying tax. For good cause, the supervisor of the county clerk may extend, for a period not to exceed one month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension, shall pay, in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, for the period of such extension, to the time of making the return and payment. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § IX) 
Sec. 62-110. - Deficiency or overpayment; late payment. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the county clerk is not satisfied with the returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the county by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency or late payment. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the first day after the close of the prior monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the county clerk may offset overpayment for a period against underpayments for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. However, if it is determined by the supervisor that overpayment of occupancy tax was made by the occupants to the operator, all overpayments of tax will be made to the county clerk without any operator's compensation for collection of the overpayment. 
(d)  Penalty for delinquent payment. When a return or remittance is delinquent, the operator shall not be allowed the applicable compensation for accounting for and remitting the tax, and he must remit the total amount due. The total amount due is the gross tax, without deduction for the operator's compensation, plus interest, plus a specific penalty, to be added to the tax, of ten percent of the gross tax due, per month, from the first day after the close of each monthly period for which the tax is due until the date of payment. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade tax. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of 25 percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto in addition to interest and penalties due to late payment. 
(f)  Service of notices. The county clerk or designated representative shall give to the operator written notice of its determination under this section. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the county clerk. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
(g)  Time limit for service of notice of deficiency determination. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the fifth day of the calendar month for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § X) 
Sec. 62-111. - Collection of unpaid tax; refunds. 
(a)  Determination of tax when no return made. If any person fails to make a return as required by this article, the county clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the person failed to make the return, and shall be based upon any information which is in the possession of the county clerk, or which may come into its possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the county clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the county, adding to the sum, per month, from the day after the close of each monthly period for which tax is due until the date of payment, a penalty equal to ten percent thereof. One or more than one determination may be made for one or for more than one period. 
(b)  Notice to persons holding credits or property of delinquent taxpayer. If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid by him, or if a determination has been made against him which remains unpaid, the county clerk may, not later than three years after the payment becomes delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the county who have in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent person, or owing any debts to the delinquent person. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified may not transfer or dispose of any such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the county clerk consents to a transfer or disposition or until 20 days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall, within five days after receipt of the notice, advise the county clerk of all such credits, other personal property or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  Action to collect tax. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the supervisor may bring an action in the courts of this state or any other state, or of the United States, in the name of the county, to collect the amount delinquent, together with penalties and interest, court fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  Duty of successors of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assignees shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price to cover such obligation until the former owner produces a receipt from the county clerk showing that the county has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  Failure of successor of operator to withhold tax. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the tax from the purchase price as required by this section, he becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him, to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within 30 days after, the supervisor shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the county clerk of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the county clerk to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold the tax from the purchase price as provided in this section. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out his business, or at the time the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Refunds. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the county clerk within three years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the supervisor. If the claim is approved by the commissioner, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts that are due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § XI) 
Sec. 62-112. - Failure to register or furnish return or other data; making false return or report. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the supervisor, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as provided in this article. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report under this article who makes any false or fraudulent report with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due under this article is guilty of a violation of a county ordinance and is punishable as provided in this article. 
(Res. of 11-14-1997, § XII) 
Sec. 62-113. - Expenditure of proceeds. 
In each fiscal year during which the tax is collected, the county shall expend: 
(1)  An amount equal to the amount by which the total taxes collected under this Code section exceed the taxes which would be collected at a rate of three percent; and 
(2)  An amount equal to 16.66 percent of the total tax collected at the rate of six percent; 
for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions, and trade shows pursuant to a contract with a private sector nonprofit organization. Said expenditures shall be pursuant to and in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(3.4)(A). 
(Res. of 11-18-2005, § 3) 
Secs. 62-114—62-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FREEPORT EXEMPTION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 

Sec. 62-146. - Findings. 
A properly advertised and properly conducted referendum was held on August 12, 1986, to determine whether Pickens County would allow the Freeport Exemption, as specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 and a majority of the voters of the county voted in favor of allowing the exemption on the following three classes of inventory and/or tangible personal property: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the State of Georgia. The exemption provided for in this article shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the State of Georgia in the ordinary course of the taxpayers manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in this article shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment outside the State of Georgia and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the State of Georgia from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this article shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. All property that is claimed to be exempt under the provisions of this subsection shall be designated as being "in transit" upon the official books and records of the warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, where such property is being stored. Such official books and records shall contain a full, true, and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, pertaining to any such "in transit" property, shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(Ord. of 12-1-1986) 
Sec. 62-147. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases are defined as follows: 
Finished goods shall mean goods, wares, and merchandise of every character and kind, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources, or raw materials, or goods in the process of manufacture or production, or the stock-in-trade of a retailer. 
Raw materials shall mean any material whether crude or processed that can be converted by manufacture, processing, or combination into a new and useful product, but shall not include unrecovered, unextracted, or unsevered natural resources. 
(Ord. of 12-1-1986) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-148. - Commissioner to set rate of exemption. 
The commissioner of the county sets the rate of exemption of all three classes of such tangible personal property at 80 percent of the value of such tangible personal property. 
(Ord. of 12-1-1986) 
Secs. 62-149—62-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 62-181. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied, an annual business license tax upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of the depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
Sec. 62-182. - Minimum business license tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 62-181 shall be $1,000.00. 
Sec. 62-183. - Filing of return. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the board of commissioners on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioners of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The board of commissioners shall assess and collect the tax levied pursuant to this resolution based upon the information provided in such return. 
Sec. 62-184. - Due date of taxes. 
Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after the filing of the return prescribed by section 62-183 unless extended by the commissioner of the county. 
Secs. 62-185—62-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - GROSS PREMIUMS TAX ON INSURERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— General assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c). 

Sec. 62-216. - Levied. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon each insurer doing insurance business within the unincorporated area of the county, in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year on all insurance, other than life insurance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), (3), (4) and (5). Gross direct premiums shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
Chapter 66 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; utilities, ch. 74. 
State Law reference— Regulation of cable television systems by counties, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq.; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1—66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS 

Sec. 66-31. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section: 
Commence operation means the completion of at least one of the following: 
(1)  The stringing of at least one-half mile of coaxial cable on utility or other poles in the public ways of this county, or 
(2)  The installation of the receiving antenna and facilities capable of receiving satisfactory reception and retransmission according to the technical standards enumerated in this article, the television signals from at least one television station located in Atlanta. 
Commissioner means the present governing body of the county or any future body governing the county. 
Community antenna television system or CATV means the coaxial cables, waveguides, or other conductors and equipment for providing television and audio communication services by cable or through its facilities as contemplated in this article. 
Franchisee means the person(s) or corporation(s) to whom or which a franchise under this article is granted by the commissioner and the lawful successor or assignee of such person(s) or corporation(s). 
Gross receipts means any and all compensation and other consideration in any form whatever and any contributing grant or other subsidy received directly or indirectly from subscribers, users, television stations or others in payment for the franchisee's services in providing television signals or electrical impulses to subscribers within the county, and gross receipts shall be taken to mean all those yearly gross receipts of the franchise collected by such franchisee which such franchisee would not have received but for the grant of such franchise, and such figures shall not be abated by any formula, or in any way, to reflect the percentage of such receipts attributable to the use of the county's public ways in relation to the capital investment of the franchise in the remainder of the franchisee's facilities. Gross receipts shall not include any taxes on the service furnished by the grantee imposed directly on any subscriber by the county, state or other governmental unit by the franchisee for such governmental unit. 
Public way means any street, highway, road, walk, freeway, parkway, lane, alley, court or drive, in which the public has a right-of-way, or any easement which the county controls and the terms of which are broad enough to include the passage of transmission lines for CATV cables, now or hereafter existing as such. Included in this definition shall be the areas on, above or below the surface of such ways in so far as the public right extends thereto. 
Subscribers means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the CATV service of the franchisee in this article. 
TV means television. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 1) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 66-32. - Advertising for proposals for CATV. 
This article shall be referred to and incorporated by reference in any advertising which this county may wish to do inviting proposals for the granting of an exclusive franchise to construct, erect, operate and maintain upon the public ways of this county a CATV system, and shall be referred to and incorporated by reference in any franchise which may hereafter be granted by this county. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 66-33. - Substantive legal bases. 
Any franchise granted under this article shall be based on the powers set forth in the official Code of Georgia and such other provisions of the general law of this state as are not in conflict with this article. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 2) 
Sec. 66-34. - Uses permitted by franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall authorize and permit the franchisee to engage in the business of providing and operating a CATV system in the county; to install, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, under, upon, across and along any public way such poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, so to use, operate, and provide similar facilities on properties rented or leased from a public utility franchised or permitted to do business in the county. 
(b)  No franchise, or any renewal thereof, granted by the commissioner under this article shall be for a term longer than 25 years following the date of acceptance of such franchise or the renewal thereof, by the franchisee. Any such franchise may be terminated prior to its expiration by the commissioner in the event that after 60 days' notice to franchisee by the county of franchisee's failure to comply with a material provision of this article or notice to cease violation by act or omission of any term or condition of this article and such condition continues to exist, then after such commissioner shall have found after notice and public hearing, that: 
(1)  The franchisee has failed to comply with any material provisions of this article, or has, by act or omission, violated any term or condition of any franchise or permit issued under this article, or 
(2)  The provisions of this article have become invalid or unenforceable, and the commissioner further finds that such provisions constitute a consideration material to the grant of such franchise; provided, however, that the franchisee shall be given at least 60 days' notice of any proposed termination proceeding. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall be construed to preclude the franchise from introducing program material into a franchised CATV system or portion thereof. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 3) 
Sec. 66-35. - Franchise fee. 
(a)  The franchisee of any CATV franchise granted under this article shall pay to the county from and after the granting of a franchise and until its expiration or until such earlier time as the rate provided in this section may be renegotiated, five percent per annum of the CATV gross receipts. Such monies paid to the county shall be in addition to all other occupancy and license taxes or other taxes on the right to do business which are or may be imposed on the franchisee by the county; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed so as to apply to gross receipts for areas incorporated within the county, or for operations of the franchisee unrelated to CATV. 
(b)  Payment of such franchise fee shall be made on or before March 1 of each year for the calendar year preceding. Franchisee shall file with the county clerk at the time of payment a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant showing in detail the total gross receipts, as defined in the article, of franchisee, its successors or assigns, during the preceding 12-month period. 
(c)  The county shall have the right of inspection of franchisee's records from which its gross receipts are computed. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 4) 
Sec. 66-36. - Limitations of franchise. 
(a)  No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this article except those specifically prescribed in this section. 
(b)  Any privilege claimed in any public way by the franchisee under such franchise shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of such public way or public property. 
(c)  Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original franchisee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased or assigned, disposed of in whole or in part, either by forced or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise without prior consent of the county expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may be therein prescribed; provided, however, that no such consent shall be required for any transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation, as a whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness. The consent of the county may not be arbitrarily refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show financial responsibility and must agree to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Time shall be of the essence of any franchise granted under this article. The franchisee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this article, or by any failure of the county to enforce prompt compliance. 
(e)  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the county is subject to transfer by the commissioner to any other officer, employee, department, or board of the county. 
(f)  The franchise shall have no recourse whatsoever against the county for any loss, cost, expense or damage, arising out of any provision or requirement of this article or its enforcement. 
(g)  Franchisee is subject to all requirements of the county ordinance, rules, regulation and specifications of the county heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, including but not limited to, those concerning street work, street excavation, use, removal, and relocation of property within a street, and other street work. 
(h)  Any franchise granted under this article shall not relieve the franchisee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department of the county, the utility companies, or from others maintaining poles in the public ways of this county, wherein the franchisee finds it necessary under its operation to make use of those poles as may now exist or which may hereafter exist in the rights-of-way of this county. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 5) 
Sec. 66-37. - Rights reserved to the county. 
There is hereby reserved to the county every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided in this section by any ordinance of the county or by general law, and the franchisee, by his acceptance of this franchise, agrees to be bound thereby, and to comply with any action or requirement of the county in its exercise of any such right or power, heretofore, or hereafter enacted or established. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 6) 
Sec. 66-38. - Time of performance. 
Franchisee shall, within 24 months after obtaining FCC permits, equitably and reasonably extend its energized cable plant to a minimum of 30 percent of the subscribers in the unserved franchise area and thereafter continue to expand its facilities until completed insofar as franchisee is technically and financially able to do so. Provided that the franchisee shall not be obligated to extend its lines to those areas in which there are less than an average of 40 subscriber homes along each mile of cable plant that would be required to serve such homes. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 7) 
Sec. 66-39. - Location of franchisee's properties. 
(a)  Any poles, wires, cable lines, conduits or other properties of franchisee to be constructed or installed in the public ways shall be so constructed or installed only at such locations and in such manner as shall be approved by the appropriately designated county official, acting in the exercise of his reasonable discretion. 
(b)  The franchisee may install or erect any facilities or apparatus on public property or rights-of-way within the county upon obtaining written approval of the appropriately designated county official, in advance. 
(c)  Construction or installation of franchisee's cable lines or conduits in all other public places, owned or controlled by the county, shall be subject to the approval of and regulation by the commissioner in advance. 
(d)  The "designated county official" shall not under this section require franchisee to construct or install its cable plant in any manner contrary to generally accepted engineering principles or contrary to economic feasibility. Should any disagreement occur between the designated county official and franchisee, construction and/or installation shall cease until the matter is resolved by the commissioner, and such cessation by franchisee shall not be considered a violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 8) 
Sec. 66-40. - Removal or abandonment of property of franchise. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any part of the CATV system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any public way or public place without complying with the requirements of its franchise, or the franchise has been terminated, or cancelled or has expired, the franchisee upon being given notice shall promptly remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles, or such system other than that which the commissioner may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of any such removal, the franchisee shall promptly restore the public way or other area from which such property has been removed, to a condition satisfactory to the commissioner. 
(b)  Any property of the franchise remaining in place 90 days after the termination of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The commissioner may extend this time not to exceed 60 days. 
(c)  Any property abandoned in place by the franchisee shall be abandoned in such a manner as the commissioner may prescribe. Under permanent abandonment of the property of the franchisee in place, the property becomes that of the county and the franchisee shall submit to the county an instrument, to be approved by the county attorney, transferring to the county the ownership of such property. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 9) 
Sec. 66-41. - Changes required by public improvements. 
The franchisee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street, public way or public place, or remove from the public way or public place, any property of the franchise when required by the commissioner or its designee by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, and tracks or other type of structures or improvements by governmental agencies when acting in a governmental or proprietary capacity, or any other structures of public improvements; provided, however, that franchisee shall in all such cases have the privilege and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the franchisee in place as provided in section 66-39. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 10) 
Sec. 66-42. - Failure to perform street work. 
Upon failure of the franchisee to complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this article to be done in any public way, within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the commissioner or its designate, the county may cause such work to be done and the franchisee shall pay to the county the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the properly designated county official to the franchisee, within 30 days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 11) 
Sec. 66-43. - Faithful performance bond. 
(a)  The franchisee shall, concurrently with the filing of and acceptance of the award of any franchise granted under this article, file with the county clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, at franchisee's sole expense, a corporate surety bond, in a company approved by and in a form to be approved by the county attorney, in the amount of $25,000.00, renewable annually, provided that such bond may be waived in its entirety on demonstration to the satisfaction of the commissioner that the net worth and the ability of the company to perform, justify such waiver. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of franchisee and that in the event franchisee shall fail to comply with any one or more of the material provisions of this article, that there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond, any damages or loss suffered by the county as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee as prescribed hereby which may be in default, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees and costs, to the full amount of the bond; such condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of this franchise, and therefore until the franchisee has liquidated all of its obligations with the county that may have arisen from the acceptance of this franchise by the franchisee or from its exercise of any privilege granted in this article. The bond shall provide that 30 days' prior written notice of intention not to renew, cancellation or material change, be given to the county. 
(b)  Neither the provision of this section, any bond accepted by the county, nor any damages recovered by the county shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the franchisee or limit the liability of the franchisee under this franchise or for damages, either to the full amount of the bond or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 12) 
Sec. 66-44. - Indemnification of the county. 
(a)  Franchisee agrees that at all times during the existence of this franchise it will maintain in force, furnish and file with the county, at its own expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the county, its boards, commissions, officers, agents and employees, in a company authorized to do business in the state and in a form to be approved by the county attorney, protecting the county and such persons against liability for loss or damages for personal injury, death, and property damage or civil suit occasioned by the operations of franchisee under this franchise with a minimum liability limit of $100,000.00 for personal injury or death of any one person, and $300,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence, and, $50,000.00 for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence, provided that nothing in this section shall restrict such commissioner from amending these minimums at any time after two years from date of granting such franchise. 
(b)  The policies mentioned in subsection (a) of this section shall name Pickens County as an additional insured, and shall also contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or reduction in coverage of such policy shall be delivered to the county not less than ten days in advance of the effective date thereof. If such insurance is provided in either case by a policy which also covers franchisee or any other entity or person than those named in this subsection, then such policy shall contain the standard cross liability endorsement. 
(c)  No franchise granted under this article shall become effective unless and until each of the foregoing policies of insurance as required by this section has been delivered to the county. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 13) 
Sec. 66-45. - Operational standards. 
The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest and best accepted standards of the CATV industry, to the effect that subscribers shall receive the highest possible quality service. In determining the satisfactory extent of such standards, the following will apply: 
(1)  The CATV system shall be installed using all-band equipment capable of passing the entire VHF television and FM spectrum. 
(2)  The system shall have the further capability of converting UHF (ultra high frequency) signals to VHF (very high frequency) channels for distribution to the subscriber receivers. 
(3)  The system shall provide a minimum signal level of 2,000 micro-volts (across 300 ohms) at the input terminals of each of the television receivers connected to the system. 
(4)  The system and all equipment shall be designed and rated for 24-hour per day continuous operation. 
(5)  The minimum system signal to noise ratio as measured at the output of any standard trunkline amplifier shall be 46 db or better on all channels carried on the system. 
(6)  Hum modulation of the video (picture) shall be less than five percent. 
(7)  The system shall use components having a VSWR of 2.0 or less, as measured utilizing standard back-matching techniques. This shall apply to all passive components only. 
(8)  The system as installed shall be capable of passing color television signals with a material degradation of the color fidelity or the imposing of any sync clipping on the color burst information contained on the color-modulated video carrier of the station carried. 
(9)  FM (frequency modulation) signals distributed on this system shall be balanced as to amplitude in the same manner that television signals distributed shall have amplitude balance within the guidelines set forth under cable attenuation characteristics with the cable utilized in the system for distribution of signals. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 14) 
Sec. 66-46. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  All notices provided for in this section shall be dispatched by certified mail to parties concerned as follows: for the county, commissioner, Pickens County Courthouse, Jasper, Georgia 30143; for the franchisee, as provided by any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this article. All matters provided to be filed with the county shall be filed with the county clerk. 
(b)  The franchisee shall maintain a regular office and service department so located as to be able to provide prompt and efficient service to the subscribers located in this county at all times. 
(c)  In the event of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of Georgia or the Federal Communications Commission taking jurisdiction over all or a part of the regulations listed in this article as a part of this article, then the authority vested in the county by this article in the applicable areas shall cease. 
(d)  The franchisee shall deliver adequate television signals from at least one educational television channel, so long as there is such a channel available, and at least 12 other channels. 
(e)  Programs carried on any channel shall not be interrupted or altered by the CATV franchisee except as may hereafter be required by local, county, state or national civil defense authorities or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 15) 
Sec. 66-47. - Nonexclusive franchise. 
Any franchise granted under this article shall not be exclusive, and the commissioner reserves the right to grant a franchise under the same terms and conditions to more than one franchisee. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 16) 
Sec. 66-48. - Compliance with requirements. 
No franchise issued under this article shall become effective until all of the requirements of this article are fully met, including the filing of the certificates of insurance required by this article with the county clerk. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 17) 
Sec. 66-49. - Specific limitation. 
Any applicant granted a CATV franchise in the county shall have 100 percent physical control and carry 100 percent maintenance responsibility for all the equipment, installation and maintenance of the CATV plant; and further, these responsibilities shall not be delegated to any other individual, firm or organization without the approval of the commissioner. 
(Ord. of 2-6-1989, § 18) 
Secs. 66-50—66-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COUNTY CELL TOWER ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The Resolution of Dec. 16, 2010 repealed the former Art III, §§ 66-71—66-84, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to the county cell tower ordinance and derived from Res. of 5-28-2009, §§ 1—14. 

Sec. 66-71. - Purpose and legislative intent. 
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed Pickens County's authority concerning the placement construction and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. Pickens County finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character, and environment of the county and its inhabitants. The county also recognizes that the development of wireless service technology can be an asset to the economic development of the county as well as providing significant benefits to the county and its residents. In order to insure that the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the county's land use policies, the county shall adopt a single and comprehensive application and permit process for the placement, construction, and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to regulate the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities in a manner which: 
(1)  Accommodates the communication, radio, television, and electric generation needs of wireless telecommunication facilities while protecting the health, safety, and welfare of Pickens County and its inhabitants; 
(2)  Minimizes the adverse environmental and visual impacts of wireless communication facilities; 
(3)  Maximizes the use of existing and approved towers, buildings, or structures to accommodate new wireless telecommunication facilities; 
(4)  Avoids potential damage to adjacent properties; 
(5)  Minimizes the hazards these facilities pose to birds. 
The above shall be accomplished through location, structural, and construction standards accompanied by a comprehensive review of the site location, the design and engineering principles described in the application, as well as the implementation of those design and engineering principles in the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities in the county. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-72. - Severability. 
If any word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion of this article or any application thereof to any person or circumstance is declared void, unconstitutional or invalid for any reason then such word, phrase, sentence, part, section, subsection, or other portion, or the proscribed Application thereof, shall be severable and the remaining provisions of this article, and all applications thereof, not having been declared void, unconstitutional, or invalid, shall remain in full force and effect. 
Any permit issued under this article shall be comprehensive and not severable. If part of a permit is found to be invalid or unenforceable in any material respect by a competent authority the permit shall be void in total. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-73. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular section, the defined terms, phrases, words, abbreviations, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the context, words in the present tense include the future tense, words used in the plural number include words in the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Applicant. Any entity desiring to place a wireless telecommunications facility within Pickens County. 
Co-location. The location of the equipment required to meet an applicant's needs upon an existing wireless telecommunications facility. No additional permit is required to co-locate equipment on a facility which has already been permitted by the county. However, notification and fees are required by Pickens County prior to the commencement of work required for the co-location. 
FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and authorized successor agency. 
Formal party of record. Formal parties of record shall consist of the county planning and development office, the applicant, and persons making a filing as proscribed in section 66-78 below. 
Modification. The addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually discernable components or aspects of a wireless telecommunications facility which either increases the overall height of the facility or which modifies the facility outside of the fenced boundaries of the facility as originally permitted. 
The replacement of any components of a wireless telecommunications facility with identical components and normal repair and maintenance of a wireless telecommunications facility shall not be considered a modification. 
Stealth design technology. A wireless telecommunications facility which appropriately models or mimics in size, shape, scale, and color something which exists in the immediate landscape or which could be legally placed there. Examples include silos in a farm setting, trees in forested lands, church steeples, water towers, or other existing tall structures in the vicinity of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility. 
Wireless telecommunications facility. Any structure designed for the purposes of promoting wireless telecommunications as contemplated by the Federal Telecommunications Act. Also referred to herein as "facility". 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-74. - Applicability. 
Any and all placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities subsequent to the adoption of this article must receive a permit from the county commissioner before any work can commence on the facility. No permit shall be transferrable between applicants or properties. Permits expire six months from issuance. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-75. - Permit requirements. 
To obtain a permit for the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities, the applicant must present to the county planning and development office a survey, plans and specifications of the facility, title certificate, and statement as described below. In addition to the following documentation, the applicant will also be required to submit an application fee in an amount sufficient to pay advertising costs as well as staff employees, independent engineers, and other related experts and consultants to be hired by the county to review the documentation submitted and to inspect the site during the construction or modification of the wireless telecommunications facility. Said fee shall be as published in the county planning and development office. 
Once the documents have been filed and the application fee paid, the county planning and development office shall issue a written notification to the applicant that the application has been received. The county shall post a notice of the filing upon the property and upon the property's access point to the public road in a manner consistent with notices for land use reclassification hearings. The county shall deliver notice of the filing to contiguous land owners in a manner consistent with notices for land use reclassification hearings. The county shall advertise the filing for two weeks in the local legal organ in a manner consistent with notices for land use reclassification hearings. The county shall post the notice together with the application on its web site in a format which will enable the documents to be downloaded by the public. The notices shall state that any person wishing to classify themselves as a formal party of record should make the appropriate filing with the county planning and development office within 30 days. 
Should the county determine that the applicant's information fails to meet the requirements outlined below, or should the applicant fail to provide additional information as required by the county, the permit will be denied. If the construction or modification of the wireless telecommunications facility deviates from the submitted documentation, the permit will be revoked. 
(a)  Survey. At a minimum, the survey shall have the following information. Additional information may be required. All surveys shall bear the signature and seal of a Georgia registered surveyor and shall otherwise comply with the requirements to be recorded in the county superior court clerk's office. 
(1)  Boundaries of the parcel of property upon which the wireless telecommunications facility is to be located. 
(2)  Contour lines showing the elevation of the property. 
(3)  Identification of all contiguous landowners. 
(4)  Identification of all parties in possession of the surveyed property. 
(5)  A site location of the wireless telecommunications facility (including fencing) as it is to appear on the parcel showing it to be at least 200 feet from the boundary line of the property. 
(6)  Access from the wireless telecommunications facility to a public road. 
(7)  A description of all utility easements as they exist on the property together with a statement that the wireless telecommunications facility shall not be placed within said casement. 
(8)  A description of all public and private right-of-ways as they exist on the property together with a statement that the wireless telecommunications facility shall not be placed within said right-of-way. 
(b)  Plans and specifications. At a minimum, the plans and specifications shall meet the following requirements. Additional information may be required. All plans and specifications shall bear the signature and seal of a Georgia registered engineer. 
(1)  Professional qualifications of the engineer preparing the plans and specifications for the placement, construction, and/or modification of the wireless telecommunications facility. 
(2)  A list of each wireless telecommunications facility or similar structure which the engineer has designed. Said list shall include at a minimum a description of the structure, the location of the structure, and the local governing authority who issued the permit for the placement, construction, and/or modification of the structure. 
(3)  A list of at least five sites where the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is currently in use. 
(4)  A description of the wireless telecommunications facility to be constructed or the modifications to the existing structure. 
(5)  All plans and specifications shall provide for a monopole design of the wireless telecommunications facility which shall not be more than 195 feet in height as measured from ground level prior to construction. 
(6)  A construction schedule for the proposed wireless telecommunications facility. The use of temporary mobile wireless telecommunications facilities shall be limited to 24 hours. All construction shall be completed within six months of the issuance date of the permit. 
(7)  Copies of applications, permits, and licenses from the FCC and FAA for the facility owner and tenants, as applicable. 
(8)  A statement that the proposed design complies with all manufacturer's specifications for the equipment used with the wireless telecommunications facility. 
(9)  A statement that the proposed design complies with all state and local building and electrical codes. 
(c)  Title certificate. At a minimum, the title certificate shall have the following information. Additional information may be required. All title certificates shall be issued by an attorney licensed to practice law in the State of Georgia. 
(1)  The attorney shall certify the title to Pickens County, Georgia. 
(2)  The certificate shall be based on a search of the public record for the preceding 50 years. 
(3)  The property certified to shall be the exact same property as shown in the applicant's survey. 
(4)  The certificate shall set forth all matters pertaining to the marketability of said title, including but not limited to all utility easements, any covenants and restrictions running with the land, and liens against any party with an ownership interest. 
(d)  Statement of applicant. At a minimum, the statement of applicant shall have the following information. Additional information may be required. All statements of applicant shall be signed under oath by the applicant. 
(1)  An explanation as to why a new wireless telecommunications facility is needed. This explanation shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  A feasibility study on co-location with existing wireless telecommunications facilities within a one-mile radius. 
b.  The feasibility of other entities co-locating wireless telecommunications facilities upon the facility to be permitted. 
c.  A feasibility study on locating the proposed wireless telecommunications facility a distance outside of a one-mile radius of existing wireless telecommunications facilities. 
(2)  A description of the visual impact to be caused by the proposed wireless telecommunications facility. This description shall include but not be limited to: 
a.  A detailed plan to screen the wireless telecommunications facility with landscaping and other efforts including but not limited to the use of stealth technology. 
b.  A detailed plan to use building materials, colors, textures, screening, as well as landscaping efforts to blend the wireless telecommunications facility with the existing environment to the greatest extent possible. 
c.  Detailed description of applicability and compliance of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. 
(3)  A statement agreeing not to place lighting, signage, or other messaging upon the facility unless required by federal, state, or local authorities (for example, addressing requirements of 911 services, FCC licensing requirements). However, an unlighted, four-foot square sign shall be affixed at each of the cardinal points of the compass on the fence surrounding the wireless telecommunications facility. This sign shall contain a statement identifying the site as a wireless telecommunications facility and prohibiting unauthorized access to the site. Said notice shall also contain the 911 address of the facility together with the name and emergency contact information of the applicant or its agent. 
(4)  Evidence of insurance for premises liability including but not limited to adequate coverage for wrongful death, personal injury, and property damage. Coverage shall be a minimum of $1,000,000.00 per occurrence with a $2,000,000.00 aggregate. 
(5)  A statement agreeing to maintain security on the premises which reasonably prohibits unauthorized access. At a minimum, this shall include an eight-foot high locked chain link fence with three strands of barbed wire across its top. The first 12 feet of the tower shall be designed to prevent climbing. 
(6)  A statement agreeing to remove the wireless telecommunications facility if it remains unused for a period of 12 months once construction has been completed. 
(7)  A copy of all required state and federal licenses for the wireless telecommunications facility to be built. 
(8)  A written statement from all persons or entities holding an interest in the property consenting to the location of a wireless telecommunications facility upon the property. 
(9)  A description of the ownership interest of the applicant which gives it the legal ability to place a wireless telecommunications facility upon the property (a copy of a lease or vesting deed will suffice). 
(10)  A statement that all county ad valorem taxes levied against the property that can be paid have been paid, together with a copy of the most recent property tax bill. 
(11)  Names, addresses, and tax parcel identification numbers of all contiguous landowners. 
(12)  Names, addresses, and phone numbers of applicant. 
(13)  A maintenance and safety plan which insures the continued safety of the wireless telecommunications facility for the life of the facility. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-76. - Variances. 
If an applicant requests in writing to the county planning and development office a variance to the enforcement of any of the requirements of this article, the county commissioner is authorized to grant a variance if the county planning and development office finds that one or more of the following considerations are present: 
(1)  The placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is undertaken by a state or local governmental entity; 
(2)  The enforcement of the provisions described in the variance request would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; 
(3)  The enforcement of the provisions described in the variance request would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services; 
(4)  There are unusual, exceptional, or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property upon which the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities is proposed that do not generally apply to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the property owner's or applicant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or particular shape of the property being considered; and as a result of such unusual circumstance or condition, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical consideration which renders the compliance with this article unfairly difficult; 
The written request for a variance to the enforcement of any of the requirements of this article shall state with particularity: 
(1)  Which provision of this article cannot be complied with; 
(2)  Which of the four considerations referenced above are applicable; and 
(3)  How the purpose and intent of this article are not in conflict with the variance should it be granted. 
The authorization of any variance shall not conflict with the purpose and intent of this article. 
In granting a variance, the county commissioner may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the placement, construction, and/or modification of the wireless telecommunications facilities as may be deemed necessary to further the purpose and intent of this article. All requests for variances shall be made with the initial application and shall be considered as part of the application. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-77. - Filings. 
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all filings required or permitted by this article shall be made with and directed to the county planning and development office. All filings shall be date stamped by the county planning and development office. 
Each filing required or permitted by this article shall have one original, ten copies, and an electronic version of the filing in "pdf" format on compact disc. Any person making a filing which does not possess the technical ability to file an electronic version shall certify this inability contemporaneously with the filing of the original hard copy and shall be assessed an additional filing fee which shall reflect the extra staff time needed in making this electronic filing for the person. In the event that a textual, substantive, or other type discrepancy exists between the original hard copy of the document and the electronic version filed, the contents of the original hard copy filed shall control. 
Each filing made pursuant to this article shall be served on each formal party of record as listed on the county web site at the time the filing is made. The county shall list on its web site any person who has filed to become a formal party of record as said filing is made with the county planning and development office. Service shall be made by delivering a copy of the filing to the party or by mailing a copy of the filing to the party's last known address as it appears on the web site. For purposes of this article, "delivering a copy" means handing it to the party or his authorized representative, or leaving it at the party's place of business with the party's clerk or other person in charge thereof, or leaving it at the party's usual place of abode with some person of suitable age and discretion residing therein. Service by mail is complete upon depositing the filing properly addressed with adequate postage in the U.S. mail or similar carrier. A proof of service shall be made to the county planning and development office with the filing. 
Each filing shall: 
(1)  Identify the person on whose behalf it is being filed; 
(2)  Identify that person's address; 
(3)  Include a sworn verification by the appropriate persons of any facts contained therein. 
In computing the time periods referenced in this article, the first day shall not be counted, but the last day shall be counted. Each calendar day shall be included in the computation of time, regardless of whether that day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday; however, if the last day of the time period falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or some other day that the county planning and development office is closed for business, then the time period shall be extended to the next business day. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-78. - Formal parties of record; rebuttal. 
Formal parties of record shall consist of the county planning and development office, the applicant, and persons making a filing as described below. 
Any person desiring to become a formal party of record shall file the following information with the county planning and development office within 30 days from the date of filing the application: 
(1)  The person's name, mailing address, and residence address; 
(2)  The grounds for objecting or supporting the application and/or variance request; 
(3)  Verified expert testimony substantiating the grounds for said objection or support; 
(4)  The name, address, and qualifications of each person giving verified expert testimony; 
(5)  Any further information deemed necessary and relevant by the county planning and development office to investigate the assertions made in the filing. 
In addition, all persons making said filing shall submit a filing fee in an amount sufficient to pay staff employees, independent engineers, and other related experts and consultants to be hired by the county to review the documentation submitted. Said fee shall be determined on a case by case basis. 
The applicant shall have 45 days from the date of filing of the application to file any written rebuttal to the assertions made by a formal party of record. Said rebuttal testimony shall contain at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  Verified expert testimony substantiating the grounds for said rebuttal; 
(2)  The name, address, and qualifications of each person giving verified expert testimony; 
(3)  Any further information deemed necessary or relevant by the county planning and development office to investigate the assertions made in the filing. 
All formal parties of record shall be entitled to participate in the public hearing as described in section 66-82 of this article. However, no formal party of record may assign, transfer, or otherwise delegate their speaking time to any other person or participant. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-79. - Limited appearances by members of the public. 
Any person who is not a formal party of record may nonetheless participate in the public hearing before the planning commission as described in section 66-82 of this article. Any statements made in the public hearing shall be added to the record; however, any person making said statements pursuant to this section shall not be entitled to service of filings or other documents. 
Any person who participates in the public hearing pursuant to this section shall be required to declare said intention prior to the public hearing by signing an attendance form supplied by the county planning and development office on the day of the hearing. At a minimum, said attendance form shall be available for signature at the place designated for the public hearing 30 minutes prior to its call to order. The attendance form shall not be available for signature once the public hearing is called to order. During that portion of the public hearing set aside for limited appearances, all persons who have signed the attendance form shall be called to speak in their order of signing. No person may assign, transfer, or otherwise delegate their speaking time to any other person or participant. If a person who has signed the attendance form is not in attendance at the public hearing when their name is called, they shall be deemed to have abandoned their right to participate in the public hearing pursuant to this section, provided that persons who have left the hearing room temporarily with the prior approval of the chairman of the planning commission and who return to the hearing room prior to the expiration of that portion of the public hearing set aside for limited appearances shall be allowed to participate pursuant to this section at the end of that portion of the public hearing set aside for limited appearances. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-80. - Requests for information. 
For purposes of preparing for rebuttal, all formal parties of record shall have access to the same information. Upon written request, a formal party of record shall be entitled to information which: 
(1)  Is relevant to a filing already made; 
(2)  Is not subject to a rule of privilege recognized by Georgia or federal law; 
(3)  Does not pertain to a trade secret or other non-public, proprietary information. 
The request for information shall be filed with the county planning and development office no later than 65 days from the filing date of the application and shall provide for inspection or production of the information within five days from the service date of the request. If inspection or production is not permitted, the party submitting the request shall note the objection in its presentation to the planning commission. 
Except for requests made by the county planning and development office, all costs for the reproduction of documents obtained pursuant to this section shall be born by the party making the request. Costs for copies of any documents requested shall be $0.25 per page plus the hourly wage of the lowest paid employee of the record holder qualified to retrieve the requested information multiplied by the time necessary to retrieve the information, less the first 15 minutes required to retrieve the information. An estimate of the costs shall be provided to the requesting party within three days of its receipt of the request. Payment for copies shall be a prerequisite for obtaining said copies. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-81. - Recommendation by county planning and development office; rebuttal. 
Within 60 days from the date of the filing of the application, the county planning and development office shall issue a written recommendation to the planning commission describing its reasons for or against issuing a permit for the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities, or a variances to the enforcement of any of the requirements of this article. This decision shall be served on each member of the planning commission, the applicant, and all other formal parties of record. 
The applicant and any other formal party of record may file a written rebuttal to the reasons and recommendation of the county planning and development office for consideration by members of the planning commission by filing said written rebuttal with the county planning and development office within 75 days from the date of the filing of the application. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-82. - Public hearing. 
Within 90 days from the date of the filing of the application, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the recommendation of the county planning and development office. The county shall post a notice of the hearing upon the property and upon the property's access point to the public road in a manner consistent with notices for land use reclassification hearings. The county shall also advertise the filing for two weeks in the local legal organ in a manner consistent with notices for land use reclassification hearings. The county shall also post the notice together with the application on its web site in a format which will enable the documents to be downloaded by the public. 
At any time during the public hearing, the planning commission shall have the authority to request and receive additional information from the applicant or any other party of interest. Said information shall include but is not limited to balloon tests and feasibility studies for the application of stealth design technology. The planning commission shall have the authority to continue the public hearing pending the results of any such information. 
The format of the hearing shall be as follows: 
Ten minutes: Presentation by county planning and development office describing its reasons for or against issuing a permit for the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities, or a variance to the enforcement of any of the requirements of this article. 
Ten minutes: Presentation by applicant. 
Ten minutes: Presentation by other formal parties of record. each formal party of record shall be entitled to ten minutes; each formal party of record shall make its presentation in the order of filing, with the first person to make a filing as a formal party of record going first. 
Two minutes: Presentation by members of the public wishing to make a limited appearance. each member of the public wishing to make a limited appearance shall be entitled to two minutes; this time shall not be transferable; presentations shall be made in the order of signing on the attendance sheet, with the first person signing going first. 
Five minutes: Rebuttal by county planning and development office. 
Five minutes: Rebuttal by applicant. 
Within five days from the date of the adjournment of the public hearing, any formal party of record may file a written rebuttal with the county planning and development office to any presentation made at the public hearing. 
Within 20 days from the date of the adjournment of the public hearing, the planning commission shall issue a written recommendation to the county commissioner describing its reasons for or against issuing a permit for the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities, or a variance to the enforcement of any of the requirements of this article. This decision shall be served on the county commissioner, county planning and development office, the applicant, and all other formal parties of record. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-83. - Decision from county commissioner. 
Within 30 days from the date of service of the planning commission's recommendation, the county commissioner shall issue a written recommendation supported by substantial evidence contained in the written record describing its reasons for or against issuing a permit for the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities, or a variance to the enforcement of any of the requirements of this article. This decision shall be served on the planning commission, the county planning and development office, the applicant, and all other formal parties of record. Any appeal of the county commissioner's decision shall be filed in the county superior court within 30 days from the date of the decision. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Sec. 66-84. - Process and procedure. 
For purposes of this article, and where not inconsistent with the context of a particular section, all applications requesting a permit for the placement, construction, and/or modification of wireless telecommunications facilities shall be processed as shown on the time line below. 
Should no formal party of record filings be made prior to day 30, the time line shall be modified by the county planning and development office with the consent of the applicant to decrease the total time required from date of filing application to final approval of application to greatest extent possible. 
Day 1: Written notification from county planning and development office to applicant that application has been received. 
Day 30: Formal party of record filings due. 
Day 45: Rebuttal filings by applicant due. 
Day 60: Recommendation of county planning and development office served on members of the planning commission, applicant, and all other formal parties of record. 
Day 65: All requests for information due. 
Day 75: Written rebuttal testimony due. 
Day 90: Planning commission hearing. 
Five days from adjournment of hearing: Post-hearing written rebuttal testimony due. 
Twenty days from adjournment of hearing: Recommendation of planning commission served on county commissioner, applicant, and all other formal parties of record. 
Thirty days from service of planning commission decision: Decision from county commissioner. 
Thirty days from county commission decision: Appeal to county superior court. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010) 
Chapter 67 - LAND USE INTENSITY DISTRICTS AND MAP[1] 
App. A. Land Use Procedures and Standards 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. of 5-2-2005, adopted May 2, 2005, pertains to land use intensity districts and maps. At the editor's discretion, these provisions are included herein as specifically set out on the ordinance.  Section 40 of a resolution adopted Aug. 25, 2011, changed all references to the "commissioner, the "Pickens County Commissioner" or the "governing body" in this chapter to the "governing authority." 

Sec. 67-1. - Preamble. 
Whereas, the Constitution of the State of Georgia, effective July 1, 1983, provides in Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV thereof, that the governing authority of the County may adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning; and 
Whereas, the Georgia General Assembly has enacted the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, (Georgia Laws, 1989, pp. 1317-1391, Act 634) which among other things provides for local governments to adopt plans and regulations to implement plans for the protection and preservation of natural resources, the environment, vital areas, and land use; and 
Whereas, the Georgia Department of Community Affairs has promulgated Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning (Chapter 110-3-2 of Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs) to implement the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, said standards and procedures were ratified by the Georgia General Assembly, and said rules require local governments to describe regulatory measures and land development regulations needed to implement local comprehensive plans; and 
Whereas, the Georgia Department of Natural Resources has promulgated Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, commonly known as the "Part Five" Standards, said rules were ratified by the Georgia General Assembly, and said rules require local governments to plan for the protection of the natural resources, the environment, and vital areas of the state; and 
Whereas, the governing authority has adopted a comprehensive plan in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, Rules of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, and said plan has been revised from time to time; and 
Whereas, the comprehensive plan specifies a number of goals and policies that are not currently implemented by the County's land use regulations; and 
Whereas, the governing authority desires to help assure the implementation of its comprehensive plan; and 
Whereas, the governing authority desires to promote the health, safety, welfare, morals, convenience, order, and prosperity of the county and its citizens; and 
Whereas, the governing authority desires to promote responsible growth, lessen congestion in the public thoroughfares, secure safety from fire and health dangers, and promote desirable living conditions; and 
Whereas, the governing authority desires to regulate the height, bulk, and the size of buildings and structures; and 
Whereas, the governing authority desires to classify land uses, establish procedures and regulations for the subdivision and development of land, and regulate the distribution and density uses on the land to avoid both the undue concentration of population and the inappropriate dispersion of population, prevent the encroachment of incompatible land uses within residential areas, and preserve property values; and 
Whereas, thegoverning authority desires to provide for economically sound and stable land development by assuring the provision in land developments of adequate streets, utilities, services, traffic access and circulation, public open spaces, and maintenance continuity; and 
Whereas, the governing authority finds that the regulations contained in this resolution [ordinance] are the minimum necessary to accomplish the various public purposes; and 
Whereas, the General Assembly of the State of Georgia enacted Ga. Laws 1985, page 1139, Act. No. 662, providing for an amendment to Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, codified as O.C.G.A. Sections 36-66-1 et seq., so as to provide procedures for the exercise of zoning powers by cities and counties; and 
Whereas, appropriate public notice and hearing have been accomplished; and 
Whereas, the planning commission has considered this matter; 
Now therefore be it resolved by the governing authority, and it is hereby resolved by the authority of the same, that the following or chapters and sections known collectively as the Pickens County Land Intensity District Ordinance is hereby enacted into law. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005) 
Sec. 67-2. - Adoption and effective date. 
This chapter is hereby adopted this 2nd day of May, 2005, and shall be effective immediately upon its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005) 
Sec. 67-3. - Legal status provisions. 
67-3.1. Title. This title shall be known and may be cited as the Land Use Intensity District Ordinance of Pickens County. 
67-3.2. Jurisdiction. Unless this chapter clearly indicates otherwise, this chapter shall apply within the unincorporated limits of Pickens County, Georgia. 
67-3.2. Conflicts with other laws. Whenever the regulations of this chapter require or impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any state or federal statute requires more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
67-3.3. Validity and severability. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
67-3.4. Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. 
67-3.5. Codification. It is the intention of the governing authority, and it is hereby resolved that the provisions of this chapter shall become and be made a part of the official code of the County of Pickens, and the sections of this chapter may be renumbered or reorganized to accomplish such intention. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005) 
Sec. 67-4. - Definitions. 
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall have the meaning herein indicated. 
Abandoned property: Wrecked or derelict property having no value other than nominal salvage value, if any, which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements and shall include wrecked, inoperative, or partially dismantled motor vehicles, trailers, boats, machinery, refrigerators, washing machines, plumbing fixtures, furniture, and any other similar article which has no value other than nominal salvage value, if any, and which has been left abandoned and unprotected from the elements. 
Abutting: Having property lines in common, or having property separated by only an alley. Separation by a street right-of-way is not considered abutting. 
Accessory building or structure: A building subordinate to the principal building or use on a lot and used for purposes incidental to the principal building or use and located on the same lot therewith. 
Accessory use: A use of the land or building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
Agriculture: The commercial cultivation or growth from or on the land of horticultural, floricultural, forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry, and apiarian products. 
Animal hospital: A building used for the medical treatment, housing or boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds or fowl by a veterinarian. 
Animal shelter: See Kennel. 
Apartment building: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more households with separate housekeeping facilities for each household. 
Assisted living facility: Residences for the frail elderly that provide rooms, meals, personal care, and supervision of self-administered medication. They may provide other services incidental to the above. For purposes of this chapter, assisted living facilities are considered institutionalized residential living and care facilities. 
Automobile sales and service establishment: New and used car, truck, tractor, trailer, boat, recreational vehicle, camper, motorcycle, and other motorized vehicle sales, leasing, rental, and service, including mobile and manufactured home and modular building sales, and agricultural implement and equipment. This definition includes automotive services such as rental car facilities, body, paint, automotive glass, transmission, and tire repair shops, car washes, including automated and staffed facilities, and oil change and lubrication facilities. 
Bed and breakfast home: A single-family dwelling occupied by the owner as his/her principal residence that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for compensation provided that; the rental occupants shall not reside at the bed and breakfast for more than seven consecutive days; breakfast is the only meal served and only to the registered overnight guests; no person not a resident on the premises is employed; the exterior appearance of the dwelling is not altered from its residential character except for safety purposes; and, the identification sign shall be no larger than two square feet and not internally lighted. 
Bed and breakfast inn: A building, not necessarily owner-occupied, that offers transient lodging accommodations and breakfast for four or more guest rooms for compensation provided that there is compliance with the same licensing, inspection and taxation requirements as hotels, motels, and restaurants; if within a residential district, the building shall be residential in character; breakfast is the only meal served and only to overnight guests; the owners may have employees; the owner shall provide one off-street parking space for each rental room and one space for each employee; and, in a residential district, signage shall be limited to one sign and maximum size of two feet. 
Berm: An earthen mound or embankment, usually two to six feet in height, designed to provide visual interest, screen views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. 
Boarding house: A building, where for compensation, both lodging and meals are provided for not more than ten persons, providing that a single-family dwelling shall not be deemed to be a boarding house by reason of a contribution to or expense sharing arrangement with the owner or tenant occupying the dwelling by a person related to by blood or marriage. 
Buffer: A natural or enhanced vegetated area usually intended to screen and separate incompatible uses. 
Buildable area: The portion of a lot which is not located within any minimum required yard, landscape strip/area or buffer, that portion of a lot wherein a building or structure may be located. 
Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and which is designed for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building, height of: The vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck lines of a mansard roof; or to the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. Grade is defined as the average elevation of the ground on all sides of a building. 
Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
Building setback line: The line that is the required minimum distance from the street right-of-way or any other lot line that establishes the area within which walls of a structure must be erected or placed. Covered porches, whether enclosed or not, shall be considered as a part of the building and shall not project into any required yards. The minimum measurement is to the wall, not the eave/overhang, and a cantilever building design measures to any wall projecting neearest to the property lines. For purposes of this chapter, a building setback line and minimum required yard shall be considered the same. On a corner lot, there is a minimum front yard setback requirement on both streets and both interior property lines shall require a minimum side yard setback. 
Business service establishment: A facility engaged in support functions to establishments operating for a profit on a fee or contract basis, including but not limited to: advertising agencies, photocopying, blueprinting and duplication services, mailing agencies, commercial art and graphic design; personnel supply services and employment agencies, computer and data processing services, detective, protective, and security system services, accounting, auditing, and bookkeeping services, publications and business consulting firms, food catering, interior decorating, and locksmiths. 
Campground: A parcel of land used or intended to be used, let, or rented for occupancy by campers or for occupancy by camping trailers, tents, or movable or temporary dwellings, rooms or sleeping quarters of any kind. 
Cemetery: A place for the burial of the dead, including a mausoleum and columbarium. 
Church: A building or structure, or groups of buildings or structures that by design and construction is primarily intended for conducting organized religious services. Associated accessory uses include, but are not limited to schools/kindergartens, meeting halls, indoor/outdoor recreational facilities, day care, cemeteries (see size requirements in the permitted use table), and counseling. 
Clinic: An institution or professional office, other than a hospital or nursing home, where persons are counseled, examined, and/or treated by one or more persons providing any form of healing or medical health service. Persons providing these services may offer any combination of counseling, diagnostic, therapeutic or preventative treatment, instruction, or services, and which may include medical, physical, psychological, or mental services and facilities for primarily ambulatory persons. A clinic allows lodging and care in cases of medical necessity. 
Club, nonprofit: A building or premises used for associations or organizations of an educational, fraternal, or social character, not operated or maintained for profit. Representative organizations include Elks, Veterans of Foreign Wars, and Lions. The term shall not include casinos, nightclubs, bottle clubs, or other establishments operated or maintained for profit. 
Cluster homes: Homes that may consist of townhouses attached or detached single-family units, with or without garages at a maximum density of 6.0 units per acre that are located within areas served by water and sewer. 
Columbarium: A vault with niches for urns containing the ashes for cremated bodies. 
Commercial outdoor firing/shooting ranges: Any facilities where outdoor firing of firearms is performed on a commercial basis (i.e., requires a fee or membership), including but not limited to target practice, skeet and trap shooting, mock war games, and temporary competitions. 
Commercial recreational facility, indoor: A use that takes place within an enclosed building that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to the following: assembly halls, auditoriums, meeting halls, art galleries and museums, billiard halls and pool rooms, amusement halls, video arcades, ice and roller skating rinks, fully-enclosed theaters, physical fitness centers and health clubs. 
Commercial recreational facility, outdoor: A use of land and/or buildings that involves the provision of sports and leisure activities to the general public for a fee, including but not limited to the following: stadiums, amphitheaters, circuses and carnivals, fairgrounds, drive-in theaters, golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, batting cages, race tracks for animals or motor-driven vehicles, turkey shoots, trout ponds, equestrian centers and horse and pony riding rinks, botanical and zoological gardens, recreational vehicle parks, ultra-light flight parks, and bungee jumping. A golf course and private club that is built as part of a single-family residential subdivision and that operates in a quasi-public manner is not considered to be an outdoor commercial recreational facility. 
Compatibility: With regard to development, the characteristics of different land uses or activities that permit them to be located near each other in harmony and without conflict. With regard to buildings, it implies harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Conditional use: A use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the particular use district and is not automatically permitted by right within a use district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, may be found to be compatible and approved by the governing authority within a particular use district as provided in certain instances by the Land Use Procedures and Standards Ordinance, Pickens County, Georgia. 
Condominium: A building or group of buildings, in which units are owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all of the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
Contractor's establishment: An establishment engaged in the provision of construction activities, including but not limited to, plumbing, electrical work, building, grading, paving, roofing, carpentry, landscaping companies, and other such activities, including the storage of material and the overnight parking of commercial vehicles. 
Curb cut: The providing of vehicular ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting public street. 
Day care center: Any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group, and licensed or registered by the State of Georgia and licensed by Pickens County as a group day care home or day care center, wherein are received for pay for group supervision and care, for fewer than 24 hours per day, seven or more children under 18 years of age. 
Density: The permitted number of dwelling units per gross acre of land to be developed. 
Development: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials. 
Drive-through: A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided or goods are sold to the customer within a motor vehicle and outside of a principal building. 
Dwelling: A building which is designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, other than a mobile home, recreation vehicles, or motels and hotels. 
Dwelling, multi-family: A building designed for or occupied exclusively by three or more families or households with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. 
Dwelling, senior: A multi-family residence with 80 percent or more of the dwelling units occupied by residents, ages 62 and over or handicapped; or couples where either the husband or wife is 62 years of age or older; does not include convalescent or nursing facilities. 
Dwelling, single-family: A building designed or arranged to be occupied by one family or household only. 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two families or households living independently of each other. 
Dwelling unit: A building or a building containing one or more rooms and forming a single habitable unit with individual permanent bathroom and kitchen facilities and is used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating purposes of a single family. 
Extended stay facility: A motel-like facility in which 50 percent or greater of all guest rooms have facilities for both the storage, refrigeration, and preparation of food, and/or which are advertised, designed, or used for weekly, monthly, or longer occupancy. (See "lodging services" in the permitted use table.) 
Family: An individual, or two or more persons, occupying a dwelling unit appropriately sized for the number of persons living as a single household unit as distinguished from a group occupying a rooming/boardinghouse, a lodging service, fraternity, sorority, and clubs. 
Family day care home: A private residence in which a business is operated by any person who receives therein (for pay) for supervision and care for fewer than 24 hours per day, three to not more than six children/adults who are not residents in the same private residence. For purposes of this chapter, a family day care home may be operated as a home occupation, subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
Fence: An enclosure or barrier, composed of wood, masonry, stone, wire, iron, or other materials or combination of materials used as a boundary, means of protection, privacy screening, or confinement, including brick or concrete walls but not including hedges, shrubs, trees, or other natural growth. 
Fence, solid: A fence, including entrance and exit gates where access openings appear, through which no visual images can be seen. 
Finance, insurance, and real estate establishment: Such uses include but are not limited to banks, savings and loan institutions and credit unions, security and commodity exchanges, insurance agents, brokers, and service, real estate brokers, agents, managers, and developers, trusts, and holding and investment companies. 
Flea market: See Open air business. 
Governing authority: The sole commissioner or board of commissioners of Pickens County, as applicable, which shall have the power to act as granted by state law and this chapter. 
Group home: A single-family dwelling, housing persons who are mentally/physically handicapped, elderly, terminally ill, AIDS/HIV victims, Alzhiemer's patients, or children and teens with emotional problems, operating as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing the organization and stability of a home environment. 
Guesthouse: A lodging unit for temporary guests in an accessory building. No guesthouse shall be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling. 
Halfway house: A building for temporary residence by nonrelated persons, who are recovering from alcohol abuse or other chemical-based substances, with one or more surrogate parents that provide services that include room, meals, supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling to enable residents to move back into society and live independently. 
Health service: Health care facilities as well as establishments providing support to the medical profession and patients, such as medical and dental laboratories, blood banks, oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services; and offices of doctors, dentists and other medical practitioners. 
Health spa: An establishment which for profit or gain provides as one of its primary purposes, services or facilities which are purported to assist patrons improve their physical condition or appearance through change in weight, weight control, treatment, dieting, or exercise. The term includes establishments designated as "reducing salons," "exercise gyms," "health studios," "health clubs," and other terms of similar import. Not included within this definition are facilities operated by nonprofit organizations, facilities wholly owned and operated by a licensed physician at which such physician is engaged in the practice of medicine, or any establishment operated by a health care facility, hospital, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing care facility. 
Home occupation: An occupation carried on entirely within a residence by the occupants thereof, which activity is clearly incidental to the use of the residence as a dwelling and which does not change the residential character thereof, and is conducted in a manner as to not give any outward appearance of a business in the ordinary meaning of the term. This occupation does not infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy a peaceful occupancy of their homes for which purpose the residential use district was created and primarily intended. 
Impervious surface: A manmade structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of storm water into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Industrialized home: Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or destruction thereof. Industrialized buildings are constructed and regulated in accordance with the "Industrialized Building Act", Georgia Law 1982 pp. 1637-1643 (Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 2, Part 1). 
Institutional residential living and care facilities: An umbrella term that encompasses the following uses as specifically defined in this chapter: assisted living facility, intermediate care home, nursing home, hospice, and personal care home. 
Intermediate care home: A facility which admits residents on medical referral; it maintains the services and facilities for institutional care and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will provide continuing supervision including emergencies; it complies with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. The term "intermediate care" means the provision of food, including special diets when required, shelter, laundry and personal care services, such as help with dressing, getting in and out of bed, bathing, feeding, medications and similar assistance, such services being under appropriate licensed supervision. Intermediate care does not normally include providing care for bed patients except on an emergency or temporary basis. 
Intra-family (lineal heir) land transfer: A subdivision of land within an AG land use intensity district where each and every lot within the subdivision is conveyed to a lineal heir, which include a grandparent, parent, stepparent, sibling, child, stepchild, adopted child or grandchild of the person conveying the parcel; provided further, that no more than one lot in the subdivision shall be deeded to any one individual. This definition shall not include or authorize any land subdivision, which involves or will involve the creation of lots for sale or the otherwise involving the property transfers for money, tangible or intangible personal property, real property exchanges, or other conveyances for consideration with anyone who does not meet the definition of lineal heir above. 
Junk: Old and dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors and other such vehicles and parts thereof, wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap, building material, scrap contractor's equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper, excelsior, hair, mattresses, beds or bedding or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled or displayed within the county limits. 
Junk yard: A lot, parcel of land, structure or part thereof, used primarily for the collection, storage, and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material, or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, and salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, or for the sale of parts thereof. 
Junked vehicle: A vehicle not in operating condition which has been parked or stored upon the same lot or parcel for a period of 60 days or more. 
Kennel: Any facility used for the purpose of commercial or not-for-profit boarding or sale of animals (excluding horses, swine, goats, and geese) or pets and any other customarily incidental treatment of the animals such as grooming, cleaning, selling of pet supplies, or otherwise. 
Landfill, inert waste: A disposal facility accepting only wastes that will not or are not likely to cause production of leachate of environmental concern. Such wastes are limited to earth and earthlike products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves, and specifically excluding industrial and demolition waste. 
Livestock: Any generally accepted farm animal raised for food, raw materials or pleasure, including, but not limited to, beef and dairy cattle, sheep, swine, poultry and horses. The term does not include cats, dogs, and other house pets. 
Livestock animal unit: A measure, which represents a common denominator for the purposes of defining the land carrying capacity for livestock. The animal unit accounts for the carrying capacity of one acre of land and is related to the amount of feed various species consume, and the amount of waste they produce. 
Livestock, concentrated operations: Any tract of land or building, pen or corral, sheds or fenced fields wherein livestock are maintained in close quarters for feeding, breeding, raising, or holding and the area is specifically designed as a confinement area where manure may accumulate at one location. All such operations are required to follow recognized best management practices. Such areas are further defined if the following minimum number of animals occur at one location: 50 horses; 75 dairy cows; 100 beef cattle; 250 swine (larger than 55 pounds); 1,000 sheep/goats; 1,000 nursery swine; 5,500 turkeys; 1,000 ostriches/emus; 500 ducks/geese; and 10,000 chickens. This provision does not apply to any number of livestock free-ranging in pasture. 
Loading space: Loading and unloading space is a space, typically with dimensions of 12 feet by 60 feet, logically and conveniently located for pickups and/or deliveries or for loading and/or unloading in such a way as it does not conflict with driveways or patron parking, scaled to the delivery vehicles to be used, and accessible to such vehicles. 
Lodging service: A facility that offers temporary shelter accommodations, or place for such shelter, open to the public for a fee, including but not limited to inns, hotels, motels, extended stay facilities and motor hotels. Bed and breakfast inns are not considered to be lodging services. 
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a use, building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
Lot area, minimum: Minimum lot area means the smallest permitted total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of street rights-of-way but inclusive of easements. 
Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. (See Building setback line. ) 
Lot coverage, maximum: The percentage of a given lot that may be occupied by all principal and accessory buildings and structures on said lot, measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings and structures on the lot. 
Lot, double frontage: Any lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two streets. 
Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street. 
Lot line, front: The front property line coincident with a street right-of-way line. 
Lot of record: A lot, which existed prior to the adoption or subsequent amendment of this chapter, as shown or described on a plat or deed in the records of the Pickens County Superior Court Clerk. 
Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
Lot width (curvilinear street frontage): For a lot having frontage upon a curvilinear street, the lot width shall be the distance between the side lines of the lot where the minimum lot width is obtained, measured parallel to the chord of the arc formed by the two outermost points of intersection of the side lines with the road right-of-way line. The lot width line is synonymous with the front setback line in this circumstance. 
Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; or a structure that otherwise comes within the definition of a "manufactured home" under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
Manufactured home park: Any property on which three or more manufactured homes are located or intended to be located for purposes of residential occupancy. 
Manufacturing: Manufacturing means the converting of raw, unfinished materials or products, or any or either of them, into an article or articles or substance of a different character, or for use for a different character, or for use as a different purpose. 
Mausoleum: A building where bodies are interred above ground in stacked vaults. 
Mini-warehouse: A structure or group of structures containing separate spaces/stalls, which are leased or rented on an individual basis for the storage of goods. 
Mobile home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, when erected on site, is 320 or more square feet in floor area, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; and which has not been inspected and approved as meeting the requirements of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 5401-5445). 
Nonconforming building or structure: A building or structure that does not meet one or more setbacks for the land use intensity district in which said building or structure is located, or a building or structure that exceeds the maximum lot coverage for the land use intensity district in which said building or structure is located, or a principal building or accessory structure that otherwise does not comply with dimensional requirements established by this chapter for the particular principal building or accessory structure or for the use district in which the nonconforming building or structure is located. 
Nonconforming lot: A lot which does not conform to the lot requirements of the land use intensity district in which the lot is located as established by this chapter but which was a lot of record prior to the effective date of this chapter or its amendment. 
Nonconforming use: Any building or use of land or building lawfully existing on or before the effective date of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments to this chapter, which does not conform with the use provisions of the use district in which it is located. 
Nursing home: A facility which admits patients on medical referral only and for whom arrangements have been made for continuous medical supervision; it maintains the services and facilities for skilled nursing care, rehabilitative nursing care, and has a satisfactory agreement with a physician and dentist who will be available for any medical and/or dental emergency and who will be responsible for the general medical and dental supervision of the home; it complies with rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Office: A building, or portion thereof, wherein predominantly administrative, professional, or clerical operations are performed, and not involving retail sales. 
Open air business: Any commercial establishment with the principal use of displaying products in an area exposed to open air on three or more sides, including but not limited to rock yards, nurseries and garden supply stores, lumber and building materials yards, flea markets, farmer's markets, statuaries and monument sales establishments, Christmas tree lots and firewood sales lots, liquid petroleum dealers and tank sales. A roadside stand is not an open-air business. 
Parking space: An area having dimensions of nine feet by 20 feet and not less than 180 square feet, excluding driveway and maneuvering area, to be used as a temporary storage space for a private motor vehicle. 
Personal care home: Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. Personal care tasks include assistance with bathing, toileting, grooming, shaving, dental care, dressing, and eating. (Synonymous with assisted living home; see Institutional residential living and care facilities. ) 
Personal service establishment: A facility engaged in the provision of services to persons and their apparel, including but not limited to barber and beauty shops, coin-operated and full service laundries and dry cleaners, photographic studios, shoe repair and shoeshine shops, dance studios, schools, and halls, and travel agencies. 
Planning commission: The Pickens County Planning Commission, or equivalent body, as established by the governing authority of Pickens County. 
Public use: Any building, structure, or use owned and/or operated by the federal government, State of Georgia, county, the city, or any authority, agency, board, or commission of the above governments, that is necessary to serve a public purpose, such as but not limited to the following: Government administrative buildings, post offices, police and fire stations, libraries and publicly operated museums, public health facilities and public hospitals, public works camps, parks and community centers, public roads and streets, airports, water and sanitary sewerage intake, collection, pumping, treatment, and storage facilities, emergency medical facilities, and jails and correctional facilities. 
Rabbit farming: An agricultural business which breeds, raises, or processes rabbits and resulting waste products for commercial marketing as pets, meat, fur, or soil by-products. 
Recreational vehicles: A vehicular type portable structure without permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use and including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. 
Recycling center, collection point: An incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop-off destination for temporary storage of recoverable resources. No processing of such items is allowed. This facility would generally be located in a commercial parking lot, or at other public/quasi-public areas, such as churches and schools. 
Recycling center, processing: Any facility utilized for the purpose of collecting, sorting and processing materials to be recycled, including but not limited to, plastics, glass, paper and aluminum materials. 
Research laboratory: A facility for scientific laboratory research in technology-intensive fields, including but not limited to biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, genetics, plastics, polymers, resins, coatings, fibers, fabrics, films, heat transfer, and radiation research facilities, computer software, information systems, communication systems, transportation, geographic information systems, multi-media and video technology. Also included in this definition are facilities devoted to the analysis of natural resources, medical resources, and manufactured materials, including environmental laboratories for the analysis of air, water, and soil; medical or veterinary laboratories for the analysis of blood, tissue, or other human medical or animal products, and forensic laboratories for analysis of evidence in support of law enforcement agencies. 
Retail trade establishment, enclosed: Any business offering goods and products for sale to the public, which may include the incidental repair of such goods and products, that operates entirely within a structure containing a roof and walls on all sides, except for outdoor display or other use during business hours and accessory storage in enclosed, subordinate buildings. These include but are not limited to the following: convenience stores including the sale of gasoline, hardware, paint, glass and wallpaper stores, grocery and miscellaneous food stores including retail bakeries, apparel, shoe, and accessory clothing stores, furniture, upholstery, floor covering, household appliance and home furnishing stores, musical instrument stores, radio, television, and computer stores, record, tape, and compact disc stores, eating and drinking places not involving drive-in or drive-through facilities, drug stores, apothecaries and proprietary stores, liquor stores and bottle shops, used merchandise stores and pawn shops, sporting goods stores and bicycle shops, art and stationery stores, hobby, toy, and game shops, jewelry, gift, novelty, souvenir and antique shops, camera and photographic supply stores, luggage and leather goods stores, sewing, needlework, and piece goods stores, catalogue and mail order stores, news stands, florists, tobacco shops, automotive parts stores not involving repair, video rental and sales stores, and watch and clock sales and repair shops. 
Roadside stand: A use offering either farm-grown, prepared food products such as fruits, vegetables, canned foods, or similar agricultural products for sale on the premises or within a temporary structure on the premises with no space for customers within the structure itself. [Does not include apple houses or wineries/wine-tasting.] 
Salvage yard: See Junk yard. 
Screening: A method of visually shielding or obscuring one abutting or nearby building, structure, or use from another by fencing, walls, berms, densely planted vegetation, or some combination thereof. 
Semi-public use: Any building, structure, or use, owned and/or operated by private utilities or private companies for a public purpose, or that is reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities, such as but not limited to the following: underground and overhead gas, electric, steam, or water distribution or transmission lines or systems, including incidental wires, cables, and poles but not telecommunication towers. 
Street: A dedicated and accepted public right-of-way, which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground. 
Telecommunications tower: (See Chapter 66, Pickens County Code of Ordinances.) 
Townhouse: One of a group of three or more attached dwelling units under fee simple ownership. 
Trash: Cuttings from vegetation, refuse, paper, bottles, and rags. Also see Junk. 
Truck terminal: A facility for the receipt, transfer, short term storage, and dispatching of goods transported by truck. 
Variance: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a matter otherwise prohibited by this chapter where specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. (See section 67-14.2.) 
Warehouse: Storage of materials, equipment, or products within a building for manufacturing use or for distribution to wholesalers or retailers. 
Wholesale trade establishment: An establishment engaged in the selling or distribution of merchandise to retailers, to industrial, commercial, institutional or professional business users, or to other wholesalers. 
Yard: A space on the same lot with a principal building, open unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the sideline of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Yard, rear: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the sidelines of the lot. 
Zero lot line: The location of a building on a lot in such a manner that one or more building sides have no (zero) side or rear building setback (or yard requirements) and rests directly on a side or rear lot line. A zero lot line development is one where houses in the development on a common street frontage are shifted to one side of their lot. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-25-2011, § 1; Res. of 9-15-2016, § 1; Res. of 3-16-2017, § 1, Exh. A) 
Sec. 67-5. - Establishment of land use intensity districts. 
Purpose and establishment. The land use intensity districts established in this chapter are intended to: promote the orderly future development of the county in accordance with the comprehensive plan; discourage the size and type of development which would create excessive requirements and costs for public services; discourage uses which because of their size or type would generate an abnormal amount of traffic on minor streets; establish relationships between and among land uses that will ensure compatibility and maintain quality of life; and protect and promote suitable environments for residences, institutions, commercial and other employment centers, and other uses. The following use districts are hereby established: 
Agriculture District (AG) 
Small Agriculture District (SA) 
Estate Residential (ER) 
Rural Residential (RR) 
Suburban Residential (SR) 
Urban Residential (UR) 
Special Planned Community District (SPC) 
Suburban Residential Private Community District (SRPC) 
Neighborhood Commercial District (NC) 
Highway Business District (HB) 
Industrial District (I) 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-26-2010; Res. of 8-25-2011, § 2) 
Sec. 67-6. - Official land use intensity districts map. 
67-6.1. Map. The boundaries of land use intensity districts created by this chapter are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Land Use Intensity Map, Pickens County Georgia." Said map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter. 
67-6.2. Map amendment. If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in the district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the official land use intensity districts map, such change shall be made on the official land use intensity district map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the governing authority. 
67-6.3. Use district of vacated right-of-way. Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated or abandoned by official action of the governing authority, the use district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public way shall be automatically extended to the center of same. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Ord. of 1-21-2016(1)) 
Sec. 67-7. - Rules governing boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid use districts as shown on the official land use intensity districts map, the following rules shall apply: 
67-7.1. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines or such lines extended, such centerlines, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
67-7.2. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
67-7.3. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance there from as indicated on the official land use intensity districts map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said official land use intensity districts map. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005) 
Sec. 67-8. - Land use intensity districts. 
67-8.1. Agricultural District (AG). 
Purpose and intent. Located within Pickens County are several areas, which contain soils highly suitable for the cultivation of agricultural crops and forests. Land in the agricultural district constitutes a valuable natural resource, and protection is in the public interest. Agriculture and forestry are major components of the county's economy, and they remain viable economic enterprises in that land is held in relatively large tracts). 
The continuation of agriculture and forestry as viable land uses and components of the local economy is threatened by rural residential, suburban and urban land uses and land subdivision. When land is divided into smaller tracts, it becomes less suitable for agriculture and forestry production because the assembly of enough acreage for a farm of minimum efficient size becomes difficult. Smaller tracts generally sell for a higher price per acre, and subdivision of large agricultural or forest tracts generally results in the increase of per-acre land values. The availability of smaller tracts at lower cost attracts exurban and suburban residential and non-farm buyers into the market, thereby increasing adjacent land values for residential uses and decreasing land values for agricultural and forest uses. The cumulative impact of the subdivision of farm and forest lands into small lots increases the level of conflict between farmers/foresters and non-farmers, makes farming more difficult, and eventually leads to dissolution of the agricultural and forest economy. 
Therefore, pursuant to the many goals, objectives, policies, and recommendations of the comprehensive plan for the county, an agricultural land use intensity district is hereby established with the purposes of maintaining the agricultural and forest land resources in a form amenable to the continuation of agriculture, restricting the division of farmland so that it does not become broken up into small parcels, thereby avoiding the accelerated conversion of land to residential uses and discouraging the shift of the land market from agricultural and rural to suburban and urban. 
These districts are most appropriately located in areas shown as agriculture/forestry on the future land use plan of the comprehensive plan. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
Intra-family (lineal heirs) land transfer. 
A.  It is the intent of this section to provide for the subdivision and conveyance of land to immediate family members for their primary residence in accordance with the technical standards of this section. The purpose of this section is to preserve the ability of property owners to convey lands to lineal heirs by providing for an exception to the density assigned to the parent parcel, where such divisions create parcel sizes that are generally prohibited by the county's comprehensive plan. 
B.  The subdivision of land under the provisions of this section shall be applied in a manner that creates the least extent and number of nonconforming lots or parcels. 
1.  The maximum number of conforming parcel sizes shall be retained while providing for the equal division of the remaining acreage. 
2.  Division of parent tracts that do not conform to the density standard assigned to parcel shall be divided to create parcels of equal size. 
3.  Minimum parcel size is one and one-half acre. 
4.  The minimum parcel size shall apply to any parcel created pursuant to this section. 
5.  This section shall not be allowed more than one time for each family member. 
6.  With the exception to density requirements, the division of land under the provisions of this section shall meet all other applicable standards in the land development regulations including, but not limited to, access design, and road construction standards. 
C.  Intra-family (lineal heir) land transfers are prohibited in the following areas: 
1.  SA, ER, RR, SR, UR, SPC, SRPC, NC, HB, and I land use intensity districts. 
2.  Subdivisions or any tract located on a private easement less than 60 feet in width and serves two or more unrelated landowners. 
3.  Lots in recorded subdivisions. 
D.  Eligibility standards are as follows: 
1.  Eligible persons or lineal heirs recipient: Grandparent, parent, stepparent, sibling, child, stepchild, adopted child or grandchild of the person conveying the parcel. 
2.  Applicants for building permits must submit a notarized affidavit identifying their relationship to the parent parcel owners. 
3.  Eligible parcels: Parent parcels of record under the ownership of the grantee for a period of time no less than five years. 
E.  Platting requirements are as follows: 
1.  A plat (survey) prepared on an 11-inch by 17-inch sheet at an acceptable scale by a licensed surveyor or engineer shall be prepared, showing the relationship of the parcels transferred to the un-platted lands of the grantee, all easements for utilities, egress and ingress and their relation to a public road right-of-way and shall include a legal description by fractional calls and/or metes and bounds for each of the lots or parcels created. 
2.  Every parcel must have a permanent access for ingress and egress and shall be provided by a road built to county standards or in special cases a nonexclusive easement. 
3.  No road or easement created may be less than 60 feet wide for the purpose of ingress and egress. 
4.  Utility easements shall be a minimum of ten feet wide, in addition to any required minimum roadway or egress and ingress easement. 
5.  Any roads constructed must meet the minimum requirements of the county road department for local roads. 
6.  Private roads (not dedicated to the public) will not be accepted into the county road maintenance system, regardless of the type of construction as long as the property is located in the AG land use intensity district. 
7.  All plats or surveys containing constructed roads shall provide construction plans that have been approved by the appropriate water management district for drainage. 
8.  Prior to application for building permits, all roads and easements created for ingress and egress must be surveyed out, cleared, and stabilized to provide a durable surface for the passage of a two-wheel drive vehicle. 
9.  Any road, easement or driveway that ties in or connects to a public road or right-of-way will require a permit that will require the driveway or turnout from a private road or easement to be constructed to county specifications. 
F.  Applications may be obtained from the development department. The following documentation is required prior to the processing and review of applications for intra-family (lineal heir) land transfer subdivisions: 
1.  Proof of ownership for five years. The applicant shall submit a deed and legal description of the parent parcel and proof of ownership for at least five years. 
2.  Description of property division. The applicant shall submit three certified boundary surveys/plat maps showing all proposed division of the property, ingress and egress, easements for utilities, tie-ins to a public road right-of-way, and metes and bounds description of each parcels/lots created by the division. 
3.  Lineal heir relationship affidavit. The applicant shall obtain, complete and submit the lineal heir relationship to the development department at the time of application for the intra-family (lineal heir) land transfer. 
G.  Deeds with an attached plat map shall be recorded prior to the issuance of a building permit. Such deeds shall include language giving notice that the subdivision of land is in accordance to the intra-family (lineal heir) land transfer and of the prohibition of additional density conveyance addressed in subsection (H) of this section. 
1.  Recording of the deeds or plat map of any parcel created pursuant to these regulations shall not be allowed until such time as the planning commission has reviewed and approved such plat. 
2.  Building permits shall only be issued to the recipient of the parcels created for the primary residence and allowable accessory structures. 
H.  No parcel created by this exception process may receive additional density exceptions for future offspring of the grantee, nor future owners of the parcel. 
I.  Variances. If the enforcement of any of the provisions of this section would be impracticable or would work an undue hardship upon any person, following a report by the planning commission on the nature of the hardship, the governing authority may waive any of the provisions of this section and such waiver shall not be deemed a continuing waiver of such provisions, nor shall such waiver abrogate or impair the effectiveness of such provisions. 
J.  Error. If an appreciable error or omission in the data shown on any plat duly recorded under the provisions of this section is detected by subsequent examination or revealed by a retracement of the lines run during the original survey of the lands shown on such recorded plat, the land surveyor who was responsible for the survey and the preparation of the plat as recorded may file an affidavit confirming that such error or omission was made. However, the person making the affidavit must state that he made a resurvey of the subject property in the recorded subdivision within the last ten days and that there is no evidence that would conflict with corrections as stated in the affidavit. The affidavit shall describe the nature and extent of such error or omission and the appropriate correction that, in his opinion, should be substituted for the erroneous data shown on such plat or added to the data on such plat. Where such an affidavit is filed, it is the duty of the county clerk to record such affidavit and he may place in the margin of such recorded plat a notation that the affidavit has been filed, the date of filing, and the book and page where it is recorded. The affidavit shall have no effect upon the validity of the plat or on the information shown thereon. 
67-8.2 Small Agriculture District (SA). 
Purpose and intent. This low density district is intended to create the opportunity for mini-farms, where the rural lifestyle of Pickens County is maintained and encouraged, albeit at a smaller scale. The minimum lot size of five acres with one single family detached home per lot, plus customary accessory uses, provides limited agriculture and forestry opportunities, perhaps mixed with animals held for personal enjoyment. Public water may be limited in some locations, so well-water may be expected in combination with individual sewage disposal systems. Conservation design subdivisions offer additional design opportunities to protect steep slopes, on-site hydrological features, and larger areas of scenic farmlands. This district, in combination with the AG district, can help implement the rural development character area of the comprehensive plan. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
67-8.3. Estate Residential District (ER). 
Purpose and intent. This low density district is designed for rural ambience. The minimum lot size of three acres helps establish a more rural environment, and further determines that streets providing access to lots do not require curb-and-gutter designs that are more common to urban subdivisions. Curvilinear streets can combine with drainage swales to provide speed limiting, country lane conditions. On-site sewage management systems are common here and the lot sizes allow private wells or community water systems, in lieu of public water. Conservation subdivision designs are feasible in this district as well. Lots are limited to one principal dwelling per lot with customary accessory uses. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
67-8.4. Rural Residential District (RR). 
Purpose and intent. RR districts are intended to provide for low-density residential areas consisting of detached single-family dwellings surrounded by yards that provide a desirable and healthy environment. RR districts are not served by sanitary sewer or by public water supply. The RR district establishes a minimum lot size of one unit per 65,340 square feet, but also establishes a maximum gross density to enable conservation subdivisions as an alternative to conventional rural residential subdivision patterns. Because RR districts are served by on-site sewage management systems, maximum density is based generally on public health requirements that lots must be large enough to accommodate a septic tank drain field and replacement drain field area. These districts are most appropriately located in areas shown as low density residential on the future land use map of the comprehensive plan. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
67-8.5. Suburban Residential District (SR). 
Purpose and intent. SR districts are intended to provide for moderate density residential areas surrounded by yards that provide a desirable and healthy environment. SR districts are not served by sanitary sewer but have a public water supply available. The SR district establishes a minimum lot size of one acre, but also establishes a maximum gross density to enable conservation subdivisions as an alternative to conventional suburban residential subdivision patterns. These districts are most appropriately located in areas shown as medium density residential on the future land use map. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
67-8.6. Urban Residential District (UR). 
Purpose and intent. UR districts are intended to provide urban low density residential living with yards that provide and encourage a desirable and healthy environment. UR districts are served by sanitary sewer and public water. With a minimum lot size of less than one acre (32,670 square feet or .75 acres), the UR district creates a large lot format that is consistent with a low density area, even though the water/sewer service levels to these areas might suggest higher density opportunities. The UR district implements the suburban infill character area. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
67-8.7. Special Planned Community (SPC). 
Purpose and intent. This district is indicative of its name, allowing planned communities to be created, yet on a smaller scale than those designed in the Suburban Residential Private Community District (SRPC). The district, itself, only exists after detailed review and approval of a site plan and the designation of such land use intensity district on the official district map. Options allow both gated and un-gated communities and maximum density is six dwelling units per acre with access on paved street systems meeting the standards of Pickens County, whether public or private. Conservation design subdivisions are allowed and service levels can include equivalent public water systems in combination with septic tanks or equivalent public sewer systems. Conservation designs are encouraged to preserve open space, reduce infrastructure, and enhance the living environment. Mixed uses are feasible as described below. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
Applicability. 
1.  Approval of the SPC district shall require development by a single owner or company, and a common master plan and any design that is approved with commonly-held open space or site amenities requires the establishment of a property/homeowner's association/equivalent prior to the sale of the first lot, along with private covenants assuring the maintenance of all improvements, common areas, and amenities. 
2.  The district requires a minimum tract size of 150 acres to qualify for consideration. 
3.  The district allows a mix of residential dwelling types. 
4.  The site/master plan of the proposal will be reviewed and recommended for either approval or disapproval by the Pickens County Planning Commission and will be forwarded to the governing authority of Pickens County for final decision. Revisions, including proposals to increase density in areas previously approved for lower density, or the location or dimensions of approved streets, or other changes that affect the intent and character of the development, shall require re-review by the planning commission and final action by the governing authority of Pickens County, per the Land Use Procedures and Standards Ordinance, Pickens County. Site plan approval shall not exempt applicable reviews under the subdivision chapter of the Pickens County Land Development Standards. 
67-8.8. Suburban Residential Private Community District (SRPC). 
Purpose and intent. Suburban Residential Private Community (SRPC) districts are intended to provide for the development of large tracts of land as planned communities, creating a mix of residential and small commercial uses and densities based on the natural environment and compatibility with surrounding land uses. The SRPC district is a flexible alternative to the strict regulations of the other districts, allowing the developer to cluster houses and reduce the needed infrastructure, thus reducing the cost and preserving larger amounts of natural open space and increasing the land available for recreational areas. The maximum residential density of this district is six dwelling units per acre when served by public water and public sewer. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Applicability. 
1.  SRPC is permitted only if the development is planned as a private gated community and is developed by a single owner or company, and/or under a common master plan with recorded restrictive covenants providing for a property owners association. The community shall include all improvements, common areas and amenities and shall be regulated by the covenants and restrictions of the property ownership association. 
2.  The minimum size for a SRPC district shall be 500 acres, in a common ownership or under a common master plan. 
3.  The land use shall be primarily residential, with community-supported uses such as small-scale neighborhood commercial, cultural, recreational and civic uses. The common property of the development such as open space, recreational areas, roads and infrastructure and buildings shall be maintained by the property ownership association or by the developer. 
4.  The site/master plan of the proposal will be reviewed and recommended for either approval or disapproval by the Pickens County Planning Commission and will be forwarded to the governing authority of Pickens County for final decision. Revisions, including proposals to increase density in areas previously approved for lower density, or the location or dimensions of approved streets, or other changes that affect the intent and character of the development, shall require re-review by the planning commission and final action by the governing authority of Pickens County, per the Land Use Procedures and Standards Ordinance, Pickens County. Site plan approval shall not exempt applicable reviews under the subdivision chapter of the Pickens County Land Development Standards. 
67-8.9. Neighborhood Commercial District (NC). 
Purpose and intent. The neighborhood commercial district is intended to provide suitable areas for the retailing of goods and the provision of services to adjacent and nearby residential neighborhoods. Most of the uses permitted in this district are not auto-oriented in nature, and the overall character of neighborhood commercial districts is such that access by both vehicles and pedestrians is possible. This district most appropriately implements portions of multiple character areas identified on the Pickens County Future Development Map in the comprehensive plan as Highway 53/West Church Street Corridor, Steve Tate Highway/Highway 53/Yellow Creek Road Crossroads, Highway 53 South (East Church St.) Corridor, Highway 5 Alt./North Main Street Corridor and Burnt Mt. Road/Cove Road Corridor. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
67-8.10. Highway Business District (HB). 
Purpose and intent. The highway business district is intended to provide suitable areas for those business and commercial uses which primarily serve the public traveling by automobile and which benefit from direct access to major streets. HB districts provide that the automobile has precedence over the pedestrian. Generally, highway commercial districts are considered unsuitable abutting single-family residential districts because of the uses permitted in the district and their associated off-site impacts. This district most appropriately implements portions of multiple character areas shown on the Pickens County Future Development Map in the comprehensive plan as Highway 515 Corridor; Highway 53/West Church Street Corridor; Highway 53 South (East Church St.) Corridor; and Highway 5 Alternate/North Main Street Corridor. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
67-8.11. Industrial District (I). 
Purpose and intent. The purposes of these districts are to provide and reserve suitable areas for a variety of industrial uses including manufacturing, wholesale trade and distribution activities. Industrial districts are only intended to be located in areas with relatively level topography, adequate water and sewerage facilities, and access to arterial streets and highways. Industrial districts may be appropriate at the single lot level of development; however, these uses are encouraged to locate in planned industrial parks where possible. Vehicular activities in industrial districts consist predominantly of trucks, with some passenger vehicle traffic, and the road system is built to support truck traffic. The industries locating in this district are characterized as lower in intensity, cleaner, and generally more compatible when located adjacent to commercial areas than are heavy manufacturing uses. Industrial districts are intended to permit only those industrial and other uses that will not generate excessive noise, particulate matter, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, radiation and other nuisance characteristics, or are capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as odors, vibrations, emissions, or other nuisance characteristics through prevention or mitigation devices and conduct of operations within the confines of buildings. Heavy commercial activities and open storage businesses are also included as permitted uses in these districts; however, industrial districts do not service the general public and, therefore, business uses are generally not permitted. Heavier industrial activities may be permitted if approved as a conditional use. This district most appropriately implements areas shown on the Pickens County Future Development Map where industrial uses are established or expected to grow. 
Permitted and conditional uses. Permitted and conditional uses shall be as provided in Table 6-1-1, "Permitted and Conditional Uses by Land Use Intensity District." 
Dimensional requirements. Dimensional requirements shall be as provided in Table 6-1-2, "Dimensional Requirements by Land Use Intensity District." 
TABLE 6-1-1  PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES BY LAND USE INTENSITY DISTRICT 
The following table shows uses, which are permitted (P), conditionally (special use) permitted (C), and not permitted (prohibited) (X). Approval of a conditional use shall require final action by the governing authority of Pickens County per the process dictated by the Land Use Procedures and Standards Ordinance, Pickens County (Chapter 67, Appendix A). 
In cases where a use is proposed, but is not listed in this table, the land use officer shall make an administrative determination as to whether or not the use is permitted in the land use intensity district or districts in question. The land use officer may determine that such use is substantially similar to another permitted use and allow that use to be permitted. The land use officer may determine that such use is substantially similar to a conditional use, and allow that use as a conditional use. The land use officer may determine that such use is prohibited altogether in the use district or districts in question. In making such determinations, the land use officer shall consult the purpose and intent statements of the land use intensity district or districts in question, in addition to comparing the use in question to uses specifically listed in this table. In the event that the land use officer is unable to make a determination or if the entity requesting consideration on the subject use disagrees with the interpretation of the land use officer, then the board of appeals is empowered to properly convene and make a decision on the use, or failing to do so, authorize and recommend that the Land Use District Ordinance be properly amended per the Land Use Procedures and Standards Ordinance, Pickens County. In the latter case, the subject use is prohibited until this chapter is properly amended. 
Section 67-10.3 Landscape Strips apply to all multi-family and non-residential developments. Also, section 67-10.5, Buffer Requirements, may apply when different land use districts abut each other. 

 
TABLE 6-1-2 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE INTENSITY DISTRICT 

 
NA = Not applicable  * = Subject to health department approval, if not served by public water and public sewer.  ** = See special requirements for duplexes in Section 38, Pickens County Land Development Standards. 
(1)  Within an AG district, the minimum lot size for any subdivision of land except those allowed for an intra-family land transfer shall be ten acres. Lot sizes for lots within intra-family land transfers shall be subject to the provisions of section 67-8.1. 
(2)  Shall be determined by an approved master plan. 
(3)  Measured at the front building setback line. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-26-2010; Res. of 8-25-2011, §§ 3—12; Res. of 9-20-2012; Res. of 9-15-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 67-9. - General provisions. 
67-9.1. Use. No building, structure, land, or water shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part hereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter or amendments thereto, including the use provisions for the use district in which it is located. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter pursuant to interpretation of the land use officer, any use not specifically permitted in a use district shall be prohibited in that district. 
67-9. Height. No building or structure shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to exceed the height limits as may be generally established by this chapter for different types of buildings and structures, and as provided for the use district in which the property is located. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, or public utility facilities. 
67-9.3. Maximum density, minimum lot size, and minimum lot width. No lot shall hereafter be developed with a number of housing units that exceeds the residential density for the use district in which the lot is located as established by this chapter. No lot shall hereafter be developed that fails to meet the minimum lot size and minimum lot width for the use district in which the lot is located as established by this chapter, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
67-9.4. Minimum required yards and building setbacks. No building shall hereafter be erected in a manner to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, or side yards than specified for the use district in which the property is located, or for the specific use if yards and setback regulations pertain to a specific use in this chapter. No lot shall be reduced in size, and no principal building shall hereafter be constructed, so that the front, side, or rear yards of the use district in which said lot and building are located are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. No part of a yard shall be included as a part of the yard required for another building. The application of buffer requirements, as established by this chapter, supersedes these minimum required yards. 
67-9.5. One principal building on a lot. Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any lot, unless this chapter specifically provides otherwise; further provided, that more than one multi-family dwelling, office, institutional, commercial, or industrial building may be located on a lot or tract. 
67-9.6. Coverage requirements. No lot shall hereafter be developed to exceed the maximum lot coverage specified for the use district in which it is located. No lot shall be developed with less than the minimum landscaped open space specified for the use district in which said lot is located. 
67-9.7. Visibility at intersections and driveway entrances. At the intersection of public streets, at the intersection of any vehicular access drive with a public street, and at the intersection of any vehicular access drive with another vehicular access drive, no plant, structure, fence, wall, sign or other element in excess of three feet in height above street grade shall be placed or maintained within a triangular area formed by a line connecting two points that are located 25 feet from the intersection. 
67-9.8. Minimum lot frontage. The minimum residential lot frontage shall be 50 feet. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-25-2011, § 13) 
Sec. 67-10. - Supplemental provisions. 
67-10.1. Accessory uses and structures. 
1.  No accessory structure or parking area shall be permitted in any required front set back of any land use intensity district. 
2.  Residential accessory uses in the ER, RR, SR, UR, SPC, and SRPC districts, such as garages, greenhouses, or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for commercial purposes. 
3.  All residential accessory buildings must be located at least ten feet from the principal building. 
4.  Filling station pumps and pump islands where permitted may occupy the required yards, provided that they shall not be less than 15 feet from street lines; canopies, whether attached or detached from the principal building must be at least 14 feet in height and the outermost edge shall be five feet from any property line. 
5.  All non-residential accessory buildings shall only be used by the owners, employees, lessee, or tenants of the premises, and shall meet the setback requirements of the principal building. 
6.  An open or unenclosed swimming pool may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided that the pool is not located closer than six feet to a rear lot line or ten feet to an interior side lot line. A three-feet wide walk space shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. 
7.  No accessory structure shall be located closer than 15 feet to a side or rear lot line in all land use intensity districts. 
67-10.2. Home occupations. The conduct of some business in residential units in the AG, SA, ER, RR, SR, UR, SPC, and SRPC is permitted under the provisions of this section. It is the intent of this section is to ensure the compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in these districts and not create a nuisance to residents from excessive noise, traffic, smoke, fire hazards, and other possible negative effects from commercial activity. Therefore, home occupations must meet the following requirements: 
1.  A home occupation must be clearly subordinate to the principal use of a parcel. In the AG, SA, ER, RR, SR, UR, SPC and SRPC districts, no more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit may be used for home occupation purposes or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. An accessory building cannot be used in conjunction with a home occupation in the ER, RR, SR, UR, SPC, and SRPC districts. 
2.  In the AG and SA districts, no more than 25 percent of the dwelling nor more than 600 square feet of an accessory building may be used for home occupation purposes or for storage purposes in connection with a home occupation. 
3.  The home occupation is limited to employment of residents of the property plus not more than one additional person. 
4.  A home occupation shall not produce objectionable noise, dust, vibrations, glare, fumes, or electrical interference detectable by normal means outside the structure. 
5.  A home occupation shall not constitute a fire hazard to neighboring residences. 
6.  No traffic shall be generated by a home occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met off-street. 
7.  On premise retail sales are prohibited except for the sale of products or goods produced or fabricated on the premises as a result of the home occupation. 
8.  There shall be no exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal use. 
67-10.3. Landscape strips. 
A.  Frontage landscape strips. A minimum 20-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along the full length of any street frontage of a multi-family or nonresidential development. 
1.  Frontage landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities or any other accessory uses except for the following: 
a.  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
b.  Pedestrian-oriented facilities such as sidewalks and bus stops. 
c.  Underground utilities. 
d.  Driveways required in order to access the property. 
e.  Signs otherwise permitted by this Code. 
2.  One tree shall be provided within the frontage landscape strip for every 40 feet of length of street frontage, or portion thereof. Such trees may be deciduous or evergreen, but must be of a type that is suitable to local growing conditions and that will normally reach at least 12 inches at diameter breast height upon maturity. The trees may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards spacing, location, and design. 
3.  All portions of a frontage landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
4.  Upon planting, new trees shall have a caliper of no less than two inches, and may be clustered for decorative effect following professional landscaping standards for spacing, location, and design. 
5.  Plant materials in the frontage landscape strip are not to extend into the street right-of-way unless specifically allowed by the public works department. 
B.  Side yard landscape strips. A minimum five-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided along any side lot line of a nonresidential development. The landscape strip is to extend from the front principal building setback line to the rear of the property (unless a buffer is required along the side lot line). 
1.  Side yard landscape strips shall contain no structures, parking areas, patios, stormwater detention facilities or any other uses except for the following: 
a.  Retaining walls or earthen berms constructed as part of an overall landscape design. 
b.  Underground utilities. 
c.  Driveways required to access neighboring property. 
2.  All portions of a side yard landscape strip shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass or ground cover, except for those ground areas that are mulched or covered by permitted structures. 
67-10.4. Parking lot trees. Deciduous shade trees shall be provided within any parking lot designed or intended to accommodate five cars or more, in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
A.  One deciduous shade tree shall be provided within the parking lot for every ten parking spaces, or portion thereof. Each tree shall be located within the parking lot in reasonable proximity to the spaces for which the tree was required. Trees provided to meet the minimum requirements of any landscape strip or buffer may not be toward this requirement. 
B.  A landscaping island shall be located at the end of every parking bay between the last parking space and an adjacent travel aisle or driveway. The island shall be no less than eight-feet wide for at least one-half the length of the adjacent parking space. The island shall be planted in trees, shrubs, grass, or ground cover except for those areas that are mulched. 
C.  Tree planting areas shall be no less than eight feet in width and shall provide at least 100 square feet of planting area per tree. No tree shall be located less than two and one-half feet from the back of curb. All parking lot landscape islands shall be curbed with minimum six-inch high vertical curbs. 
D.  Landscaping islands and tree planting areas shall be well drained and contain suitable soil and natural irrigation characteristics for the planting materials they contain. 
67-10.5. Buffers requirements. To minimize future potential conflicts between non-compatible land uses and to protect the health, safety, and general welfare, a buffer shall be required whenever two adjoining properties are in different land use districts as shown in the following Table 6-1-3. 
TABLE 6-1-3  BUFFER REQUIREMENT BETWEEN LAND USE DISTRICTS 

 
A.  AG Buffer requirements between livestock concentrated feeding operations and other uses. Any property located within the agriculture district, which proposes to engage in livestock concentrated feeding operations and are adjacent to properties with residential uses, or adjacent to other certain uses; including but not limited to, recreation park or center, hospital or convalescent home will be subject to a 550 foot building or use setback. 
1.  Permitting. 
a.  All permits will be obtained from the planning and development office. 
b.  The permit will be in the individual company's name who will be owning such operation. 
c.  Each individual obtaining such a permit shall furnish proof to the county building permit officer that such provisions of this section have been met. 
2.  Exemptions. Any currently existing livestock concentrated feeding operations shall be exempt from the buffer requirement. All new livestock concentrated feeding operations must comply with the buffer requirement. 
B.  Buffer requirements between residential, commercial and industrial districts. When two adjoining properties are in different land use districts, the property within the more intensive district is required to provide the buffer type as indicated in Table 6-1-3 when acquiring a building permit unless the buffer was pre-existing. When two adjoining vacant parcels are in different land use districts as indicated in Table 6-1-3, no buffer is required when the parcel in the less intensive district acquires a building permit. 
Type I Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall have not less than a 12-foot width and shall consist of plantings, which meets the screening standards of section 67-10.5C. 
Type II Buffer Requirement. The required buffer shall have not less than a 30-foot width and shall consist of plantings plus a fence, wall (not otherwise a part of a structure), or a berm, or any combination thereof, which meets the screening standards of section 67-10.5C. 
C.  Screening standards. Screening is a method of visually shielding or obscuring one use from another by fence, walls, berms or densely planted vegetation. 
Plantings. Plantings shall consist of either trees or shrubs or any combination of both. Planted areas shall be located along the abutting property lines or in areas that will be provide the best screening effectiveness. 
If trees or large shrubs are used solely as the screening devise, they shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the planning and development office which, under normal growing conditions, will attain a minimum height of eight feet and a canopy spread of ten feet within four years. They shall be planted a minimum 20 feet on center as shown in the following illustration. 

Tall Trees
If trees are used in combination with shrubs, they may be of any species from the list provided by the planning and development office. Small trees shall be planted 30 foot on center, and large trees 40 foot on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall be any evergreen species from the list provided by the planning and development office planted four feet on center as shown in the following illustration. Shrubs shall initially be of any size, which would normally attain a minimum height of six feet within three years after planting. 

Small Trees
that will provide 90 percent visual blockage as shown in the examples provided by the planning and development office. The fence shall be placed on the edge of the buffer nearest the most intense land use. 
Berms. Earthen berms shall have a minimum height of six feet. 
D.  Buffer design. All buffers required by this section shall conform to the following specifications: 
1.  Prior to development, a buffer plan shall be required to show the types and locations of all plantings within a required buffer. If a site plan is required, a buffer plan shall be incorporated as part of the site development plan. 
2.  Landscaping within buffer areas shall be used to screen objectionable views or nuisances, such as parking and service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units and transformers. 
3.  Existing on-site trees may be credited as meeting the requirements of this section if the planning and development office determines that such plant materials achieve the purposes of this section. 
E.  Location of buffers. Buffers shall be located on the outer perimeter of a lot or parcel along all lot lines adjoining dissimilar districts including adjacent property lines, which may be separated by an existing or proposed public right-of-way. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of existing, dedicated, or reserved public or private street right-of-way. 
F.  Variances. The requirements of this section may be waived by the appropriate agency under any of the following conditions: 
1.  If it is clearly demonstrated that the existing topography and/or vegetation will achieve the purposes of this section. 
2.  If it is clearly demonstrated that for topographic reasons, no required screening device could possibly screen the ground level activities of the use from the first floor view of the residential structure abutting the use. 
3.  It is clearly demonstrated that an existing separation between adjoining properties will achieve the purposes of this section. 
G.  Use of buffers. A buffer may be used for some forms of passive recreation such as pedestrian, bike or equestrian trails, or as a stormwater retention area provided that: 1) no planted materials shall be eliminated; and 2) the total width of the required buffer area shall be maintained. 
H.  Maintenance. The responsibility for maintenance of buffers shall remain with the owner of the property. To preserve the intended mitigation purpose of the buffer relative to adjacent properties, regularly scheduled maintenance of the buffer is required, including possible replacement of dead or diseased plant(s), fertilization, mowing grass, pruning, replenishing ground cover, or general care. Maintenance of planted areas shall consist of mowing, removal of litter and dead plant materials, and necessary pruning. Fences and walls shall be kept in a condition that meets the requirements of this section. 
I.  Failure to comply with these provisions. See sections 1-11 of this chapter for enforcement and penalty provisions. 
J.  Surety for buffer installation. When the date for issuing a certificate of occupancy does not coincide with the planting conditions that are necessary to install a required buffer, the planning and development office shall accept a letter of credit or other acceptable surety in the name of Pickens County for the buffer installation. Such surety shall be in the amount and form satisfactory to the planning and development office and shall certify the following: 
1.  That the creditor does guarantee funds in an amount to cover the cost of installing all buffers as estimated by the developer and approved by the planning and development office. The guaranteed amount accepted by planning and development office shall equal the actual buffer costs (plants plus installation), plus 15 percent in the event of default. 
2.  That in the case of failure on the part of the developer to complete the specified improvements within six months of the issue date of the credit, the creditor shall pay to Pickens County immediately and without further action such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. 
3.  That the letter of credit or other acceptable surety may not be withdrawn or reduced in amount until released after final inspection and certification of approval of the buffer by the planning and development office. Prior to the end of the first year after the buffer installation, the planning and development office shall make an inspection and notify the owner or developer of any required replacement or restoration. 
67-10.6. Junk cars and junkyards. 
A.  Junkyards; depositing junk; characteristics of junk property. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to deposit, store, keep or maintain or to permit to be deposited, stored, kept or maintained junk or trash in or on any lot, parcel or tract of land or body of water, except within a legally established junkyard. It is not the intent hereof to prohibit the deposit of trash or junk in a usual location for waste collection provided it is not or will not become a nuisance and the same will be collected by the county or a county authorized commercial waste collector. 
2.  Junkyards must be greater than 300 feet from the lot line of an existing abutting residential use. This does not prohibit a residential lot being located within 300 feet of an existing junkyard. No junkyard shall be established or enlarged without a permit from the county, and the permit shall not be issued until county review is completed. 
3.  If a junkyard fronts upon any public or private street/road, then a sight impermeable fence or wall eight feet high shall be required parallel to such street/road. 
4.  If the fence is a cyclone-wire type fence, then it shall have a top rail and be interwoven with wooden, metal, or plastic strips to create a solid sight impermeable barrier. If wire fencing is used, a two-foot concrete (on footing) or heavy sheet metal curb (imbedded at least two feet in the ground) shall be placed immediately adjacent to and inside such fence to prevent runoff of oil, transmission fluid and other contaminants onto adjacent properties or into adjacent waterways that may result from junking operations. 
5.  All gates shall be of the cyclone-wire type, interwoven with wooden, metal, or plastic slats in order to screen the interior of the yard when the gates are closed. 
6.  In addition, when either a fence or wall is installed as required for a junkyard, an appropriate hedge made up of native tree or plant species or other species approved by the county shall be planted outside the required walls or fences. Such tree or plant species shall be not less than four feet in height at the time of planting, shall be five feet on center, and not less than 2.5 feet from the wall or fence. In no event shall the junk or scrap be piled higher than the wall or fence unless the hedge around the entire site grows above the wall or fence and forms a solid screen; in that event the scrap or junk may be piled up to the height of the hedge. 
7.  All walls, fences, interwoven material, curbs and hedges shall be continuously maintained in good condition and appearance and in such a manner that the purpose of screening and water runoff prevention is served. 
8.  If an existing junk or scrap yard expands the operation by enlarging the size of the affected tract or relocates to an entirely new site, then all of the requirements of this subsection shall apply to the existing or new site. If any such use shall not comply as required by this subsection, such use shall be immediately discontinued. 
B.  Removal of abandoned property. It shall be unlawful for any Pickens County property owner/renter to accumulate and store salvageable junk materials on their own property without complying with subsection 67-10.6 and obtaining the proper permit. 
C.  Enforcement. 
1.  A one-time fee of $1,000.00 is required for a permit to site a junkyard/salvage yard in Pickens County. The fee can be paid at the planning and development office. 
2.  Any person or entity who violates any provision of this chapter shall be given 30-days' written notice to remedy any such violation. 
3.  Each day any such violation continues after the 30-day written notice shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day for each violation. 
67-10.7. Livestock animal units. 
Livestock animal unit: A measure, which represents a common denominator for the purposes of defining the land carrying capacity for livestock. The animal unit accounts for the carrying capacity of one acre of land and is related to the amount of feed various species consume, and the amount of waste they produce. Table 6-1-3(a) indicates the number of common farm species, which are permitted per acre for free-range activity. (See also the definition for Livestock, concentrated operations.) The land use officer shall determine the acreage requirement for livestock not listed in the table. 
Enclosure requirement. All lands devoted to the raising and keeping of livestock shall be enclosed by a permanent type of fence, adequately constructed to house the species of livestock being raised or kept. The enclosure is required to be regularly maintained to ensure that all animals are prohibited from encroaching on abutting property or property not allocated for housing of livestock. 
TABLE 6-1-3(a) 
NUMBER OF VARIOUS LIVESTOCK ALLOWED PER ACRE 
(Free-Range Activity Only) 

 
67-10.8. Halfway houses—Special requirements. In compliance with O.C.G.A. 36-66-4, any such halfway house location or relocation shall require a public hearing at least six months and not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on any zoning decision (i.e. rezoning, annexation, or conditional use review). A sign posted on the subject property and a published notice shall contain a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will relocate a halfway house. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. The latter posted and published notices shall appear at least 15 days and not more than45 days prior to the date of this public hearing. The above public hearing is in addition to the public hearing that may be required nearest to making a zoning decision per the requirements of the Land Use Procedures and Standards Ordinance, Pickens County. 
67-10.9. Open air businesses—Special requirements. Year-around open air businesses/flea markets/farmer's markets, and similar facilities are permitted in the NC and HB districts provided that: 
1.  Permanent sanitary facilities are required for patrons and shall be approved by the Pickens County Health Department or applicable authority. 
2.  No overnight camping on the property is permitted. 
67-10.10. Extended stay facilities—Special requirements. Extended stay facilities are unique in creating a commercial facility environment, like a motel or hotel, where overnight accommodation is provided for community visitors, yet such facilities also provide overnight accommodation to others, who may be working temporary or full-time jobs in the community or choosing such facility for residence as if it were considered a multi-family dwelling. The latter scenarios are thus residential in nature, with some units within the facility functioning and equipped as dwelling units. The following criteria thus apply: 
1.  The minimum lot area is not less than two acres. 
2.  All extended stay facilities shall have a maximum density of 60 guest units per gross acre. 
3.  Not more than ten percent of individual guest rooms shall have registrants who reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the same licensed facility for more than a 90-day period. 
4.  No permanent business license shall be issued for the conduct of any business from any guest room, nor shall any home occupation function from such guest room. 
5.  Extended stay hotels/motels shall have a landscape plan submitted and approved by the county zoning administration staff, such plan shall be implemented prior to the issuance of a business license. 
6.  Each guest room shall be protected with a sprinkler system approved by the fire marshal or their designee and hard-wired smoke detector shall be provided and installed in each guest unit. 
7.  All guest rooms which have facilities for both the storage and preparation of food shall not have less than 300 square feet of floor area and are limited to a maximum of two persons per such room; however, for all such guest rooms greater than 300 square feet, one additional person shall be allowable per each additional 75 square feet of floor area up to and including a maximum of four persons. 
8.  An indoor or fenced outdoor active recreation areas shall be provided. The size of each recreation area shall be calculated at a ratio of five square feet per room with a minimum provision of 600 square feet. 
9.  A minimum of 25 percent of the lot area shall be dedicated to either active or passive open space. The open space shall include active recreation, such as a children's playground area, and/or passive recreation, such as green space and walking paths. 
10.  All such extended stay facilities shall provide a 50-foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for multi-family residential purposes and/or a 100-foot undisturbed buffer from any property zoned for single family residential purposes. 
67-10.11. Commercial outdoor firing/shooting ranges—Special requirements. 
(a)  Minimum undisturbed buffer of at least 500 feet shall be required along property lines adjacent to and/or abutting residential use properties and/or residential land use districts. 
(b)  Area where firing activity takes place shall be at least 500 feet from all property lines. 
(c)  Applicant shall list proposed hours of operation as part of the Conditional use application. 
(d)  Protective natural or artificial barriers must be provided to prevent bullets, shells, or pellets from travelling to human-occupied areas. 
(e)  Applicant shall provide a copy of liability insurance as part of the Conditional use application. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-26-2010; Res. of 8-25-2011, §§ 14—31, 33—35; Res. of 9-15-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 67-11. - Nonconforming situations. 
67-11.1. Nonconforming lots. A lot of record, as defined by this chapter, does not conform to the minimum lot size or minimum lot width for the use district in which it is located, or does not conform to a specific lot requirement of this chapter. Such lot may be used as a building site, provided that the access, height, buffer, setback, parking, and other dimensional requirements of the use district in which the lot of record is located are met and, provided further, that the lot meets all the current standards and requirements of the Pickens County Health Department, if applicable. 
67-11.2. Expansion of nonconforming buildings and structures. A nonconforming building or structure, as defined by this chapter, may be expanded, enlarged, or extended if such expansion, enlargement, or extension is for a use that conforms to the requirements for the use district in which the building or structure it is located. Any such expansion, enlargement, or extension of a nonconforming building or structure shall meet the minimum yard, setback, buffer, height, bulk, and other dimensional requirements for the use district in which said nonconforming building or structure is located. 
67-11.3. Nonconforming uses. A use of land, building, or structure which at the time of the enactment or amendment of this chapter does not comply with the provisions for the use district in which it is located, defined in this chapter as a nonconforming use, may be continued even though such use does not conform with the use provisions of the district in which said use is located, except that the use of a principal nonconforming building, structure or land shall not be: 
a.  Changed to another nonconforming use. A change in tenancy or ownership shall not be considered a change to another nonconforming use, provided that the use itself remains unchanged. 
b.  Re-established after discontinuance for one year. Vacancy and/or non-use of the building, regardless of the intent of the owner or tenant, shall constitute discontinuance under this provision. If a business registration is required for said nonconforming use and the business registration pertaining to said use has lapsed in excess of six months, said lapse of business registration shall constitute discontinuance. 
c.  Expanded, enlarged or extended, in land area or in floor space or volume of space in a building or structure, except for a use which complies with the use district in which said use is located. 
d.  Rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of its replacement cost at the time of damage as determined by the building official, except for a use which conforms with the use district in which said use is located, and provided such rebuilding, alteration or repair is completed within one year of such damage. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a nonconforming use to prove to the land use officer that such use was lawfully established and existed on the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-25-2011, § 32) 
Sec. 67-12. - Parking and loading. 
67-12.1. Off-street parking required. Off-street automobile parking spaces shall be provided on every lot on which any building, structure, or use is hereafter established in all use districts, except as otherwise specifically exempted by this chapter. Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger vehicles for residents, customers, patrons, and employees, as appropriate given the subject use. 
67-12.2. Location of off-street parking areas. All parking spaces required by this chapter shall be provided on the same lot with the main building or use, which it serves. Upon demonstration that the parking spaces required are not available and cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot as the building, structure or use it serves, the land use officer may permit the required parking spaces to be provided on any lot a substantial portion of which is within 400 feet of such building, structure, or use. This provision shall require submittal of evidence of ownership or valid agreement to lease the parking area off-site that is intended to be used to comply with this section. 
67-12.3. Parking plan required. Before any building or land use permit is issued, the proposed parking lot layout and area must be found by the land use officer to be in compliance with all requirements of this chapter. A parking plan for all but detached single-family uses shall be submitted for approval by the land use officer. Occupancy of the land or use of a building shall not occur until the land use officer determines that parking facilities are available in accordance with the approved plan. 
67-12.4. Minimum number of parking spaces required. On each lot where a building, structure, or use exists, off-street parking shall be provided according to Table 6-1-4. No existing facility used for off-street parking shall be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum required number of spaces, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards. 
TABLE 6-1-4 
MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED 

 
67-12.5. Interpretations of parking requirements. 
Fractions. Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. 
Parking space requirement not specified. Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in this section, and where no similar use is listed, the land use officer shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, the total square footage, potential customer use, and other expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. 
67-12.6. Reduction of required parking for mixed or joint use of parking spaces. When more than one use is provided on a lot, and such uses operate more or less simultaneously, the total requirements for off-street parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. The land use officer may authorize a reduction in the total number of required off-street parking spaces for two or more uses jointly providing parking facilities when their respective hours of need of maximum parking do not normally overlap, provided that the developer submits sufficient data to demonstrate that the hours of maximum demand for parking at the respective uses do not normally overlap. The required spaces assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking spaces required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-25-2011, § 36) 
Sec. 67-13. - Loading. 
67-13.1. Off-street loading areas required for specified uses. On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, dry cleaning plant, retail business, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading of such materials to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys, and parking areas. 
67-13.2. Loading area specifications. Unless otherwise approved by the land use officer, loading spaces shall be a minimum of 14 feet wide, 40 feet long, with 14 feet of height clearance. Said loading area shall be located to the rear of the building unless site design precludes a rear location, in which case loading shall be to the side of a building. 
67-13.3. Minimum number of off-street loading spaces required. One off-street loading space shall be provided for the first 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for industrial use and one off-street loading space for the first 5,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other non-industrial use for which a loading space is required. One additional space shall be required for each additional 25,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for industrial use and for each additional 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other non-industrial use. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005) 
Sec. 67-14. - Board of appeals. 
A.  Purpose. These regulations establish a board of appeals and provide a mechanism for relief in individual cases where certain dimensional requirements of this Code pose undue hardship. These regulations also provide for appeals from actions of the land use officer in the administration, enforcement and interpretation of this Code. The grant of authority and powers delegated by the governing authority is limited to the provisions herein and shall be sparingly used by the board of appeals. 
B.  Board of appeals. A board of appeals is hereby established. Said board shall consist of five voting members, who are residents and registered voters of the county, each of whom shall serve for terms of three years without compensation. None of the members of the board of appeals shall be a member of the governing authority, but one member of the planning commission may serve on the board of appeals. The board members shall be appointed by the governing authority. If any vacancy should occur in the membership of the board for any cause, the governing authority shall fill such vacancy by making an appointment for the unexpired term. Any members of the board may be removed for due cause or upon expiration of term. 
C.  Meetings. The board of appeals shall adopt rules of procedure as are necessary to carry out the purposes of its authority. The board shall establish a regular meeting date and time for its meetings. However, meetings shall be held only on an as-needed basis. All meetings shall be open to the public. The board shall appoint a secretary, who shall be the land use officer unless otherwise designated, to keep a record and minutes of its proceedings, showing the action of each board member upon each question. The board shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed with the county clerk and which shall be public records. The land use officer shall serve as the advisor to the board, except in cases of an appeal from a decision of the land use officer. The board may adjourn any public hearing or meeting in order to obtain additional information or to serve further notice upon such other property owners as it decides may be interested in the application or appeal; provided however, that the board shall act on all applications within 64 days of the date the initial public hearing on the matter was held. 
D.  Authority to grant variances. The board of appeals is authorized to receive, consider, grant, grant with conditions, or deny applications for variances to the dimensional requirements of this Code, after a public hearing and after making written findings of fact that the conditions for variances specified herein have been fulfilled. In granting a variance, the board may impose such requirements and conditions with respect to the location, construction, maintenance and operation of any use or building, in addition to those expressly set forth herein, as may be deemed necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public interest. However, a variance application may not be taken for consideration of a land use not otherwise allowed in a particular land use intensity district, nor for any request that proposes to increase the allowed density of any particular land use intensity district. 
Decisions of the board of appeals shall be final; there shall be no appeal to the governing authority or any other administrative body, but the applicant aggrieved by a decision of the board of appeals may pursue appeals by writ of certiorari directly to the Pickens County Superior Court. 
E.  Variance applications. A request for a variance may be initiated by a property owner or his authorized agent by filing an application with the land use officer. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions and arrangement of the proposed development. The land use officer may require other drawings or materials essential to an understanding of the proposed use and variance requested and its relationship to the surrounding properties. Variance applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established by the governing authority from time to time. 
F.  Conditions and criteria for granting variances. The board of appeals, in cases where specifically authorized, may grant a variance only after consideration and adoption of findings of fact that all of the following conditions exist and criteria are met: 
1.  There are unusual, exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other property in the same vicinity or use district, and such conditions are not the result of the owner's or occupant's own actions. Such conditions may include topography, unique natural conditions, surroundings of the subject property, or the size or peculiar shape of the lot. 
2.  As a result of such unusual circumstance or conditions, there is an unnecessary hardship or practical difficulties that render it difficult to carry out the provisions of this Code. 
3.  The authorization of such variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property in the vicinity or district in which property is located, and the variance will be in harmony with the general purposes and intent of the provisions of this Code. 
4.  The variance approved is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure. 
G.  Staff investigation and report. The planning and development office shall make an investigation of all variance applications and shall prepare a report thereon, considering applicable criteria specified herein. Said investigation shall be submitted to the board of appeals. Said investigation shall also be made available to the applicant prior to any public hearing held on the matter. This provision shall not apply to appeals of administrative decisions of the planning and development office. 
H.  Appeals of administrative decision. Any person who alleges there is an error in, or who is aggrieved by a decision of the land use officer in the administration, enforcement and interpretation of this Code, may file an appeal with the county clerk stating the grounds for such appeal. The board of appeals is hereby authorized to hear and decide said appeals, after proper application accompanied by a fee, public hearing, and adoption of relevant findings of fact. 
An appeal from a ruling of the land use officer shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action being appealed. The board may affirm, overrule or modify, in whole or in part, the rulings of the planning and development office. In cases where an appeal is granted, the board shall have all necessary powers of the land use officer and may issue building permits and land use permits, or direct the issuance of building permits and land use permits, not otherwise inconsistent with this Code and any other code, resolution, or ordinance adopted by the governing authority. 
I.  Special exceptions. The board of appeals is empowered to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this chapter provided that such exceptions shall impose appropriate conditions and safe guards as needed. 
1.  Land use intensity district boundary interpretations. 
2.  Questions related to interpretation of uses or use restrictions. 
3.  Questions related to the existence of a nonconforming use. 
J.  Notice of hearing. Upon the filing of any complete application for a variance with the planning and development office, or upon the filing of any complete application accompanied by a fee for appeal or special exception with the county clerk, a public hearing shall be scheduled and held on the proposed variance, appeal, or special exception. At least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to the date set by the board of appeals for the hearing a written notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Pickens County setting forth the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
At least 15 days notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be sent to the applicant. In addition, the land use officer shall post, in a conspicuous place on the subject property a sign or signs which shall contain information as to the date, time, location, and purpose of the hearing before the board, at least 15 days before the hearing. However, acts of vandalism or natural occurrences which limit the effectiveness of posting the property for public notice shall not void the proceedings or actions taken under this section. 
K.  Action on variances or appeals or special exceptions. The board shall make findings and render a decision in writing within 32 days after the initial public hearing on the proposed variance, appeal, or special exception. The board's secretary shall notify the applicant, in writing, of its decision within five days after the board has rendered its decision. 
(Res. of 8-25-2011, § 38) 
Editor's note— A resolution adopted Aug. 25, 2011, renumbered the former § 67-14 as § 67-15 and enacted a new § 67-14 as set out herein. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 67-15. - Administration and procedures. 
67-15.1. Procedures. 
Authority to amend. Pickens County may from time to time amend the number, shape, boundary, or area of the land use intensity district map, or it may amend any ordinance or individual section of this Code. The procedure for amending the land use intensity district map and amendment to any ordinance or section shall be as contained in the Pickens County Land Use Procedures and Standards Ordinance found in Appendix A. 
67-15.2. Administration. 
A.  Enforcement officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the land development officer who is given the authority to perform these functions. The land development officer's duties shall include receiving applications, inspecting premises, issuing building permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and structures that meet the requirements of this chapter and other duties that are authorized by the governing authority. 
B.  Building permit and manufactured home location permit. 
1.  Building permit. A building permit, to indicate and insure compliance with all provisions of this chapter, shall be required for any proposed use of lands or buildings before any improvements or grading of lands or any alteration or construction of buildings commences. 
2.  Manufactured home location permit. A location permit shall be required for the construction of a manufactured home stand, or the placement of a manufactured home on an individual lot. 
3.  Application. All applications for building permits shall be made to the planning and development office and shall be accompanied by two copies of a dimensioned site plan. 
C.  Site plan requirements. The site plan may be required to include the following: 
1.  Name. Name(s) of the proposed development. Names, address(es), and phone number of the owner(s) and the designer(s) of the site plan and his seal. 
2.  Date. Date, north arrow, and graphic scale. 
3.  Survey boundaries. Surveyed boundaries of the entire tract and their relationship to adjoining properties, public rights-of-way, and easements. 
4.  Location map. A general location map at a scale of one inch equals 2,000 feet indicating existing zoning on or adjacent to the site, adjoining roads, and the adjacent areas are required. 
5.  Building locations. Location of all proposed buildings, their shape, size, and setback in appropriate scale. 
6.  Parking and loading. All required parking and loading facilities for non-residential uses. 
7.  Right-of-way. Show the location, with lengths and widths, and the name or purpose of all rights-of-way of streets, roads, alleys, railroads, public crosswalks, and applicable easements. 
8.  Buffers. Show the location and design of the proposed buffer and landscaping for the proposed development. 
9.  Environmentally sensitive areas. Show the location of major river corridors, steep slopes, and elevation of the 100-year floodplain as determined by the past history of flooding or the best available data. 
10.  Proposed improvements. The names, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, buildings, parking and loading, dumpsters, recreation areas and facilities, yards and other open spaces. 
11.  Adjacent developments. All other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential to determine whether the proposed development meets the provisions of this chapter shall be included in the sketch plan. 
D.  Issuance. If the proposed excavation, filling or construction as set forth in the application are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, then the land development officer shall issue a building permit upon payment of the required fee. If a building permit is refused, the land development officer shall state such refusal in writing with cause. The land development officer shall not issue any permit if the land or building as proposed to be used, constructed or altered would be in violation to any provisions of this chapter or any codes and laws of Pickens County, or the state, or federal government, except as provided herein. 
E.  Duration of permit validity. The permit shall become invalid if the work authorized by the permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
F.  Appeals from decisions. All questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this chapter shall be presented to the board of appeals only on appeals from the decision of such official. 
G.  Certificate of occupancy. Any tenant or owner, as applicable, is required to obtain a certificate of occupancy issued by the chief building official or his designee in advance of the occupancy or use of: 
1.  Any building, structure, land, or premises. 
2.  Any building or structure hereafter erected or moved. 
3.  Any building hereafter altered, so as to affect the front, side, or rear yards thereof, or its height. 
4.  Any building, structure, or premises in which there is a change of occupancy or use. 
Within 48 hours after the application for a certificate of occupancy and payment of any required fees, the chief building official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building, as stated on the certificate of occupancy and signed by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. 
H.  Denial of certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter, or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the plans upon which the building permit was issued. The chief building official shall state in writing the reasons for denying such certificate of occupancy. 
I.  Records of applications and certificates. Records of application for all building permits, occupancy certificates with said permits, and occupancy certificates and denials shall be kept on file in the office of the chief building official and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-25-2011, §§ 37, 39) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 67-14. 
APPENDIX A 
LAND USE PROCEDURES AND STANDARDS ORDINANCE  PICKENS COUNTY, GEORGIA 
An ordinance of Pickens County, Georgia, establishing minimum procedural regulations, notice of public hearings, conduct of public hearings, standards, and factors governing the land use power of Pickens County, Georgia, and repealing all conflicting resolutions, ordinances, and amendments thereto, and for other purposes. 
Section 1.0. Preamble and enactment clause. 
For the purpose of insuring that due process is afforded to the general public when Pickens County regulates the use of property through the exercise of land use powers, and pursuant to the authority and mandates of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph IV and Chapter Sixty-Six of Title Thirty-Six of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.), Pickens County does hereby adopt, order, and enact into law this ordinance. 
Section 2.0. Definitions. 
When used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the definitions and meaning hereafter set forth: 
Conditional use (special use). A use approved within a land use intensity district, generally considered compatible with the other uses allowed in the district, only after due consideration of objective criteria as applicable to the proposed conditional use. 
Governing authority. The sole commissioner or board of commissioners of Pickens County, as applicable, which shall have the power to act as granted by state law and this ordinance. 
Land use decision. The final legislative action by Pickens County, which results in: 
a)  Adoption of a land use intensity district ordinance; 
b)  Adoption of an amendment to a land use intensity district ordinance which changes the text of the land use intensity ordinance; 
c)  Adoption of an amendment to a land use intensity district ordinance which changes property from one land use intensity district to another; or 
d)  Approval of a conditional use of property. 
Land use intensity districts. The power of Pickens County to provide within its territorial boundaries for the districting of property for various uses and the prohibition of other or different uses within such land use intensity districts and for the regulation of development and the improvement of real estate within such districts in accordance with the uses of property for which said land use intensity districts were established. 
Land Use Intensity District Ordinance. An ordinance for Pickens County establishing procedures and land use intensity districts within its territorial boundaries which regulate the uses and development standards of property within such land use intensity districts. The term also includes the land use intensity district map (as hereinafter amended) adopted in conjunction with the Land Use Intensity District Ordinance of Pickens County, which shows the land use intensity districts and the classification of property therein. 
Planning commission. The Pickens County Planning Commission or any other authority hereafter designated by the governing authority to participate in land use matters as authorized herein. 
Section 3.0. Adoption. 
At least one public hearing shall be held by the planning commission prior to the adoption/amendment of this ordinance and/or the land use intensity district ordinance by the governing authority of Pickens County and such proceeding shall comply with section 8.0 regarding public hearings; section 9.0 regarding hearing notice; and section 15.0 regarding conduct of hearings. 
Section 4.0. Initiation of amendments. 
This ordinance and the Land Use Intensity District Ordinance of Pickens County, Georgia may be amended from time to time subject to the following conditions: 
Amendments to this ordinance, the land use intensity district ordinance, and/or land use intensity district map must be initiated either by the governing authority, the Pickens County Planning Commission/equivalent, or the property owner. The property owner's permission is required before a petition for changing the land use intensity district map can be filed by anyone other than Pickens County or the planning commission. Applications for amendment to the land use intensity district map or the text of this ordinance shall be accompanied by payment of a filing fee as established by Pickens County by resolution from time to time. 
Section 5.0. Pre-application conference. 
Prior to the filing of any application to amend the text of this ordinance, the land use intensity district map, or any other application pursuant to this Code, applicants are encouraged to schedule and attend a pre-application conference with the land use officer. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to provide applicants with the best available information regarding development proposals and processing requirements, and to ensure the availability of complete and accurate information for review of said application. Upon request of the applicant, the land use officer shall provide the applicant with a written summary of the pre-application conference and list any specific documents, information, or other information that must be submitted to satisfy application requirements. 
Section 6.0. Map amendment application requirements. 
Each application for a map amendment or conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property and a survey plat of the property, a letter of intent describing the proposed use of the property, an application form supplied by the land use officer, a filing fee as specified from time to time by resolution of Pickens County, and any other information as may be required by this ordinance or as specified by the land use officer to evaluate compliance with this ordinance. 
Section 7.0. Complete application. 
Any application for action under this ordinance must be complete before it shall be accepted for processing. Upon receipt of all application materials, the land use officer shall find the application complete and schedule it for public hearing and consideration. 
Section 8.0. Public hearing. 
Within no more than 60 days after the filing of a complete application for which a hearing is required by this ordinance, a public hearing shall be held on such application(s) before the planning commission as required by and in accordance with this ordinance, before the governing authority shall make a final land use decision on a proposed application. 
Section 9.0. Public hearing notice. 
For any proposed text amendment to this ordinance, any application for a land use intensity ordinance or map amendment, and any application for a conditional use permit, a public notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the local jurisdiction at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the scheduled public hearing. Such notice shall state the purpose, location, time and date of the public hearing, the location of the property involved in the application, and the nature of said application. For map amendments, the public notice shall specifically include the current land use intensity district classification of the property and the proposed land use intensity district classification of the property. For conditional use applications, the public notice shall specifically include the proposed use of the subject property and the current land use intensity district classification of the property. 
Section 10.0. Public notice sign on subject property. 
Whenever a map amendment or an application for conditional use is proposed, the Land Use Officer shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on said property one or more signs(s), each of which shall be not less than 12 square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date, time and location of the public hearing before the public hearing body. For map amendments, the sign or signs shall specifically include the current land use intensity district classification of the property and the proposed land use intensity district classification of the property. For conditional use applications, the sign or signs shall specifically include the proposed use of the subject property and the current land use intensity district classification of the property. No public hearing shall take place until said sign or signs have been posted for at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the schedule public hearing to which said notice applies. 
Section 11.0. Criteria to consider for map amendments. 
In reviewing, recommending, and acting upon applications, respectively, for map amendments, the land use officer, the planning commission, and the governing authority shall consider the following criteria for approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval, as appropriate: 
1.  Compatibility with adjacent uses and districts. Whether the proposed land use intensity district is suitable in light of the existing uses and land use intensity districts of surrounding and nearby properties, and whether the proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby properties. 
2.  Property value. The existing value of the property contained in the petition under the existing land use intensity district classification, the extent to which the property value of the subject property is diminished by the existing land use intensity district classification, and whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use under the current land use intensity district. 
3.  Suitability. The suitability of the subject property under the existing land use intensity district classification, and the suitability of the subject property under the proposed land use intensity district classification of the property. 
4.  Vacancy and marketing. The length of time the property has been vacant or unused under the current land use intensity district classification; and any efforts taken by the property owner(s) to use the property or sell the property under the existing land use intensity district classification. 
5.  Evidence of need. The amount of undeveloped land in the general area affected which has the same land use intensity district classification as the map change requested. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed application promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
6.  Public facilities impacts. Whether the proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, parks, or other public facilities and services. 
7.  Consistency with comprehensive plan. Whether the proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the locally adopted comprehensive plan. 
8.  Other conditions. Whether there is any other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property, which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposal. 
Section 12.0. Criteria to consider for conditional uses. 
In reviewing, recommending, and acting upon applications, respectively, for conditional uses, the land use officer, the planning commission, and the governing authority shall consider the following criteria for approval with conditions, or disapproval, as appropriate: 
1.  Access to the site is appropriate considering the anticipated volume of traffic resulting from the use. 
2.  The amount and location of open space and the provision of screening is such that buffering of incompatible uses is achieved. 
3.  Hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are not inconsistent with the adjacent or nearby uses. 
4.  Public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use. 
5.  The proposed use will not have a significant adverse effect on the level of property values or the health, safety and general welfare and character of adjacent land uses or the general area. 
6.  The physical conditions of the site, including size, shape, topography and drainage, are suitable for the proposed development. 
7.  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
8.  Whether all pertinent and applicable requirements of this ordinance, and all applicable state and federal laws have been met. 
9.  Any other factors deemed relevant to the land use officer, planning commission, or the governing authority. 
Section 13. Staff investigation and report. 
The land use officer shall make an investigation of the application and shall prepare a report thereon, considering applicable criteria specified herein. Said investigation shall be submitted to the planning commission and the governing authority. Said investigation shall also be made available to the applicant prior to any public hearing scheduled on the matter or in cases where a public hearing is not required, within a reasonable time prior to action. 
Section 14. Planning commission review and recommendation. 
The planning commission shall consider all applications to amend the text of this ordinance, applications to amend the land use intensity district ordinance and map, and applications for conditional use permits. It shall render a recommendation to the governing authority on all such applications, and the planning commission's recommendation shall be advisory only. The planning commission is delegated as the authority of Pickens County for the purpose of conducting the public hearing on all such applications and shall conduct its review in accordance with the procedures established herein. The planning commission may recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the application. The land use officer shall notify the applicant in writing of the planning commission's recommendation within 30 days of the conclusion of the public hearing or within 30 days of its recommendation, if not made at the public hearing. 
Section 15. Procedures for conducting public hearings. 
This section establishes procedures which shall be applicable to the planning commission in the conduct of all public hearings. The planning commission shall follow such policies and procedures for the conduct of public hearings, except in cases where it is prudent to dispense with formalities where due process of the applicant or interested parties will be unaffected. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the planning commission from conducting the public hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to assure the public hearing on a proposed application is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. The below rules for the conduct of the public hearing may be summarized and verbally stated by a member of the planning commission or a staff representative prior to the conduct of the first public hearing scheduled for consideration. These rules shall be public record and shall be made available at the public hearing. 
1.  Call of hearing. The presiding officer or authorized delegate of the planning commission shall indicate that a public hearing has been called for the consideration of said applications. Thereupon, the planning commission shall consider each application on an individual basis in the order of the published agenda or as otherwise called by the presiding officer or authorized delegate. The presiding officer may at any time accept into the record any written comments, petitions, plats, photographs or other documentary evidence from proponents or opponents to the land use or conditional use matter being considered. 
2.  Report by land use officer. The presiding officer shall call upon the land use officer or other appropriate staff to make a report, if any, concerning the proposed application. The land use officer or other appropriate staff shall then give the report, if any, for said application. 
3.  Presentation by applicant. The presiding officer shall call on the applicant or applicant's agent who shall present and explain his application. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed application promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. The applicant for a proposed land use intensity amendment or conditional use, or his attorney at law or in fact, must be present at the public hearing to present the merits of the application. Failure of an applicant or his legal representative to attend the public hearing will result in the planning commission making an unfavorable advisory recommendation on the land use or conditional use matter. 
4.  Determination of interested parties. Following the applicant's presentation, the presiding officer may ask for a show of hands of those persons who wish to appear in support of/or opposition to the petition. If it appears that the number of persons wishing to appear in support of/opposition to the petition is in excess of that which may reasonably be heard, the presiding officer may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen to make presentations. Proponents and opponents of each decision shall have not less than ten minutes per side to present data, evidence and opinions on the proposed application. 
5.  Public testimony. Prior to speaking, each speaker will identify himself or herself by name and state his or her current address. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits or liabilities of the proposed application under consideration and shall address his or her remarks only to the planning commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed application under consideration. The presiding officer may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate these procedures. 
6.  Applicant's rebuttal. After public testimony, the applicant or applicant's agent shall be allowed a short opportunity for rebuttal and final comment. Those speaking opposition shall only be granted additional speaking opportunity if the presiding officer determines that new evidence was presented during rebuttal. 
7.  Close of public hearing. After the above procedures have been completed, the presiding officer will indicate that the public hearing is formally closed, and the public hearing shall not be reopened except upon formal vote of the planning commission; provided, however, that this provision shall not require the closure of a public hearing where at the discretion of the planning commission the hearing should be continued at a later time or date. 
8.  Recess of hearing. The planning commission, for any reason it deems necessary or desirable, may recess or continue a hearing. Upon recessing or continuing a hearing, the planning commission shall announce the time, date and place when the hearing or hearings will be resumed and such public announcement shall be considered sufficient notice thereof to all persons. 
9.  Vote. After the public hearing is closed, the planning commission may vote upon the proposed application. Prior to voting, the planning commission shall consider evidence and public testimony presented at the public hearing, and the planning commission shall apply the evidence to the applicable criteria specified in this ordinance for said application. It will not be required that the planning commission consider every criteria contained in this ordinance. At such public hearings as herein required to be held by the planning commission, the planning commission at the conclusion of the public hearing, or within a specified time thereafter, may by motion, send forth a written recommendation for granting the application, granting with conditions, or a recommendation for denial of the application, along with a summary of the proceedings of the hearing or transcript thereof. The recommendation shall be forwarded to the governing authority within 45 days after the close of the public hearing. Failure of the planning commission to send forth a timely written recommendation shall deem the recommendation as favorable to the requested amendment or conditional use request. 
10.  Final approval or denial of an application. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the planning commission, the governing authority shall have 90 days to render a final decision of approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval. Upon making this decision, the applicant shall be notified of the decision within 30 days of the date such decision is rendered. 
Section 16. Withdrawal of application. 
Any application for an amendment to this ordinance, to amend the land use intensity district ordinance or map, or for a conditional use permit may be withdrawn at any time prior to the public hearing on said application, by the person or entity initiating such a request, upon written notice to the land use officer. No filing fee for said application will be refunded by the county in the event of such withdrawal. 
Section 17. Limitations on new applications. 
In a case where an application to amend the land use intensity district map is denied by the governing authority, the same property shall not again be eligible for consideration until a period of six months has elapsed from the date of said denial. 
Section 18. Distribution. 
Copies of this land use procedures and standards ordinance, as amended, shall be printed and copies thereof made available for distribution to the general public in the offices of the County Clerk of Pickens County, Georgia. Distribution to the general public shall be upon request of a member of the general public who shall be entitled to one copy. The governing authority of Pickens County, Georgia, is authorized to print copies of this Ordinance and any amendments thereto from time to time for purposes of public information. 
Section 19. Separability. 
Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. of 5-2-2005; Res. of 8-25-2011) 
Chapter 70 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 42; roads and bridges, ch. 54. 
State Law reference— Authority of county to regulate traffic in unincorporated areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20; Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 

Sec. 70-31. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372—40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2—40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the county with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
Secs. 70-32—70-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SPEED ZONES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 

Secs. 70-61—70-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 74 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; water system advisory board, § 2-211 et seq.; businesses, ch. 18; environment, ch. 26; health and sanitation, ch. 34; utilities in subdivisions, § 38-251 et seq.; landfills and waste disposal systems, § 38-616 et seq.; roads and bridges, ch. 54; solid waste, ch. 58; telecommunications, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Water resources, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-1 et seq.; waterwell standards, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections, payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; authority to provide for the development, storage and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6); authority to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(6). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1—74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER RATES AND SERVICE RULES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The Res. of December 16, 2010 repealed the former Art. II, §§ 74-31—74-41, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to water rates and service rules and derived from Ord. of 6-7-1993, §§ 1—11; Ord. of 9-12-1994. 

Sec. 74-31. - Water rate schedule. 
Rates for water from the county water and sewer authority system for residential and commercial use shall be established from time to time by the county water and sewer authority and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-32. - Application for water service. 
The consumer shall make application for water service, in person, at the county water and sewer authority offices located in the county administrative center in Jasper, Georgia, and at the same time shall pay all fees required as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for water service. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-33. - Charges for initial water service. 
Each consumer subscribing to use the water service of the county shall pay a connection fee, set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, multiplied by the number of connections desired for water service. This provision shall become effective after the water line has been constructed beyond the consumer's property. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-34. - Minimum charges. 
The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-35. - County's responsibility and liability. 
The county shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 74-33 of this article, will be made for a ⅝-inch × ¾-inch meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee above will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(1)  The county may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(2)  The county may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the county's option, on the consumer's property within three feet of the property line. 
(3)  The county reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross connections or backflow. 
(4)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the county. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-36. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
Water furnished by the county shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection, nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(1)  Where meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer that is unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(2)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(3)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(4)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the county's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the county water system and all applicants by becoming consumers of the county covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the county they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the county water system. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-37. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the county shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing county property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the county a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water lines. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-38. - Change of occupancy. 
Not less than three days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the county water and sewer authority offices located in the county administrative center in Jasper, Georgia, to discontinue water service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. The new occupant shall apply for water service within 48 hours after occupying the premises and failure to do so will make him or her liable for paying the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-39. - Meter reading; billings; collecting. 
Bills to customers for water service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as established by the county water and sewer authority. The failure of water users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the imposition of penalties as established by the county water and sewer authority. Water service shall not be reestablished until such time as customer tenders payment of fees and complies with existing policies as established by the county water and sewer authority. Rates and penalties charged to water customers shall be established from time to time by the county water and sewer authority. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-40. - Suspension of service. 
The county reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the county's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the county's control. 
(5)  Legal processes. 
(6)  Direction of public authorities. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, unavoidable accident. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-41. - Complaints; adjustments. 
If the consumer believes his or her bill to be in error, he or she shall present his or her claim, in person, at the county water and sewer authority offices located in the county administrative center in Jasper, Georgia, before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance in service as heretofore provided. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Sec. 74-42.1. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this article. 
(b)  The county water and sewer authority shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The board of commissioners may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the magistrate court or by any other legal means as set forth in this Code. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Editor's note— Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1, repealed former § 74-42.1, which pertained to restrictions on outdoor watering of landscape and derived from the Res. of 12-16-2010. Res. of 10-20-2016 also renumbered former §§ 74-42.2—74-42.4 as §§ 74-42.1—74-42.3. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 74-42.2. - Repealer. 
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 74-42.1 
Sec. 74-42.3. - Severability. 
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article are severable. Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article be rendered invalid by any court of law, the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases shall not be affected but shall continue in effect until amended or repealed by action of the governing authority of the county. 
(Res. of 12-16-2010; Res. of 10-20-2016, § 1) 
Note— See the editor's note to § 74-42.1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances and resolutions of the county used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 

 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 

 