CODE OF DEKALB COUNTY AS REVISED, 1988 
____________ 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE COUNTY 
____________ 
Adopted, November 14, 1989  Effective, December 15, 1989 
____________ 
Published in 1988 by Order of the Board of Commissioners 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of 
DEKALB COUNTY, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Michael L. Thurmond 
Chief Executive Officer 
____________ 
Jeff Rader 
Presiding Officer 
____________ 
Steve Bradshaw 
Deputy Presiding Officer 
District 1: Nancy Jester 
District 2: Jeff Rader 
District 3: Larry Johnson 
District 4: Steve Bradshaw 
District 5: Mereda Davis Johnson 
District 6: Kathie Gannon 
District 7: Lorraine Cochran-Johnson 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Viviane Ernstes 
County Attorney 
____________ 
Barbara Sanders-Norwood 
Clerk of the Board of Commissioners and Chief Executive Officer 
OFFICIALS 
of 
DEKALB COUNTY, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Manuel J. Maloof 
Chief Executive 
____________ 
Jean Williams 
Sherry Sutton 
Nathaniel Mosby 
Robert J. Morris 
John S. Fletcher, Jr. 
Annie S. Collins 
Robert E. Lanier 
Board of Commissioners 
____________ 
Albert Sidney Johnson 
County Attorney 
____________ 
David W. Joyner 
Director of Finance and Ex Officio Clerk 
of the Board of Commissioners
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of DeKalb County, Georgia of a general and permanent nature. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through December 22, 1987, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of commissioners. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the second section of Chapter 1 is 1-2. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 1-2 and 1-3 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 1-2.1, 1-2.2 and 1-2.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 5 and 6, it will be designated as Chapter 5.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
The indices of the Code have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the publication. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Supervising Editor, and Ms. Laura Johnson, Code Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Mr. David W. Joyner, Director of Finance, Ms. Joyce B. Eastman, Assistant Director of Finance, Mr. Albert Sidney Johnson, County Attorney, and Ms. Jann Shevin, Principal Staff Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the county readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the county's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 89-41 
AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT AND ENACT A NEW CODE FOR DEKALB COUNTY, GEORGIA; TO PROVIDE FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; TO PROVIDE FOR THE RATIFICATION AND CONFIRMATION OF FEES AND TAXES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND TO PROVIDE WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS OF DEKALB COUNTY, GEORGIA, and it is hereby ordained by authority of same: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988" published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 26, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 27, 1988, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Notwithstanding section 2 above, Part 11, Chapter 2 of the 1976 DeKalb County Code, commonly called the "zoning ordinance," shall remain in full force and effect until such time as Chapter 27 of the 1988 code is duly adopted. 
Section 5. Notwithstanding section 2 above, all existing fees and taxes adopted pursuant to the 1976 DeKalb County Code are hereby ratified and confirmed. 
Section 6. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the board of commissioners to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 7. Ordinances adopted after December 27, 1988, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 8. Severability. If any section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
Section 9. Effective date. This ordinance shall be effective December 15, 1989. 
Section 10. Repealer. All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Adopted by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners, this 14th day of November, 1989. 

Approved by the Chief Executive Officer of DeKalb County, this 20th day of November, 1989. 

ATTEST: 

Approved as to Form: 


SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

 
ORGANIZATIONAL ACT[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Published herein is the basic act organizing the county governing authority, being Acts 1956, p. 1203, as amended. History notes show the source of amendments. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. The act has been published in a style consistent with that of the Code. For example, capitalization has been made consistent with the Code and numbers have been printed in words and figures. 

Sec. 1. - Governing authority [described]. 
(a)  There is hereby created the board of commissioners of DeKalb County to be elected and organized as hereinafter provided. There is hereby created the office of chief executive officer of DeKalb County, and said chief executive officer, who shall not be a member of the commission, shall be elected as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The board of commissioners of DeKalb County, hereinafter referred to as the "commission," and the chief executive officer of DeKalb County, hereinafter referred to as the "chief executive" shall constitute the governing authority of DeKalb County, and the respective powers and duties of the commission and the chief executive shall be as provided in this act. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - The commission. 
(a)  The commission shall consist of seven members. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the board of commissioners, DeKalb County is divided into seven commissioner districts. One member of the board shall be elected from each such district. 
(c)  (1)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 shall be and correspond to those five numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as "Plan: dekalbcc-import1-02092012 Plan Type: local Administrator: dekalb cc User: bak". 
(2)  When used in such attachment, the term "VTD" (voting tabulation district) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(3)  The separate numeric designations in a district description which are underneath a VTD heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a VTD as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of DeKalb County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(4)  Any part of DeKalb County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(5)  Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(6)  Paragraphs (2) through (5) of this subsection shall only be applicable with respect to Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. 
(d)  (1)  Commissioner Districts 6 and 7 shall be and correspond to those two numbered districts described in and attached to and made a part of this Act and further identified as "Plan Name: deksuperdist4 Plan Type: LOCAL User: Gina Administrator: CNTY-DEKALB". 
(2)  When used in such attachment, the terms "Tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographical boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. The separate numeric designations in a Tract description which are underneath a BG heading shall mean and describe individual Blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of DeKalb County which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Any part of DeKalb County which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such noncontiguous part shall instead be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. Except as otherwise provided in the description of any commissioner district, whenever the description of such district refers to a named city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census map for the United States decennial census of 2000 for the State of Georgia. This paragraph shall only be applicable with respect to Commissioner Districts 6 and 7. 
[ Districts ] 
Plan: dekalbcc-import1-02092012  Plan Type: local Administrator: dekalb cc User: bak 
District 001 
DeKalb County 
VTD: 089AD - AUSTIN 
VTD: 089AG - ASHFORD DUNWOOD 
VTD: 089AH - ASHFORD PARKSIDE 
VTD: 089BD - BRIARLAKE ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089BF - BROCKETT ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089BH - BROCKETT 
021805: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1011 1012 
021806: 
1005 
021809: 
2038 2039 2040 
VTD: 089CE - CHAMBLEE (CHA) 
VTD: 089CH - CHESNUT ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089DA - DORAVILLE NORTH 
VTD: 089DB - DORAVILLE SOUTH 
VTD: 089DF - DUNWOODY 
VTD: 089DG - DUNWOODY HIGH SCHOOL 
VTD: 089DI - DUNWOODY LIBRARY 
VTD: 089EC - EMBRY HILLS 
VTD: 089EF - EVANSDALE ELEM 
VTD: 089GD - GEORGETOWN SQ 
VTD: 089HC - HENDERSON MILL 
VTD: 089HF - HUNTLEY HILLS ELEM 
VTD: 089HG - HUGH HOWELL 
VTD: 089KB - KINGSLEY ELEM 
VTD: 089LV - LAWRENCEVILLE HIGH SCHOOL 
VTD: 089MH - MIDVALE ELEM 
VTD: 089MQ - MOUNT VERNON EAST 
VTD: 089MS - MOUNT VERNON WEST 
VTD: 089MU - MONTGOMERY ELEM 
VTD: 089MW - MIDVALE ROAD 
VTD: 089NA - NANCY CREEK ELEM 
VTD: 089NF - NORTH PEACH TREE 
VTD: 089OB - OAKCLIFF ELEM 
VTD: 089PB - PEACHTREE MIDDLE SCHOOL 
VTD: 089PF - PLEASANTDALE ELEM 
VTD: 089PK - PLEASANTDALE ROAD 
VTD: 089SH - SMOKE RISE 
VTD: 089TF - TUCKER 
VTD: 089TG - TILLY MILL ROAD 
VTD: 089TH - TUCKER LIBRARY 
VTD: 089WI - WARREN TECH 
VTD: 089WL - WINTERS CHAPEL 
District 002 
DeKalb County 
VTD: 089AB - ASHFORD PARK ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089BC - BRIAR VISTA ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089BE - BRIARWOOD 
VTD: 089BG - BRIARCLIFF 
VTD: 089BI - BROOKHAVEN 
VTD: 089CI - CLAIREMONT WEST 
VTD: 089CJ - CLAIRMONT HILLS 
VTD: 089CO - CROSS KEYS HIGH 
VTD: 089CV - CLAIREMONT EAST 
VTD: 089CW - CORALWOOD 
VTD: 089DC - DRESDEN ELEM 
VTD: 089DH - DRUID HILLS HIGH SCHOOL 
VTD: 089EE - EPWORTH (ATL) 
VTD: 089EG - EMORY SOUTH 
VTD: 089ER - EMORY ROAD 
VTD: 089FB - FERNBANK ELEM 
VTD: 089GA - GLENNWOOD (DEC) 
VTD: 089HB - HAWTHORNE ELEM 
VTD: 089HD - HERITAGE ED 
VTD: 089JA - JOHNSON ESTATES 
VTD: 089LA - LAKESIDE HIGH 
VTD: 089LB - LAVISTA ROAD 
VTD: 089LC - LAVISTA 
VTD: 089LE - MARYLIN ELEM 
VTD: 089MG - MEDLOCK ELEM 
VTD: 089MJ - MONTCLAIR ELEM 
VTD: 089MP - MARGARET HARRIS 
VTD: 089ND - NORTH LAKE 
VTD: 089OA - OAK GROVE ELEM 
VTD: 089OK - OAKHURST (DEC) 
VTD: 089PG - PONCE DE LEON 
VTD: 089RD - REHOBOTH 
VTD: 089RN - RENFROE MIDDLE 
VTD: 089SA - SAGAMORE HILLS 
VTD: 089SB - SCOTT 
VTD: 089SE - SILVER LAKE 
VTD: 089SF - SKYLAND 
VTD: 089WF - WINNONA PARK ELEM 
VTD: 089WJ - WOODWARD ELEM 
District 003 
DeKalb County 
VTD: 089AF - HOOPER ALEXANDER 
VTD: 089BB - BOULEVARD (ATL) 
VTD: 089BL - BOULDERCREST RD 
VTD: 089BR - BURGESS ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089CA - COLUMBIA DRIVE 
VTD: 089CB - CANBY LANE ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089CC - COLUMBIA ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089CD - CEDAR GROVE ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089CG - CHAPEL HILL ELEMENTARY 
023425: 
1000 1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1006 1010 1013 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1026 1031 
VTD: 089CL - CLIFTON ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089CM - COLUMBIA MIDDLE 
VTD: 089CN - COAN MIDDLE 
VTD: 089CQ - CANDLER 
VTD: 089CR - CEDAR GROVE MIDDLE 
VTD: 089CS - CEDAR GROVE SOUTH 
VTD: 089EA - EAST LAKE ELEM 
VTD: 089EB - EASTLAND 
VTD: 089FC - FLAT SHOALS ELEM 
VTD: 089FE - FLAT SHOALS PARKWAY 
VTD: 089FJ - FLAT SHOALS 
VTD: 089FK - FLAKES MILL FIRE 
VTD: 089FL - FLAT SHOALS LIBRARY 
VTD: 089GC - GRESHAM PARK ELEM 
VTD: 089HH - NARVIE J HARRIS 
VTD: 089KA - KELLEY LAKE ELEM 
VTD: 089KC - KELLEY CHAPEL 
VTD: 089KE - KNOLLWOOD ELEM 
VTD: 089ML - MEADOW VIEW ELEM 
VTD: 089MO - MIDWAY ELEM 
VTD: 089MP - MCNAIR MIDDLE 
VTD: 089MR - BOB MATHIS ELEM 
VTD: 089MT - METROPOLITAN 
VTD: 089OV - OAK VIEW ELEM 
VTD: 089PA - PEACHCREST ELEM 
VTD: 089PN - PINEY GROVE 
VTD: 089RA - RAINBOW ELEM 
VTD: 089SG - SNAPFINGER ELEM 
VTD: 089SR - SNAPFINGER ROAD 
VTD: 089TA - TERRY MILL ELEM 
VTD: 089TB - TILSON ELEM 
VTD: 089TC - TONEY ELEM 
VTD: 089WA - WADSWORTH ELEM 
VTD: 089WB - WESLEY CHAPEL SOUTH 
VTD: 089WE - WHITEFOORD ELEMENTARY 
District 004 
DeKalb County 
VTD: 089AA - ALLGOOD ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089AE - AVONDALE (AVO) 
VTD: 089AM - AVONDALE MIDDLE 
VTD: 089BH - BROCKETT 
021805: 
1015 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 3019 
021810: 
3023 3030 3031 3034 3035 
022009: 
3007 3008 
VTD: 089CK - CLARKSTON (CLA) 
VTD: 089CT - COVINGTON HWY L 
VTD: 089DE - DUNAIRE ELEM 
VTD: 089FD - FORREST HILLS ELEM 
VTD: 089FM - FREEDOM MIDDLE 
VTD: 089HA - HAMBRICK ELEM 
VTD: 089IA - IDLEWOOD ELEM 
VTD: 089IB - INDIAN CREEK ELEM 
VTD: 089JB - JOLLY ELEM 
VTD: 089MA - ELDRIDGE L MILL 
VTD: 089ME - MCLENDON ELEM 
VTD: 089MK - MONTREAL 
VTD: 089MM - MEMORIAL NORTH 
VTD: 089MN - MEMORIAL SOUTH 
VTD: 089NB - NORTH DECATUR 
VTD: 089NC - NORTH HAIRSTON 
VTD: 089PE - PINE LAKE (PIN) 
VTD: 089RE - ROCKBRIDGE ELEM 
VTD: 089RI - ROCKBRIDGE ROAD 
VTD: 089RJ - ROWLAND ROAD 
VTD: 089SC - SCOTTDALE 
VTD: 089SD - STN MTN ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089SI - STN MTN MIDDLE 
VTD: 089SJ - STONE MILL ELEM 
VTD: 089SK - SHADOW ROCK ELEM 
VTD: 089SN - SHAMROCK MIDDLE 
VTD: 089SO - SOUTH DESHON 
VTD: 089SP - STN MTN CHAMPION 
VTD: 089SQ - STONE MTN LIBRARY 
VTD: 089ST - STEPHENSON MIDDLE 
VTD: 089SU - SOUTH HAIRSTON 
VTD: 089SV - STEPHENSON HIGH 
VTD: 089VB - VALLEY BROOK 
VTD: 089WN - WYNBROOKE ELEM 
District 005 
VTD: 089AC - ATHERTON ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089BJ - BROWN'S MILL ELEMENTARY 
VTD: 089BM - BETHUNE MIDDLE 
VTD: 089CF - MURPHEY CANDLER 
VTD: 089CG - CHAPEL HILL ELEMENTARY 
023426: 
1000 1004 1026 1027 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 
VTD: 089CP - CROSSROADS 
VTD: 089FA - FAIRINGTON ELEM 
VTD: 089FG - FLAT ROCK ELEM 
VTD: 089GB - GLENHAVEN 
VTD: 089GE - GLENHAVEN ELEM 
VTD: 089KD - M L KING JR HIGH 
VTD: 089LD - LITHONIA (LIT) 
VTD: 089LH - LITHONIA HIGH SCHOOL 
VTD: 089MC - MARBUT ELEM 
VTD: 089MF - MCWILLIAMS 
VTD: 089MI - MILLER GROVE MIDDLE SCHOOL 
VTD: 089MV - MILLER GROVE ROAD 
VTD: 089MZ - MILLER GROVE HIGH 
VTD: 089PC - PRINCETON ELEM 
VTD: 089PH - PANOLA 
VTD: 089PI - PANOLA WAY ELEM 
VTD: 089PR - PANOLA ROAD 
VTD: 089RC - REDAN ELEM 
VTD: 089RF - ROCK CHAPEL ELEM 
VTD: 089RG - ROWLAND ELEM 
VTD: 089RH - REDAN-TROTTI 
VTD: 089RK - REDAN ROAD 
VTD: 089RL - ROCK CHAPEL ROAD 
VTD: 089RM - REDAN MIDDLE 
VTD: 089SL - STONEVIEW ELEM 
VTD: 089SM - SALEM MIDDLE 
VTD: 089SS - SNAPFINGER ROAD 
VTD: 089WD - WOODROW ROAD 
VTD: 089WG - WOODRIDGE ELEM 
VTD: 089WK - WHITE OAK 
VTD: 089YA - YOUNG ROAD 
(e)  Each commissioner shall be a citizen of this state, at least 25 years of age, and shall have been a resident of the geographic area encompassed by the respective commissioner district for at least two years immediately prior to taking office. Each commissioner shall be elected by a majority of the electors voting within the respective commissioner district. Except for displacement of their residences from their respective districts due to reapportionment of the districts, any commissioners who cease to be residents of their respective commissioner districts during their terms of office shall thereby vacate their seats on the commission. All members of the commission shall be nominated and elected pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1982, p. 4235, § 1; Acts 1992, H.B. 1577, § 1; Acts 1992, p. 6566, § 1; Acts 2002, p. 3544, § 1; Acts 2012, p. 4610, §§ 1, 7) 
Sec. 3. - Establishment of commission. 
(a)  Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, as they exist on January 1, 2012, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5, respectively, but as newly described under this Act, and such members of the board serving from those former commissioner districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this Act. Commissioner Districts 6 and 7 as they exist on January 1, 2012, shall continue to be designated as Commissioner Districts 6 and 7 as described under this Act and in effect on January 1, 2012. 
(b)  Those members of the Board of Commissioners of DeKalb County who are serving as such on January 1, 2012, and any person selected to fill a vacancy in any such office shall continue to serve as such members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and until the election and qualification of their respective successors. The successor to each such member shall be elected as provided in this section. 
(c)  The first members for new Commissioner Districts 1, 4, and 5 and the member from Commissioner District 6 shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2012. Those members of the board elected thereto from new Commissioner Districts 1, 4, and 5 and from Commissioner District 6 in 2012 shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2016, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(d)  The first members for new Commissioner Districts 2 and 3 and the member from Commissioner District 7 shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2014. Those members of the board elected thereto from new Commissioner Districts 2 and 3 and from Commissioner District 7 in 2014 shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2018, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. 
(e)  Those and all future successors to members of the board whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the time of the state-wide general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four years each. Members of the board shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1992, H.B. 1577, § 1; Acts 1992, p. 6566, § 1; Acts 2002, p. 3544, § 2; Acts 2012, p. 4610, § 2) 
Sec. 4. - Running for other elective offices. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this section, no member of the commission or the chief executive shall be qualified to be a candidate for nomination or election to any other elective office, other than to succeed one's self as a member of the commission or as chief executive, unless the member of the commission or the chief executive shall resign from office as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  If the term of the other office to which the member of the commission or the chief executive seeks to be a candidate for nomination or election expires on the same date the member's or the chief executive's term of office expires, then resignation from office under subsection (a) of this section shall not be required. If resignation is required under subsection (a) of this section, such resignation shall be irrevocable and shall be submitted to the commission by not later than April 1 of the year in which the election for other office to which the member of the commission or the chief executive seeks nomination or election is held and shall be effective on December 31 of that year. 
(c)  The April 1 date specified in subsection (b) of this section for irrevocable resignation from office shall be deemed to be the date of the creation of a vacancy, notwithstanding the fact that the resignation is not effective until the thirty-first day of December immediately following the date of resignation. Notwithstanding the provisions of section 6 of this act, no special election shall be held to fill such vacancy, and such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by nomination and election at the immediately following general primary and election in the same manner as nomination and election for a full term of office as a member of the commission in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 21 [§ 21-2-1 et seq.] of the O.C.G.A., known as the "Georgia Election Code." 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1984, p. 4916, § 1) 
Sec. 5. - Chief executive. 
(a)  The chief executive of DeKalb County shall be a citizen of this state, at least thirty (30) years of age and shall have been a resident of DeKalb County for at least five (5) years immediately prior to taking office. The chief executive shall be elected by a majority of the electors voting from the county at large. The chief executive shall be nominated and elected pursuant to Code Title 34 known as the "Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended. 
(b)  The first chief executive shall be elected as provided in subsection (a) hereof at the general election of 1984, and shall take office on the first day of January, 1985, for a term of four (4) years. Future successors shall be elected at the general election immediately preceding the expiration of the term of office and shall take office on the first day of January immediately following the election for a term of four (4) years. Each chief executive shall serve until the successor is elected and qualified. 
(c)  Any person elected chief executive shall not be eligible to serve more than two (2) consecutive full terms of office. In the event a person fills a vacancy in the office of chief executive as provided in section 6 of this act, such person shall be eligible for election to two (2) full consecutive terms of office as chief executive. When a person has served two (2) full consecutive terms of office as chief executive, such person shall not again be eligible to hold said office until such person has been out of office as chief executive for at least four (4) years. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 6. - Vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies on the commission and in the office of chief executive occurring by reason of death, resignation, removal from the county or from the district from which elected or for any other reason shall be filled as provided in this section. 
(b)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the commission or in the office of chief executive when at least one hundred eighty (180) days remain in the unexpired term of office, the election superintendent of DeKalb County, within fifteen (15) days after the vacancy occurs, shall issue the call for a special election to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. Such special election shall be held not less than twenty-nine (29) nor more than forty-five (45) days after the issuance of the call, and shall be held and conducted in accordance with the provisions of Code Title 34, known as the "Georgia Election Code" [O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.], as now or hereafter amended. If the vacancy is in the office of the chief executive, the presiding officer of the commission shall exercise the powers and duties of the chief executive, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, for the period beginning on the date the vacancy occurs and ending when the successor chief executive takes office for the unexpired term following the special election provided for herein. 
(c)  In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of chief executive when less than one hundred eighty (180) days remain in the unexpired term of office, the presiding office of the commission shall exercise the powers and duties of the chief executive, except as provided in subsection (e) of this section, for the unexpired term. 
(d)  In the event a vacancy occurs on the commission when less than one hundred eighty (180) days remain in the unexpired term of office, the remaining members of the commission shall appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy for the unexpired term. Any person appointed by the commission to fill a vacancy as provided herein shall possess the residency and other qualifications required for the office. 
(e)  If the presiding officer of the commission exercises the powers of chief executive pursuant to subsections (b) and (c) of this section, the person serving as the chief executive in either case shall not be authorized to discharge the executive assistant. A presiding officer serving as chief executive shall not be authorized to vote as a member of the commission during such service. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 7. - Oath and bond. 
Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, the chief executive and members of the commission shall subscribe to an oath before the judge of the probate court of DeKalb County for the true and faithful performance of their duties and that they are not the holders of any public funds unaccounted for. In addition the chief executive shall further give a satisfactory surety bond, as determined by the judge of the probate court of DeKalb County, and payable to the judge of the probate court of DeKalb County and filed in the office of the judge of the probate court of DeKalb County, in the sum of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00), conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties of the office. Each member of the commission shall give like bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The costs of said bonds shall be paid from county funds. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 8. - Compensation. 
The provisions of any other law to the contrary notwithstanding: 
(1)  The chief executive officer of DeKalb County shall be compensated in an amount equal to the compensation which he received in 1991, to be paid in equal monthly installments; 
(2)  Each member of the commission shall receive an annual salary equal to nineteen (19) percent of the annual salary of the chief executive officer; 
(3)  In addition to the annual salary provided for by paragraph (2) of this section, each member of the commission shall receive an expense allowance of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1987, p. 5013, § 1; Acts 1989, p. 4863, § 1; Acts 1990, p. 4296, § 1; Acts 1989, p. 4863, § 1; Acts 1990, p. 4296, § 1; Acts 1991, p. 4334, § 1) 
Sec. 9. - Powers and duties of the commission. 
(a)  The commission shall have the power and authority to fix and establish, by appropriate resolution or ordinance entered on its minutes, policies, rules and regulations governing all matters reserved to its jurisdiction by this act. The commission shall exercise only those powers which are necessarily and properly incident to its function as a policy-making or rule-making body or which are necessary to compel enforcement of its adopted resolutions or ordinances, and any power or combination of powers vested in the commission by this act shall be subject to the limitations provided in section 23 of this act. The following powers are hereby vested in the commission: 
(1)  To levy taxes. 
(2)  To make appropriations. 
(3)  To fix the rates of all other charges. 
(4)  To authorize the incurring of indebtedness. 
(5)  To authorize work to be done where the cost is to be assessed against the benefited property and to fix the basis for such assessment. 
(6)  To establish, alter, or abolish public roads, private ways, bridges and ferries, according to law, but the chief executive shall have the authority to accept subdivision plats when the requirements established by the commission for subdivisions have been met. 
(7)  To establish, abolish, or change election precincts and militia districts according to law. 
(8)  To allow the insolvent lists for the county. 
(9)  To authorize the acceptance for the county of the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the governing authority of a county. 
(10)  To regulate land use by the adoption of a comprehensive development plan and by the adoption of other planning and zoning ordinances which relate reasonably to the public health, safety, morality, and general welfare of the county and its citizens; provided, however, that no planning or zoning ordinances shall become effective unless approved, prior to consideration and adoption by the governing authority, by the member or members of the commission representing the district or super district in which the subject property is located. 
(11)  To create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law. 
(12)  To fix the bonds of county officers where same are not fixed by statute. 
(13)  To enact any ordinances or other legislation the county may be given authority to enact. 
(14)  To determine the priority of capital improvements. 
(15)  To call elections for the voting of bonds. 
(16)  Except as modified by the powers vested in the chief executive by other provisions of this act, to exercise the power and authority vested by law in the judge of the probate court when sitting for county purposes. 
(17)  Except as modified by the powers vested in the chief executive by other provisions of this act, to exercise the powers now or hereafter vested in county governing authorities by the constitution and general laws of this state. 
(18)  To fix, levy and assess license fees, charges or taxes on all persons, firms and corporations engaging in or offering to engage in any trade, business, calling, avocation or profession in the area of DeKalb County, outside the corporate limits of municipalities situated therein, except businesses which are subject to regulation by the state public service commission, and to classify all such persons, firms and corporations according to the nature, manner and size of business conducted by such persons, firms and corporations and to fix, levy and assess different license fees, charges or taxes against different classes of trades, businesses, callings, avocations or professions. Such licenses shall be issued, annually or otherwise, and may be revoked, canceled or suspended after notice and a hearing, in accordance with rules prescribed by the commission. Said commission shall be further authorized to adopt ordinances and resolutions to govern and regulate all such trades, businesses, callings, avocations or professions, not contrary to regulations prescribed by general law, for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare and morals of the citizens of said county, and to prescribe penalties for the violation of any such ordinances and resolutions, including the operation of such businesses without the obtaining of a license or when such license is revoked or suspended. Payment of said license fees, charges or taxes may be enforced by fi. fas. issued by the commission and levied by any officer in said county authorized by law to levy fi. fas. for taxes, assessments, fines, costs or forfeitures due said county. The commission shall be authorized, in its discretion, to require any and all persons, firms or corporations licensed pursuant to the authority herein granted to give a bond payable to DeKalb County, and conditioned to pay said county or anyone else, suing in the name of said county and for their use, for injuries or damages received on account of dishonest, fraudulent, immoral or improper conduct in the administration of the business so licensed, such bond to be fixed and approved by the commission. Such license fees, charges or taxes shall be in addition to all other taxes or assessments heretofore or hereafter levied by said county, and all funds received from same shall be paid into the county depository as general funds of said county. 
(19)  To adopt rules regulating the operation of the commission. 
(20)  To prepare an agenda for meetings of the commission. The commission shall accept agenda items by the chief executive officer upon motion by any commissioner to be placed upon the agenda, pursuant to the rules by which an item may be placed on the agenda by a member of the commission. 
(b)  In addition to the powers enumerated in subsection (a) of this section, the commission may adopt all such ordinances or regulations as it may deem advisable, not in conflict with the general laws of this state and of the United States, for the governing and policing of the county for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, welfare, and morals of the citizens of the county and for the implementation and enforcement of the powers and duties of the commission. 
(c)  The commission is hereby authorized to adopt ordinances prescribing penalties and punishment for violation of any and all ordinances adopted by the commission to carry out any of the provisions of this section or other provisions of this Act or of any other law, and to prescribe maximum penalties and punishment for violation of same, except that the same shall in no event exceed a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment in the county jail for thirty (30) days, or labor on the work gang for any single offense, or any combination thereof; provided, however, that for violations of a pretreatment standard or requirement adopted pursuant to the federal Clean Water Act the maximum fine shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation by an industrial user. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1983, p. 4547, § 1; Acts 1986, p. 4107, § 1; Acts 1990, p. 4479, § 1; Acts 1992, p. 5363, § 1; Acts 2008, p. 3897, § 1; Acts. 2016, p. 4219, § 1 ) 
Sec. 10. - Audits. 
(a)  The commission shall choose three (3) of its members to serve as an audit committee. The term of members serving as the audit committee and their manner of selection shall be as determined by the commission. The audit committee shall screen and recommend to the commission an independent auditing firm to serve as an outside auditor of the county government to make an annual continuous general audit of all county finances and financial records. 
(b)  The outside auditor shall be employed pursuant to written contract to be entered upon the minutes of the commission, and the contract shall state clearly and concisely the depth and scope of the audit and that it shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of the act providing uniform standards for audits of municipalities and counties within the State of Georgia, approved April 21, 1967 (Ga. Laws 1967, p. 883), as amended, by an act approved March 28, 1968 (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 464) [O.C.G.A. § 36-60-8]. The auditor shall immediately inform the commission in writing of any irregularities found in the management of county business by an officer or department of the county government. 
(c)  The outside auditor shall complete the audit in compliance with Article 1 of Chapter 81 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated each year, and, within ten (10) days after its completion, the auditor shall deliver a copy of the audit to each commissioner, the chief executive, and the grand jury of the DeKalb County superior court then in session. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1915, p. 3826, § 1 ; Acts. 2016, p. 4219, § 2 ) 
Sec. 10A. - Independent internal audit. 
(a)  (1)  It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the DeKalb County government that public officials, government managers, and private citizens know not only whether government funds are handled properly and in compliance with laws and regulations but also whether public programs are achieving the purposes for which they were authorized and funded, and whether they are doing so efficiently, effectively, and equitably. An independent internal audit function can provide objective information on the operations of government programs, assist managers in carrying out their responsibilities, and help ensure full transparency and accountability to the public. Internal auditing is defined as an independent, objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value and improve an organization's operations by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes. 
(2)  The public interest requires that the general assembly provide for the proper administration and operation of the DeKalb County government by establishing by law an independent internal audit function to assist the governing authority to accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disciplined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk management, control, and governance processes. 
(b)  The office of internal audit is hereby established which shall consist of the chief audit executive ("auditor") and those assistants, employees, and personnel as deemed necessary by such auditor for the efficient and effective administration of the affairs of the office, and over whom the auditor shall have the sole authority to appoint, employ, and remove. 
(c)  The office of internal audit shall be completely independent and shall not be subject to control or supervision by the chief executive, the commission, or any other official, employee, department, or agency of the county government. 
(d)  The auditor shall be appointed by a majority vote of the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners from a list of not fewer than two (2) nor more than three (3) candidates provided to the board by the audit oversight committee. Such appointment shall be made within thirty (30) days of receipt of the list of nominees by the board. In the event that the commission fails to appoint a nominee within thirty (30) days, the auditor shall be appointed by a majority vote of the audit oversight committee. 
(d)  The term of office of the auditor shall be five (5) years and until his or her successor is qualified and appointed. The auditor shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) terms in office. A vacancy in the position of auditor shall exist by reason of expiration of term, resignation, death, removal from office by the vote of a supermajority of the members of the commission, or if the auditor becomes ineligible to hold civil office within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 and that ineligibility is established by decision of a court of competent jurisdiction which declares the office vacant because of such ineligibility. A vacancy shall be filled within sixty (60) days by a majority vote of the audit oversight committee for the remainder of the term of office. 
(e)  The auditor must have adequate professional proficiency for the job and shall: 
(1)  Be a certified public accountant or a certified internal auditor; 
(2)  Have a bachelor's degree in public policy, accounting, business administration, economics, or a related field; and 
(3)  Have at least five (5) years of experience in government auditing, evaluation, or analysis. 
(f)  The position of the auditor shall be nonpartisan. Qualifying for election to a public office shall constitute a resignation from the position as of the date of qualifying. 
(g)  The auditor shall have authority to conduct financial and performance audits of all departments, offices, boards, activities, agencies, and programs of the county in order to independently and objectively determine whether: 
(1)  Activities and programs being implemented have been authorized by this Act, Georgia law, or applicable federal law or regulations and are being conducted and funds expended in compliance with applicable laws; 
(2)  The department, office, board, or agency is acquiring, managing, protecting, and using its resources, including public funds, personnel, property, equipment, and space, economically, efficiently, effectively, and in a manner consistent with the objectives intended by the authorizing entity or enabling legislation; 
(3)  The entity, programs, activities, functions, or policies are effective, including the identification of any causes of inefficiencies or uneconomical practices; 
(4)  The desired results or benefits are being achieved; 
(5)  Financial and other reports are being provided that disclose fairly, accurately, and fully all information required by law, to ascertain the nature and scope of programs and activities, and to establish a proper basis for evaluating the programs and activities including the collection of, accounting for, and depositing of, revenues and other resources; 
(6)  Management has established adequate operating and administrative procedures and practices, systems or accounting internal control systems, and internal management controls; and 
(7)  Indications of fraud, abuse, or illegal acts are valid and need further investigation. 
(h)  All officers and employees of DeKalb County shall furnish to the auditor unrestricted access to employees, information, and records including electronic data within their custody regarding powers, duties, activities, organization, property, financial transactions, contracts, and methods of business required to conduct an audit or otherwise perform audit duties. In addition, they shall provide access for the auditor to inspect all property, equipment, and facilities within their custody. If such officers or employees fail to provide or produce such access and information, the auditor may initiate a search to be made and exhibits to be taken from any book, paper, or record of any such official or employee or outside contractor or subcontractor, except as governed by statute. Further, all contracts with outside contractors and subcontractors shall contain a "right-to-audit" clause and provide for auditor access to the contractors' employees and to all financial and performance related records, property, and equipment purchased in whole or in part with governmental funds. For the purpose of this subsection, the auditor shall have the authority to issue subpoenas and may apply to the Superior Court of DeKalb County for the enforcement of any subpoena issued by the auditor. 
(i)  The auditor may obtain the services of certified public accountants, qualified management consultants, or other professional experts necessary to perform audit work. An audit that is performed by contract must be conducted by persons who have no financial interests in the affairs of the governmental entity or its officers. The auditor shall coordinate and monitor auditing performed by certified public accounting firms or other organizations employed under contract by the governing authority to assist with audit related activities. Contracting for the external audit will follow the normal contracting processes of the governing authority of DeKalb County except for the participation and oversight by the audit oversight committee and auditor. The selection of a certified public accounting firm for the annual financial audit must be approved by the commission. 
(j)  (1)  Audits shall be conducted in accordance with recognized government auditing standards. 
(2)  At the beginning of each fiscal year, the auditor shall submit a one- to five-year audit schedule to the audit oversight committee and the commission for review and comment. The schedule shall include the proposed plan, and the rationale for the selections, for auditing departments, offices, boards, activities, programs, policies, contractors, subcontractors, and agencies for the period. This schedule may be amended after review with the audit oversight committee and the commission, but the auditor shall have final authority to select the audits planned. 
(3)  In the selection of audit areas and audit objectives, the determination of audit scope and the timing of audit work, the auditor shall consult with federal and state auditors and external auditors so that the desirable audit coverage is provided and audit efforts are properly coordinated. 
(4)  A final draft of the audit report shall be forwarded to the audit oversight committee, the chief executive, the commission, and the audited agency for review and comment regarding factual content prior to its release. The agency shall respond in writing, specifying the agreement with audit findings and recommendations or reasons for disagreement with findings and recommendations, plans for implementing solutions to issues identified, and a timetable to complete such activities. The response shall be forwarded to the auditor within sixty (60) days. The auditor shall review and report on information included in the agency's response. If no response is received, the auditor shall note that fact in the transmittal letter and shall release the audit report. 
(5)  Each audit shall result in a final report, in written or some other retrievable form. The report shall contain relevant background information and findings and recommendations and shall communicate results to the audit oversight committee, the audited agency, and the governing authority. 
(6)  The auditor shall submit an annual report to the audit oversight committee, chief executive, and the commission indicating audits completed, major findings, corrective actions taken by administrative managers, and significant issues which have not been fully addressed by management. The annual report, in written or some other retrievable form, shall be made available to the public through the county website within ten (10) days of submission to the commission. 
(k)  If, during an audit, the auditor becomes aware of abuse or illegal acts or indications of such acts that could affect the governmental entity, the auditor shall report the irregularities to the audit oversight committee, the chief executive, and the commission. If a member of the governing authority is believed to be a party to abuse or illegal acts, the auditor shall report the acts directly to the audit oversight committee, the chief executive, and the commission. If it appears that the irregularity is criminal in nature, the auditor shall notify the district attorney in addition to those officials previously identified in this subsection. 
(l)  The auditor shall follow up on audit recommendations to determine if corrective action has been taken. The auditor shall request periodic status reports from audited agencies regarding actions taken to address reported deficiencies and audit recommendations. 
(m)  (1)  The audit activities of the office of internal audit shall be subject to a peer review in accordance with applicable government auditing standards by a professional, nonpartisan objective group utilizing guidelines endorsed by the Association of Local Government Auditors (ALGA). 
(2)  The peer review shall use applicable government auditing standards to evaluate the quality of audit effort and reporting. Specific quality review areas shall include staff qualifications, adequacy of planning and supervision, sufficiency of work paper preparation and evidence, and the adequacy of systems for reviewing internal controls, fraud and abuse, program compliance, and automated systems. The peer review shall also assess the content, presentation, form, timelines, and distribution of audit reports. The commission shall pay for the costs of the peer review. 
(3)  A copy of the written report of such independent review shall be furnished to each member of the governing authority and to the audit oversight committee. 
(n)  (1)  To ensure independence of the audit function, an audit oversight committee is hereby established. The audit oversight committee shall consist of five (5) voting members. 
(2)  All members of the audit oversight committee shall: 
a.  Be residents of DeKalb County; 
b.  Have expertise in performance auditing; and 
c.  Have a minimum of five (5) years' experience as a certified public accountant, a certified internal auditor, a certified performance auditor, a certified management accountant, or ten (10) years of other relevant professional experience. 
(3)  Not later than October 31, 2015, the members of the audit oversight committee shall be selected as follows: 
a.  One (1) member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the DeKalb County delegation in the Georgia House of Representatives; 
b.  One (1) member shall be appointed by the chairperson of the DeKalb County delegation in the Georgia Senate; 
c.  One (1) member shall be appointed by the Chief Executive of DeKalb County; and 
d.  Two (2) members shall be appointed by the commission. 
(4)  The members shall serve for terms of five (5) years; provided, however, that the initial term of the first appointee of the commission shall be one (1) year and until his or her respective successor is appointed and qualified; the initial term of the appointee of the chairperson of the DeKalb County delegation in the Georgia House of Representatives shall be two (2) years and until his or her respective successor is appointed and qualified; the initial term of the appointee of the chief executive shall be three (3) years and until his or her respective successor is appointed and qualified; the initial term of the second appointee of the commission shall be four (4) years and until his or her respective successor is appointed and qualified; and the initial term of the appointee of the chairperson of the DeKalb County delegation in the Georgia Senate shall be five (5) years and until his or her respective successor is appointed and qualified. 
(5)  Successors to all members of the audit oversight committee and future successors shall be appointed by the respective appointing authorities not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of each such member's term of office, and such successors shall take office on January 1 following such appointment and shall serve terms of five (5) years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
(6)  If a member of the audit oversight committee ceases to be a resident of DeKalb County, that member's position on the board, by operation of law, shall become vacant upon the establishment of the fact of such nonresidency, if contested, by a court of competent jurisdiction. A vacancy on the audit oversight committee shall exist by reason of death, resignation, incapacity to serve for ninety (90) days or longer, or loss of residency as described in this subsection. A member of the audit oversight committee may also be removed from office during a term if the member becomes ineligible to hold civil office within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 of the O.C.G.A. and that ineligibility is established by decision of a court of competent jurisdiction which declares the office vacant because of such ineligibility or by a vote of two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the members of the legislative delegation. A vacancy shall be filled within sixty (60) days by the legislative delegation for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(7)  The members of the audit oversight committee shall elect from their own membership a chairperson and otherwise provide for their own internal organization. 
(8)  The audit oversight committee shall consult with the auditor regarding technical issues and work to assure maximum coordination between the work of the auditor's office and external audit efforts. 
(9)  The audit oversight committee shall meet as needed to perform its duties but shall not meet less than once quarterly and shall be responsible for: 
a.  Selecting not fewer than two (2) nor more than three (3) nominees for the position of auditor who meet the requirements outlined in subsection (e) of this section which shall be submitted to the commission for selection and appointment of one (1) of the nominees to the position of auditor; 
b.  Performing regular evaluations of the DeKalb County audit function; 
c.  Providing suggestions and comments for the annual audit plan; 
d.  Ensuring that audit reports are transmitted to the governing authority and to the public; 
e.  Monitoring follow-up on reported findings to assure corrective action is taken by management; 
f.  Reporting to the governing authority on problems or problem areas at such times as deemed appropriate; 
g.  Conducting or overseeing the requests for proposal and selection process for the firm conducting the annual financial statement audits, and ranking and recommending in order of preference no fewer than three (3) firms deemed to be the most highly qualified to perform the required services. If fewer than three (3) firms respond to the request for proposal, the audit oversight committee shall recommend such firms as it deems to be the most highly qualified; 
h.  Evaluating the firm providing annual financial statement auditing services and providing oversight of that audit, including ensuring transmission of reports and follow-up on corrective action by management; 
i.  Evaluating the findings and recommendations of the peer review as required by recognized government auditing standards; 
j.  Consulting with the auditor regarding technical issues with the external audit firm and working to assure maximum coordination between the work of the office of internal audit and contracted audit efforts and other consulting engagements; 
k.  Maintaining the confidentiality of personnel matters while taking responsibility for appropriate disclosure to the governing authority, the legislature, or to the public; and 
l.  Annually meeting with members of the commission to discuss controls, systems and risk, and performance of the audit firm, and to discuss other matters that the audit firm, the auditor, or staff desires or is required to bring to the commission's attention such as fraud, illegal acts, and financial and control weaknesses. 
(10)  The audit oversight committee shall have the authority to hire outside experts, including legal counsel, when necessary. 
(11)  The audit oversight committee shall have the authority to propose the budget of the office of internal audit, including the auditor's salary and staffing, and shall then recommend the budget to the commission for approval, who shall fund it as a priority. 
(12)  Sufficient resources as requested by the audit oversight committee shall be provided by the commission to enable the audit oversight committee to carry out its responsibilities. 
(o)  The provisions of this section are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
( Acts 1915, p. 3826, § 2 ) 
Sec. 11. - Presiding officer. 
(a)  The chief executive shall have no vote at any regular or specially called meeting of the commission unless the members of the commission are equally divided. Even when the members of the commission are equally divided, the chief executive may not vote on a matter which is not subject to veto by said officer under the provisions of subsection (d) of section 15 of this Act. 
(b)  At the first regular meeting in January of each year, the commission shall elect from its membership a presiding officer and a deputy presiding officer. The member serving as presiding officer or deputy presiding officer shall retain all rights, powers and duties as a member of the commission. 
(c)  The presiding officer shall preside at meetings of the commission and shall have the following additional duties: 
(1)  To convene such special meetings of the commission as are deemed necessary, but all members shall be notified at least three (3) days in advance of any such special meeting; 
(2)  To appoint the members and chairpersons of such committees of the commission as the commission, by its rules, may establish and fill vacancies therein, but any such appointments may be rejected by a majority vote of the total membership of the commission; 
(3)  To compel the attendance of members at meetings of the commission by subpoena, if necessary, subject to the policy of the commission as established by its rules; and 
(4)  To exercise such other powers and duties as may be assigned to the presiding officer by ordinance or rules and regulations of the commission. 
(d)  In the event the office of the member serving as presiding officer becomes vacant for any reason, or in the event the presiding officer is absent for any reason, or in the event the presiding officer exercises the powers of the chief executive pursuant to subsections (b) or (c) of section 6 of this act, then the deputy presiding officer shall exercise the powers and duties of the presiding officer during the absence of the presiding officer or until a successor presiding officer is elected by the commission at the first regular meeting held during the next succeeding January. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1988, p. 4740, § 1; Acts 2008, p. 3897, § 2) 
Sec. 12. - Meetings. 
The commission shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at the county seat, which meetings shall be open to the public, and may hold such additional meetings as shall be necessary when called by the chief executive, the presiding officer, or any four (4) members of the commission, but all members shall be notified at least three (3) days in advance of any such additional meeting. No official action shall be taken by the commission except in a meeting which is open to the public. The presiding officer and any three (3) members of the commission, or any four (4) members of the commission exclusive of the presiding officer, shall constitute a quorum, except that a lesser number shall be sufficient to recess or adjourn any meeting; but no official action shall be taken except upon the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the commission, or three (3) members and the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall be entitled to the same voting rights as the commission members on questions considered by the commission. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 13. - Powers and duties of the chief executive. 
(a)  The chief executive shall have the exclusive power to supervise, direct and control the administration of the county government. The chief executive shall carry out, execute and enforce all ordinances, policies, rules and regulations of the commission when such ordinances, policies, rules and regulations become effective. Members of the commission shall deal solely through the chief executive or his executive assistance [assistant] in all matters concerning the operation, supervision, and administration of the various departments, offices, and agencies of the county government. No member of the commission shall directly or indirectly order, instruct, or otherwise attempt to control the actions of county personnel subject to the administrative and supervisory control of the chief executive. Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude any commissioner from seeking information necessary to the establishment of policy from any person, including any employee of DeKalb County. 
(b)  Subject to the approval of the commission, the chief executive shall have the power to change, consolidate, or abolish any departments, agencies, or offices over which the chief executive exercises supervision and control, except that the department of finance shall be maintained at all times as a separate and distinct department and may not be abolished by the chief executive or by the commission. Subject to the approval of the commission, the chief executive may create other departments, agencies, and offices, which departments, agencies, and offices, when created, shall be under the supervision and control of the chief executive. 
(c)  (1)  Subject to confirmation by the commission, the chief executive shall appoint the executive assistant and the county attorney. The executive assistant shall be subject to the requirements of section 14 of this act. No member of the commission or the commission itself shall be authorized to nominate persons for the office of executive assistant or county attorney. Within the budgetary limitations, the chief executive shall fix the compensation of the executive assistant and the county attorney. Both of said officers shall serve at the pleasure of the chief executive. The commission may also discharge either such officer for cause, but the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the commission shall be required to discharge either such officer. 
(2)  Subject to confirmation by the commission, the chief executive shall appoint the planning director, finance director, and merit system director. No member of the commission or the commission itself shall be authorized to nominate persons for any such position. All three (3) of said officers shall be under the DeKalb County Merit System and, subject to the regulations of said merit system and budgetary limitations, the chief executive shall have the authority to fix the compensation of said officials. 
(d)  Subject to budgetary limitations and DeKalb County Merit System regulations, the chief executive shall have exclusive authority to appoint, remove, and fix the compensation of all employees and officials of the county, except employees of the commission, and except that deputies and employees of the elected county officers of DeKalb County shall be subject to appointment, removal, supervision, and control of the respective elective county officers. The compensation of persons filling offices and positions created by state statutes shall be fixed by the chief executive within budgetary limitations when such state statutes authorize or require such compensation to be fixed by county governments or by county governing authorities. 
(e)  The chief executive may convene special meetings of the commission when deemed necessary, but all members shall be notified at least three (3) days in advance of any such special meeting. 
(f)  The chief executive may compel the attendance of members at meetings of the commission by subpoena, when deemed necessary, subject to the policy of the commission as established by its rules. 
(g)  The chief executive shall have power to investigate the affairs, records and expenditures of the various authorities, boards, councils, commissions, committees, and similar bodies or agencies, whether created by ordinance of the commission or by acts of the General Assembly, relating to the affairs of the county and to report thereon to the commission. 
(h)  The chief executive shall represent the county in intergovernmental matters and shall seek to promote and improve the government of the county and encourage the growth of the county and promote and develop the prosperity and well-being of the citizens of the county. 
(i)  The chief executive, within one hundred twenty (120) days after the close of each fiscal year, shall prepare and submit to the commission a complete annual report on the financial affairs and activities of the county for the immediately preceding fiscal year. The annual report shall show all income from all sources, including state, county, and federal funds, and all expenditures. The chief executive shall cause a summary of said annual report to be published in the official organ of DeKalb County. Said published summary shall state that a copy of the full report is available from the office of the chief executive. The chief executive shall also send copies of the full report to each branch of the county library. The chief executive shall also make financial reports during the year as may be required by the commission. 
(j)  The chief executive may recommend, at any time, to the commission for its formal consideration, such measures or proposals as are deemed necessary or desirable to improve the administration of the affairs of the county. 
(k)  The chief executive shall devote full time to the duties of the office and shall have no other source of employment. 
(l)  Reserved. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1983, p. 4547, §§ 2, 3; Acts 1986, p. 4107, § 2; Acts 1988, p. 4740, § 2; Acts 2008, p. 3897, § 3) 
Sec. 13A. - Appointments to public office. 
(a)  (1) Whenever any other law of this state authorizes or requires a county governing authority, including any such law which refers to a local governing body with the intention of including a county governing authority, to appoint or elect a person to fill a post or vacancy in any public office or as a member of any public authority, board, commission, or other body or agency, such post or vacancy shall be filled as follows: 
(A)  The chief executive shall nominate a person by sending a written notice to the commission, and such notice shall specify the post or vacancy to be filled, the date such post or vacancy is to be filled, the qualifications, if any, which must be possessed by a person filling the post or vacancy, and the name of the person nominated by the chief executive; 
(B)  Within twenty (20) days after the date the notice described in subparagraph (A) of this subsection is received, the commission, either at a regular or called meeting, shall confirm or reject the nominee of the chief executive; 
(C)  If the first nominee of the chief executive is rejected by the commission, the chief executive shall make a second nomination in writing to the commission within ten (10) days after the date of such rejection; 
(D)  Within fifteen (15) days after the date the second nomination of the chief executive is received, the commission, either at a regular or called meeting, shall confirm or reject the second nominee of the chief executive; and 
(E)  If the second nominee of the chief executive is rejected by the commission, the commission shall, within fifteen (15) days after the date of such rejection, either at a regular or called meeting, elect a qualified person to fill the post or vacancy without the necessity of a nomination by the chief executive. 
(2) When the need to fill a post or vacancy is known by the chief executive at least sixty (60) days in advance of the date on which the post or vacancy should be filled, the chief executive shall initiate the procedures provided by paragraph (1) of this subsection far enough in advance to permit such post or vacancy to be filled at the proper time. In all other cases, the chief executive shall initiate such procedures as soon as practicable after learning of the need to fill the post or vacancy. 
(b)  When a law described in subsection (a) of this section authorizes a person elected or appointed to fill a post or vacancy to be removed from office by a county governing authority, such power of removal may be exercised by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the commission, exclusive of the presiding officer, or by the affirmative vote of three (3) members of the commission and the presiding officer. Such power of removal may be exercised by the commission without the concurrence of the chief executive, but the chief executive may recommend such removal to the commission. 
(c)  Whenever any other law of this state authorizes or requires the chairman of the board of commissioners of a county or the elected chief executive officer of a county, by whatever name designated, to hold another office or to serve as a member of any public authority, board, commission, or other body or agency, such law shall be construed to grant such authority or apply such requirement to the chief executive. 
(d)  Whenever any other law of this state refers, for purposes other than those described in subsection (c) of this section, to the chairman of the board of commissioners of a county or to the elected chief executive officer of a county, by whatever name designated, such law shall be construed to refer to the chief executive. 
(Acts 1986, p. 4107, § 3) 
Sec. 14. - Executive assistant; administrators. 
(a)  Subject to the qualifications for said office as hereinafter provided in this section, the chief executive shall nominate, and the commission shall confirm, an executive assistant. The executive assistant shall be the chief administrative aide to the chief executive and the commission and shall be responsible to the chief executive and the commission for the proper administration of the affairs of the county. 
(b)  When directed to do so by the chief executive, the executive assistant may exercise any of the administrative duties and powers vested in the chief executive by law or ordinances, rules, and regulations adopted by the commission. 
(c)  The executive assistant shall hold a college degree in public administration, political science, urban affairs, business administration, engineering, or a related field and must have at least five (5) years of experience in a supervisory capacity as an employee, director, administrator, or manager of a city or county government or a state or federal agency or equivalent experience in the private sector or any combination thereof. 
(d)  No person shall be appointed or hold office as executive assistant to the chief executive if such person, within two (2) years immediately preceding appointment, has: 
(1)  Been a candidate for elective public office; 
(2)  Been the holder of elective public office; or 
(3)  Held a management position in the political campaign of any candidate for the office of chief executive, or any member of the board of commissioners of DeKalb County. 
(e)  After appointment, the executive assistant shall not take part in the management of any political campaign for any elective public office or hold office in any political party or body. If the executive assistant participates in political activities in violation of this subsection, such participation, by operation of law, shall result in the immediate discharge of the executive assistant, and the office of executive assistant shall be vacant. 
(f)  The chief executive shall also have exclusive power to appoint, remove from office and, within budgetary limitations, fix the compensation of two (2) administrators to assist the executive assistant in such manner as the chief executive shall direct. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1983, p. 4547, § 4) 
Sec. 15. - Veto power of chief executive. 
(a)  Every ordinance or resolution adopted by the commission shall be signed by the presiding officer of the commission or, in the absence of the presiding officer, the deputy presiding officer shall sign the ordinance or resolution. Such ordinance or resolution shall be certified by the clerk of the commission and presented by said clerk to the office of the chief executive within three (3) business days following its adoption by the commission. The chief executive shall approve or veto the ordinance or resolution within eight (8) business days after its adoption by the commission, and, except as hereinafter provided, no ordinance or resolution shall become effective without the approval of the chief executive. 
(b)  If the chief executive vetoes an ordinance or resolution, the chief executive shall return it to the commission within two (2) business days after such veto along with a written statement of the reasons for the veto. If, at the meeting of the commission next held after receiving the vetoed ordinance or resolution, the commission shall again pass the ordinance or resolution by a two-thirds vote of its total membership, such ordinance or resolution shall become effective without the approval of the chief executive. If the chief executive does not approve or veto an ordinance or resolution within eight (8) business days after its adoption by the commission, it shall become effective without the chief executive's approval. 
(c)  The chief executive may veto any item or items of any ordinance or resolution making appropriations, and the part or parts vetoed shall not become effective, except as provided by subsection (b) of this section with respect to other ordinances or resolutions. Any part of an ordinance or resolution making appropriations not vetoed by the chief executive shall become effective. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall authorize the chief executive to exercise a veto over any zoning ordinance adopted by the commission pursuant to its authority under paragraph (10) of subsection (a) of section 9 of this act, nor over any rule adopted by the commission pursuant to its authority under paragraph (19) of subsection (a) of section 9 of this act. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1988, p. 4740, § 3) 
Sec. 16. - Comprehensive development plan. 
(a)  The chief executive shall from time to time present to the commission a comprehensive development plan which shall: 
(1)  Consider the economic and social aspects of the county; 
(2)  Set forth the comprehensive development goals, policies and objectives of the county, its specific geographic areas, communities and neighborhoods and the citizens thereof; and 
(3)  In conformity with such development goals, policies and objectives, identify parks, recreation facilities, sites for public buildings and structures, utilities, transportation systems and facilities, housing, community facilities, manufacturing and industrial sites, future land use for all classifications and such other elements, features and policies as will promote the improvement of the county. 
(b)  In preparing or revising the comprehensive development plan, the chief executive shall seek the views and opinions of citizens of the county and shall establish and publicize formal procedures to obtain such views and opinions. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 17. - Budgeting; control of expenditures. 
The chief executive shall submit to the board not later than December 15 of each year a proposed budget governing the expenditures of all county funds, including capital outlay and public works projects for the following calendar year. In an election year, if the incumbent chief executive is not reelected, this date may be extended to January 15 of the year to which the budget pertains. The proposed budget submitted to the commission shall be accompanied by a report containing information and data relating to the financial affairs of the county pertinent to arriving at and establishing the annual budget. 
The chief executive shall cause to be published in the official organ of DeKalb County a copy of the proposed budget along with a notice to the public that a public hearing on the proposed budget shall be held at a time and place certain, which time shall be not less than ten (10) days of [from] the publication. At this public hearing the commission shall review the proposed budget. It may adopt the budget as presented by the chief executive or it may make such amendments thereto as it deems necessary to maintain the county in a sound financial condition. Nothing herein shall prevent the commission from continuing the hearing on the proposed budget from time to time, provided the time and place to which the hearing is continued shall be publicly announced at the previous hearing. However, the final budget shall be approved and adopted before March 1, of the year to which it pertains. The final budget shall constitute the commission's appropriations of all funds for such year. The budget may be amended during the calendar year which it covers upon formal action of the commission in a regular meeting, but no increase in appropriations shall be made therein without provision also being made for financing same. 
A copy of the final budget adopted shall be transmitted by the chief executive to the grand jury of DeKalb County Superior Court then in session within ten (10) days of its adoption. 
Between January 1 and such time as the budget for the county is adopted by the board of commissioners, the director of finance, with the approval of the chief executive, shall be authorized to make such expenditures of county funds as are deemed necessary and proper for the continuing operation of the county any its various departments at the then-currently approved level of service. These expenditures shall not include disbursements for new personnel, new services, new equipment, or other items which could be interpreted as providing additional level of service not previously authorized. 
No expenditure of county funds shall be made except in accordance with the county budget, or amendments thereto, adopted by the Commission. The chief executive shall enforce compliance with this requirement by all departments, offices, or agencies of the county government, including elected county officers, with the exception of the tax commissioner, clerk of the superior court, district attorney, and sheriff. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Ord. No. 85-17, § I, 7-23-85; Acts 2007, p. 4073, § 1) 
Editor's note— The ordinances shown in the left-hand column below may be found in the acts as shown in the right-hand column below: 

 
Sec. 18. - Purchases; contracts. 
(a)  The chief executive, subject to the approval of the commission, shall establish rules to regulate purchasing for all county departments, offices, and agencies of the county government, with the exception of the tax commissioner, clerk of the superior court, district attorney, and sheriff. Except as hereinafter provided, formal sealed bids, after notice of same has been published one (1) time in the official organ of DeKalb County, must be obtained on all purchases exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). Purchases exceeding fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) may be made without formal sealed bids from any vendor who, at the time of purchase, has an existing contract or schedule with a county or municipality if such contract was procured by a competitive process, or the State of Georgia or the federal government so long as all such purchases are made pursuant to the price, terms, and conditions of said contract and if the county receives all the benefits of such contract. 
(b)  Except for contracts of employment, the commission shall authorize all contracts involving the expenditure of county funds in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). 
(c)  No more than one (1) contract involving the expenditure of county funds during a fiscal year may be made with any vendor without approval of the commission. 
(d)  Subdividing a proposed contract which is for an amount above the threshold specified in subsection (a) or (b) of this section into smaller contracts or subcontracts for the purpose of avoiding the requirement of subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall be prohibited and such contracts or subcontracts shall be void ab initio. 
(e)  Except for contracts of employment, all contracts for purchase shall be published on the county website within thirty (30) days of approval of such contracts. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Ord. No. 01-02, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 12-03, 6-10-03; Acts 2007, p. 4073, § 2; Acts 1915, p. 3824, § 1 ; Acts. 2016, p. 4219, § 3 ) 
Sec. 19. - Department of finance. 
(a)  The department of finance is hereby established as a permanent administrative unit of the county government. The department shall be under the control and supervision of the director of finance. The department of finance shall perform the following functions: 
(1)  Keep and maintain accurate records reflecting the financial affairs of the county. 
(2)  Compile the annual budget covering all county funds. 
(3)  Make quarterly allotments of monies appropriated and budget to each department, office or agency of the county entitled to receive same. 
(4)  Maintain current control accounts over the collection and deposit of monies due the county from taxes and other sources. 
(5)  Examine all claims against the county and make recommendation as to payment. 
(6)  Maintain budgetary control accounts showing encumbrances for obligations entered into, liquidation of such encumbrances, unencumbered balances of allotments, unexpended balances of appropriations. 
(7)  Maintain proprietary accounts of the current assets and of the liabilities of all county funds. 
(8)  Prepare and issue quarterly financial reports of the operations of all county funds. 
(9)  Maintain property control records of all county property, including equipment and stores, and supervise stores. 
(10)  Plan and prepare for meeting the financial needs of the county, project financial requirements, recommend means of financing those requirements and advise the chief executive and the commission on financial matters. 
(11)  Perform such other duties as may be assigned by the chief executive. 
(b)  The director of finance shall certify to the chief executive and to the commission on March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31 of each year a statement of county finances which shall reflect the overall county financial position by individual funds as well as a comparison of cash revenue collections by source with the budget estimates of cash revenues by source and also a comparison of departmental expenditures with budget appropriations. The chief executive shall cause the June 30 and December 31 statements to be published in the official organ of DeKalb County one (1) time and a copy posted on the county courthouse bulletin board within thirty (30) days of each date. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, the provisions of this section are advisory only, and the chief executive, subject to the approval of the commission, may provide for the organization or reorganization of the department of finance and may specify and provide for the powers and duties of the director of finance and other personnel of the department of finance in such manner as may be necessary or desirable for the efficient and effective operation of the department of finance. The department of finance and the office of director of finance shall not be abolished by the chief executive or the commission. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 20. - Records; minutes. 
The commission shall appoint a clerk who shall be the clerk of the chief executive and the commission and shall keep a proper and accurate book of minutes wherein shall appear all the acts, orders, and proceedings of the commission, in chronological order, and a similar book of minutes wherein shall appear, in chronological order, all acts, orders, and proceedings of the chief executive. The minute books of the chief executive and the commission shall be open to public inspection at all times during the regular office hours, and certified copies of any entries therein shall be furnished by the said clerk to any person requesting same upon payment of a reasonable fee, to be paid into the county treasury as other funds, to be assessed by the commission in an amount sufficient to defray the cost of preparing same. In addition, the clerk shall manage the agenda for meetings of the commission and perform such other duties as the commission may direct. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 2008, p. 3897, § 4) 
Sec. 21. - Agreements of candidates. 
It shall be unlawful for any candidate, either for the office of chief executive or for membership on the commission, or for nomination to either of such offices, to enter into any agreement or understanding with any person as to the disposal of any work or appointment which is or shall be under the control of the chief executive or the commission, and any person so offending shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as for a misdemeanor. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1) 
Sec. 22. - Officials not to be interested in contracts. 
Neither the chief executive nor any member of the commission or other county officer empowered to use public or county funds for the purchase of goods, property, or services of any kind for public or county purposes shall be financially interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract to which the county is a party, either as principal, surety or otherwise; nor shall such officer, his partner, agent, servant, or employee of a firm of which he is a member or by whom he is employed purchase from or sell to the county any real or personal property, goods or services. Any contract made in violation of any of the foregoing provisions shall be void, and the officer so offending shall be removed from office upon proper proceedings instituted by any taxpayer in said county in accordance with the provisions of section 23-1714 of the Code of Georgia of 1933 [O.C.G.A. § 36-1-14]. Provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not be applicable to any contract which has been approved, prior to execution, performance and payment thereon, by a majority of the commission by a proper entry on the minutes of the commission. 
Sec. 22A. - Code of ethics. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  It is essential to the proper administration and operation of the DeKalb County government that its officials and employees be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial, that public office not be used for private gain, and that there be public confidence in the integrity of DeKalb County officials and employees. Because the attainment of one (1) or more of these ends is impaired whenever there exists in fact, or appears to exist, a conflict between the private interests and public responsibilities of officials and employees, the public interest requires that the general assembly protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing by law appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the officials and employees of DeKalb County in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(2)  The general assembly recognizes that an appropriate and effective code of ethics for appointed officials and employees of DeKalb County is also essential for the proper administration and operation of the DeKalb County government. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the term: 
(1)  Agency means any board, bureau, body, commission, committee, department, or office of DeKalb County to which the governing authority has appointment powers. 
(2)  Business means any corporation, partnership, organization, sole proprietorship, and any other entity operated for economic gain, whether professional, industrial, or commercial, and entities which for purposes of federal income taxation are treated as nonprofit organizations. 
(3)  Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of holding public office, employment, acting as an independent contractor, or otherwise acting as an official or employee and which information is not available to members of the public under state law or other law or regulation and which the official, independent contractor, or employee is not authorized to disclose. 
(4)  Contract means any claim or demand against or any lease, account, or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, verbal or in writing. 
(5)  Emergency situation means any circumstance or condition giving rise to an immediate necessity for the execution of a contract by and between DeKalb County and an official or employee or between DeKalb County and a business in which an official or employee has an interest and where, to the satisfaction of the chief executive, it is shown that there is no one other than such persons with whom the contract could have been made and that the necessity was not brought about by such persons' own fault or neglect. 
(6)  Immediate family means an official or employee and his or her spouse, parents, brothers, sisters, and natural or adopted children. 
(7)  Interest means any direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit held by or accruing to the official or employee as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with DeKalb County. Unless otherwise provided in this section, the term 'interest' does not include any remote interest. An official or employee shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
a.  Any person in the official's or employee's immediate family; 
b.  Any person, business, or entity that the official or employee knows or should know is seeking official action with DeKalb County, is seeking to do or does business with DeKalb County, has interests that may be substantially affected by performance or nonperformance of the official's or employee's official duties, or with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the official or employee may receive any payment or other benefit; 
c.  Any business in which the official or employee is a director, officer, employee, shareholder, or consultant; or 
d.  Any person of whom the official or employee is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(8)  Official or employee means any person elected or appointed to or employed or retained by DeKalb County or any agency, whether paid or unpaid and whether part time or full time. This definition includes retired employees or former county employees during the period of time in which they are later employed or retained by the county or any agency. This definition does not include superior and state court judges and their immediate staffs, the district attorney, the solicitor of the state court, the clerks of the superior and state courts, magistrates, judges of the recorders court, the judge of the probate court, and their respective staffs. 
(9)  Official act or action means any legislative, administrative, appointive, or discretionary act of the commission, the chief executive, or a commissioner. 
(10)  Paid means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary, commission, percentage, brokerage, or contingent fee. 
(11)  Participate means to take part in official acts, actions, or proceedings personally as an official or employee through approval, disapproval, decision, recommendation, investigation, the rendering of advice, or the failure to act or perform a duty. 
(12)  Person means any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust, or association, whether paid or unpaid, and includes any official or employee of DeKalb County. 
(13)  Property means any property, whether real or personal or tangible or intangible, and includes currency and commercial paper. 
(14)  Remote interest means the interest of: 
a.  A nonsalaried director, officer, or employee of a nonprofit organization; 
b.  A holder of less than five (5) percent of the legal or beneficial ownership of the total shares of a business; 
c.  Any person in a representative capacity, such as a receiver, trustee, or administrator; or 
d.  Any person who, by determination of the board of ethics, is deemed to have such an interest. 
(15)  Transaction means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of an official or employee of DeKalb County. 
(c)  Proscribed conduct. No official or employee of DeKalb County shall: 
(1)  By his or her conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or her or unduly enjoy his or her favor in the performance of his or her official acts or actions or that he or she is affected unduly by the rank or position of or kinship or association with any person; 
(2)  a.  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or herself or another person if: 
(i)  It tends to influence him or her in the discharge of his or her official duties; or 
(ii)  He or she recently has been, or is now, or in the near future may be, involved in any official act or action directly affecting the donor or lender. 
b.  Subparagraph a. of this paragraph shall not apply in the case of: 
(i)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of value less than one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
(ii)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; or 
(iii)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan; 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his or her position for his or her or another person's private gain; 
(4)  Appear on his or her own personal behalf, or represent, advise, or appear on the personal behalf, whether paid or unpaid, of any person before any court or before any legislative, administrative, or quasi-judicial board, agency, commission, or committee of this state or of any county or municipality concerning any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of DeKalb County or otherwise use or attempt to use his or her official position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or other persons; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any agency, private business, or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties; 
(6)  Acquire an interest in any contract or transaction at a time when he or she believes or has reason to believe that such an interest will be affected directly or indirectly by his or her official act or actions or by the official acts or actions of other officials or employees of DeKalb County; or 
(7)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him or her by virtue of his or her being an official or employee of DeKalb County. 
(d)  Disclosure of interests. An official or employee who has an interest that he or she has reason to believe may be affected by his or her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of another official or employee of DeKalb County shall disclose the precise nature and value of such interest by sworn written statement to the board of ethics and ask for the board's opinion as to the property of such interest. Every official or employee who knowingly has any interest, direct or indirect, in any contract to which DeKalb County is or is about to become a party, or in any other business with DeKalb County, shall make full disclosure of such interest to the chief executive and the commission and to the ethics officer and the board of ethics. The information disclosed by such sworn statements, except for the valuation attributed to the disclosed interest, shall be made a matter of public record by the board of ethics. 
(e)  Participation in contracts. 
(1)  An official or employee shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any official act or action of DeKalb County directly affecting a business or activity in which he or she has any interest, whether or not a remote interest. 
(2)  DeKalb County shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with an official or employee of the county or with a business in which an official or employee of the county has an interest. This subsection shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for county funds; 
b.  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest for such loans; 
c.  Contracts for services entered into with a business which is the only available source for such goods or services; or 
d.  Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation, provided that a record explaining the emergency is prepared by the chief executive and submitted to the board of ethics at its next regular meeting and thereafter kept on file. 
(3)  DeKalb County shall not enter into any contract with, or take any official act or action favorably affecting, any person, or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding two-year period an official or employee of DeKalb County. 
(f)  Reporting violations. Any person who witnesses or becomes aware of a violation of this section may complain of the violation as follows: 
(1)  A complaint may be communicated anonymously to the ethics officer. Such complaint shall be made in good faith and with veracity and sufficient specificity so as to provide the ethics officer with salient and investigable facts. The ethics officer may require the anonymous complaint to be made in a manner and form that is intended only to obtain relevant facts related to the alleged violation of this section and that is not designed to reveal the identity of the complainant. 
(2)  A sworn written complaint may be filed with the ethics officer of the board of ethics, as described in this paragraph. All written complaints to be considered by the board of ethics and the ethics officer shall contain the following, if applicable: 
a.  The name and address of the person or persons filing the complaint; 
b.  The sworn verification and signature of the complainant; 
c.  The name and address of the party or parties against whom the complaint is filed and, if such party is a candidate, the office being sought; 
d.  A clear and concise statement of acts upon which the complaint is based along with an allegation that such facts constitute one (1) or more violations of law under the jurisdiction of the board of ethics; 
e.  A general reference to the allegedly violated statutory provision(s) of the code of ethics within the jurisdiction of the board of ethics; and 
f.  Any further information which might support the allegations in the complaint including, but not limited to, the following: 
(i)  The names and addresses of all other persons who have first-hand knowledge of the facts alleged in the complaint; and 
(ii)  Any documentary evidence that supports the facts alleged in the complaint. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a complaint, whether by the ethics officer or by the board of ethics, the ethics officer or the secretary of the board of ethics shall send a written notice to the subject of the complaint by the next business day. Both this notice and any subsequent documents shall be subject to Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a written, nonanonymous complaint which does not conform to the applicable requirements of paragraph (2) of this subsection, the ethics officer shall by letter acknowledge receipt of the complaint and advise the complainant of the defect in the complaint and that the complaint will not be considered by the board of ethics unless the defect is corrected. 
(g)  Enactment. 
(1)  This section shall be construed liberally to effectuate its purpose and policies and to supplement such existing laws as may relate to the conduct of officials or employees. 
(2)  The propriety of any official act or action taken by or transaction involving any officials or employees immediately prior to the time this section shall take effect shall not be affected by the enactment of this section. 
(3)  The provisions of this section are severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions. 
(h)  Board of ethics. 
(1)  a.  There is created the Board of Ethics of DeKalb County to be composed of seven (7) citizens of DeKalb County to be appointed as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
a.  Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of DeKalb County for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the county while serving as a member of the board of ethics. 
b.  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the immediately preceding two-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official act or action of DeKalb County. 
c.  No member of the board of ethics shall be a member of an agency or an official or employee of DeKalb County or shall have served in such a capacity in the two-year period immediately preceding such person's appointment to the board of ethics. 
d.  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has been a candidate for, or was elected to, public office in the immediately preceding three-year period. Filing for an elective office shall constitute a resignation from the board of ethics on the date of filing. 
e.  Appointees to the board of ethics shall have professional knowledge or expertise in matters of ethics, finance, governance, or the law. 
f.  All proposed appointments to the board of ethics shall be subject to an education and employment background check as well as a criminal history check. Persons proposed to be appointed to the board of ethics shall execute all releases necessary for the appointing authority to accomplish such checks. If the nominee is determined to have committed a felony, the nomination shall be withdrawn. 
(2)  a.  The members of the board of ethics in office on the effective date of this section shall serve until December 31, 2015, and then their terms shall terminate. A new board shall be appointed as provided in this paragraph to take office on January 1, 2016, and to serve for the terms prescribed in this paragraph. 
b.  Not later than December 31, 2015, the members of the new board of ethics shall be selected as follows: 
(i)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the DeKalb Bar Association, chosen from the attorney members of the association; 
(ii)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the DeKalb County Chamber of Commerce, which member shall not be an attorney; 
(iii)  One (1) member shall be appointed by a majority vote of the DeKalb County legislative delegation; 
(iv)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the judge of the Probate Court of DeKalb County; 
(v)  One (1) member shall be appointed by Leadership DeKalb; 
(vi)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the six (6) major universities and colleges located within DeKalb County (Agnes Scott College, Columbia Theological Seminary, Emory University, Georgia State University, Mercer University, and Oglethorpe University), which member shall not be an attorney; and 
(vii)  One (1) member shall be appointed by the chief judge of the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
c.  The members shall each serve for terms of three (3) years; provided, however, that the initial terms of the first DeKalb County Chamber of Commerce appointee, the first Leadership DeKalb appointee, and the first DeKalb County legislative delegation appointee shall be two (2) years; and provided, further, that the initial terms of the six (6) major institutes of higher learning within DeKalb County appointee and the judge of the probate court appointee shall be one (1) year. 
d.  Successors to all members of the board of ethics and future successors shall be appointed by the respective appointing authorities not less than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of each such member's term of office, and such successors shall take office on January 1 following such appointment and shall serve terms of three (3) years and until their respective successors are appointed and qualified. 
(3)  If a member of the board of ethics ceases to be a resident of DeKalb County, that member's position on the board of ethics, by operation of law, shall become vacant upon the establishment of the fact of such nonresidency, if contested, by a court of competent jurisdiction. A vacancy in the board of ethics shall exist by reason of death, the disability or incapacity of a member for more than ninety (90) days, resignation, or loss of residency as described in this paragraph. A member of the board of ethics may be removed from office during a term if the member becomes ineligible to hold civil office within the meaning of O.C.G.A. § 45-2-1 and that ineligibility is established by decision of a court of competent jurisdiction which declares the office vacant because of such ineligibility or for good cause by a majority vote of the board of ethics. The ethics officer shall notify the appointing authority of a vacancy upon its occurrence, and such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the respective appointing authority. 
(4)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation and shall elect from their own membership a chairperson and otherwise provide for their own internal organization. The commission shall provide adequate office and meeting space and pay all administrative costs, including those specifically stipulated in this section, pertaining to the operation of the board of ethics. The board of ethics shall be authorized to employ its own staff and clerical personnel and contract for the services of a competent court reporter, an attorney, and a private investigator as it deems necessary. The members of the board of ethics shall have the authority to propose the budget of the board and shall recommend the budget to the commission, who shall fund it as a priority. In the event that the proposed budget is in excess of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00), the commission shall have the authority to authorize the additional funds requested in accordance with standard budgetary procedures and requirements. The board of ethics shall be completely independent and shall not be subject to control or supervision by the chief executive, the commission, or any other official or employee or agency of the county government. 
(5)  The board of ethics shall have the following duties: 
a.  To establish procedures, rules, and regulations governing its internal organization and the conduct of its affairs; 
b.  To render advisory opinions with respect to the interpretation and application of this section to all officials or employees who seek advice as to whether a particular course of conduct would constitute a violation of the standards imposed in this section or other applicable ethical standards. Such opinions shall be binding on the board of ethics in any subsequent complaint concerning the official or employee who sought the opinion and acted in good faith, unless material facts were omitted or misstated in the request for the advisory opinion; 
c.  To prescribe forms for the disclosures required in this section and to make available to the public the information disclosed as provided in this section; 
d.  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this section over which it has personal and subject matter jurisdiction; 
e.  To make such investigations as it deems necessary to determine whether any official or employee has violated or is about to violate any provisions of this section; and 
f.  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as it deems necessary for it to carry out properly its functions and powers. 
(i)  Ethics officer. 
(1)  There is hereby created as a full-time salaried position an ethics officer for DeKalb County. The ethics officer must be an active member of the Georgia Bar Association in good standing with five (5) years' experience in the practice of law. The ethics officer shall be appointed by a majority of the members of the board of ethics, subject to confirmation by a majority of the commission and approval by the chief executive, for a period not to exceed six (6) years. Removal of the ethics officer before the expiration of the designated term shall be for cause by a majority vote of the members of the board of ethics. The ethics officer need not be a resident of the county at the time of his or her appointment, but he or she shall reside in DeKalb County within six (6) months of such appointment and continue to reside therein throughout such appointment. 
(2)  The ethics officer shall not be involved in partisan or nonpartisan political activities or the political affairs of DeKalb County. 
(3)  The duties of the ethics officer shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Educating and training all city officials and employees to have an awareness and understanding of the mandate for and enforcement of ethical conduct and advising them of the provisions of the code of ethics of DeKalb County; 
b.  Maintaining the records of the board of ethics as required by Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A.; 
c.  Meeting with the board of ethics; 
d.  Advising officials and employees regarding disclosure statements and reviewing the same to ensure full and complete financial reporting; 
e.  Urging compliance with the code of ethics by calling to the attention of the board of ethics any failure to comply or any issues, including the furnishing of false or misleading information, that the ethics officer believes should be investigated by the board of ethics so that the board of ethics may take such action as it deems appropriate; 
f.  Monitoring, evaluating, and acting upon information obtained from an "ethics hotline" which shall be a city telephone number for the receipt of information about ethical violations. Each complaint, as of the time it is reported, whether by telephone or otherwise, shall be deemed to be a separate pending investigation of a complaint against a public officer or employee as provided by Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A.; 
g.  Notifying the subject of a report of any alleged violation of the ethics code, whether the report is anonymous, made by an identified individual, or is written. Such notice shall be given in writing, by facsimile, or hand delivered to the subject of the complaint at the same time and in the same form that any disclosure of information is required by Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the O.C.G.A.; 
h.  Notifying the board of ethics of any report of an alleged violation of the ethics code received by the ethics officer; 
i.  Reporting, as appropriate, suspected ethical violations to the board of ethics; 
j.  Reporting, as appropriate, suspected criminal violations to state or federal law enforcement agencies; and 
k.  Filing with the board of ethics, the chief executive, and the commission on the first Tuesday of each February a written report describing the activities of the ethics officer in carrying out the goals of his or her office and the code of ethics and reporting on the ethical health of DeKalb County. 
(j)  Investigations and hearings. The board of ethics shall conduct investigations into alleged violations of the code of ethics, hold hearings, and issue decisions as prescribed in this subsection: 
(1)  The proceedings and records of the board of ethics shall be open unless otherwise permitted by state law. 
(2)  Upon request of the board of ethics, the solicitor of DeKalb County or any attorney representing the office of the solicitor of DeKalb County, or in the event of a conflict any attorney who shall be selected by a majority vote of the board of ethics, shall advise the board of ethics. 
(3)  A complaint may be filed by the ethics officer, any resident, or a group of residents of DeKalb County by submitting to the office of the ethics officer a written, verified, and sworn complaint under the penalty of perjury or false swearing. The complaint shall specifically identify all provisions of the DeKalb County code of ethics which the subject of the complaint is alleged to have violated, set forth facts as would be admissible in evidence in a court proceeding, and show affirmatively that the complainant or affiant (if in addition to or different from the complainant) is competent to testify to the matter set forth therein. All documents referenced in the complaint as well as supporting affidavits shall be attached to the complaint. 
(4)  Upon receipt of the complaint, the ethics officer shall conduct a preliminary investigation to determine whether it meets the jurisdictional requirements as set forth in this section. If in the opinion of the ethics officer the complaint fails to meet these requirements, the ethics officer shall notify the person who filed the complaint and he or she shall have ten (10) days from the date of notice to correct and refile the complaint directly with the ethics officer. A complaint which fails to satisfy the jurisdictional requirements as established by this section and by the rules and procedures established by the board of ethics shall be dismissed by the board of ethics no later than thirty (30) days after the complaint is filed with the office of the ethics officer, unless extended by a majority vote of the board of ethics. 
(5)  The ethics officer will report his or her findings and recommendation to the board of ethics and advise whether there is probable cause for belief that the code of ethics has been violated, warranting a formal hearing. If the board of ethics determines, after the preliminary investigation of a complaint by the ethics officer, that there does not exist probable cause for belief that this section has been violated, the board of ethics shall so notify the complainant and the subject of the investigation, and the complaint will be dismissed. If the board of ethics determines, after a preliminary investigation of the complaint by the ethics officer, that there does exist probable cause for belief that this section has been violated, the board of ethics shall give notice to the person involved to attend a hearing to determine whether there has been a violation of this section. 
(6)  For use in proceedings under this section, the board of ethics shall have the power to issue subpoenas to compel any person to appear, give sworn testimony, or produce documentary or other evidence. Any person who fails to respond to such subpoenas may be subjected to the penalties set forth in subsection (k) of this section. 
(7)  All hearings of the board of ethics pursuant to this section shall be as follows: 
a.  All testimony shall be under oath, which shall be administered by a member of the board of ethics. Any person who appears before the board of ethics shall have all of the due process rights, privileges, and responsibilities of a witness appearing before the courts of this state. Any person whose name is mentioned during a proceeding of the board of ethics and who may be adversely affected thereby may appear personally before the board of ethics on such person's own behalf or may file a written sworn statement for incorporation into the record to be made part of all proceedings pursuant to this subsection. 
b.  The decision of the board of ethics shall be governed by a preponderance of the evidence standard. 
c.  At the conclusion of proceedings concerning an alleged violation, the board of ethics shall immediately begin deliberations on the evidence and proceed to determine by a majority vote of members present whether there has been a violation of this section. The findings of the board of ethics concerning a violation and the record of the proceedings shall be made public by the ethics officer as soon as practicable after the determination has been made. 
(k)  Violations; appeals. 
(1)  Any intentional violation of this section, furnishing of false or misleading information to the board of ethics or the ethics officer, failure to follow an opinion rendered by the board of ethics, or failure to comply with a subpoena issued by the board of ethics pursuant to this section shall subject the violator to any one (1) or more of the following: 
a.  Administrative sanction of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) assessed by the board of ethics; 
b.  Public reprimand by the board of ethics; and 
c.  Prosecution by the DeKalb County Solicitor in municipal court and, upon conviction, a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and up to six (6) months imprisonment, whether the official or employee is elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to conflict with state law. An action for violation of this section or the furnishing of false or misleading information or the failure to comply with a subpoena issued by the board of ethics must be brought within two (2) years after the violation is discovered. 
(2)  With regard to violations by persons other than officials or employees, in addition to the remedies in paragraph (1) of this subsection, the board of ethics may recommend to the chief executive and the commission any one or more of the following: 
a.  Suspension of a contractor; and 
b.  Disqualification or debarment from contracting or subcontracting with DeKalb County. 
(3)  The decision of the board of ethics after a hearing shall be final; provided, however, that such proceeding shall be subject to review by writ of certiorari to the DeKalb County Superior Court. The designee of the board of ethics shall be authorized to acknowledge service of any such writ and shall, within the time provided by law, certify and cause to be filed with the clerk of the superior court a record of the proceedings before the board of ethics, the decision of the board of ethics, and the notice of the final actions of the board of ethics. 
(Acts 1990, p. 3900, § 1; Acts 1992, p. 6137, §§ 1—3; Acts 1915, p. 3811, § 1 ) 
Sec. 23. - How sections amended, limitations on powers. 
Pursuant to the authority of an amendment to the Constitution ratified at the 1978 general election as set forth in Georgia Laws 1978, pages 2370—2372, which amendment authorized the General Assembly to provide by law for the form of government of DeKalb County and to provide for the various officers, bodies, branches, or agencies by or through which the county's governmental powers shall be exercised, any law adopted pursuant to such authority shall be conditioned on the approval of a majority of the qualified electors of DeKalb County voting at elections held for such purpose when any such law affects the DeKalb County government in any one or more of the following ways: 
(1)  Changing the number of members, terms of office, or the manner of electing the members of the governing body of DeKalb County; 
(2)  Changing the term of office or the method of electing the chief executive officer of DeKalb County; 
(3)  Establishing the powers and duties of the executive or legislative branch of the DeKalb County government; or 
(4)  Changing the powers and duties of the executive or legislative branch of the DeKalb County government when such powers and duties have been established by Acts of the General Assembly, pursuant to the authority of the amendment to the Constitution ratified at the 1978 general election as set forth in Georgia Laws 1978, pages 2370—2372. 
(Acts 1981, p. 4304, § 1; Acts 1984, p. 4916, §§ 2, 3; Acts 1986, p. 4107, § 4; Acts 1990, p. 3900, § 2; Acts 2012, p. 4610, § 3) 
Secs. 24—27. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 24—27 were repealed by Acts 1981, p. 4304. 
Sec. 28. - Use of voting machines. 
If, in the opinion of the ordinary of DeKalb County [now board of commissioners. See O.C.G.A. § 21-2-320] it is practicable to hold any election, whether the same be a referendum, special or general election, provided for by this act by use of voting machines, the ordinary is authorized to hold such election or all or any such election by means of voting machines in accordance with the provisions of the act of the General Assembly approved March 28, 1947 (Ga. L. 1947, p 1203) [now repealed. See O.C.G.A. § 21-2-310 et seq.]. 
Sec. 29. - Conflicting laws repealed. 
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act, and all provisions of the act approved August 21, 1906 (Ga. L. 1906, p. 405) creating the office of commissioner of roads and revenues of DeKalb County which are in conflict with this act, are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 30. - Separability clause. 
Should any court of this state declare any section, part, paragraph or clause of this act unconstitutional or invalid for any cause or reason, then such decision shall affect only that section, part, paragraph or clause so declared to be unconstitutional and invalid, and shall not affect any other section, part, paragraph or clause of this act. 
ORGANIZATIONAL ACT COMPARATIVE TABLE - ACTS 
This table shows the location of the basic act organizing the county governing authority and any amendments thereto. 

 
ORGANIZATIONAL ACT COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location within this Organizational Act of those ordinances included herein. 

 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated, the "Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988" and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to all ordinances and resolutions of the board of commissioners unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the board of commissioners, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil, and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(a), (b). 
Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of commissioners may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Adequate. The word "adequate" means equal to what is required, suitable to the case or occasion, fully sufficient, proportionate, satisfactory. 
Aforesaid. The word "aforesaid" usually means next before, unless the context requires a different signification. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(4). 
All. The word "all" means everyone, or the whole number of particulars. 
Also. The word "also" means "in like manner," "likewise," "in addition," "besides," "as well," "further," "too." 
As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(5). 
At. The term "at" may mean "in," "near," "within," or "about." Its primary idea is nearness, and it is less definite than "in" or "on." 
Board of commissioners, board. The words "board" or "board of commissioners" mean the board of commissioners of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Chief executive. The words "chief executive" or "chief executive officer" mean the chief executive of the county. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988 as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege, or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exerise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven (7) days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(3). 
County. The word "county" means DeKalb County, Georgia. When appropriate, "county" means a designated department, officer or employee thereof. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a county officer or county employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
Department. The word "department" means an administrative department of county government. When appropriate, "department" means the director of the department or the director's designee. 
Director. The word "director" refers to the director of an administrative department of county government or the director's designee. The term is synonymous with department head. 
Finance department, department of finance. The terms "finance department" and "department of finance" are synonymous. 
Finance director, director of finance. The terms "finance director" and "director of finance" are synonymous. 
Following. The word "following" means next after. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(8). 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(4). 
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons, or officers, may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(5). 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
May. The word "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
State Law reference— Definition of "may," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(10). 
Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(11). 
Must. The word "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Number. The singular and plural number include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(6). 
Oath. An "oath" includes an affirmation. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(12). 
Officials, employees, boards, commissions, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the county by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the county. 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
Person. The word "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, partnership and body politic and corporate as well as an individual. 
State Law reference— Definition of "person," O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(14). 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as defined in this section. 
Preceding. The word "preceding" means next before. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(15). 
Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(16). 
Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
Real property. The words "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The word "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
Signature or subscription. A "signature" or "subscription" includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(19). 
State. The word "state" means the State of Georgia. 
Street or road. The word "street" or "road" includes any street, avenue, boulevard, road, alley, lane, viaduct and any other public highway in the county, including, but not limited to, the paved or improved surfaces thereof. 
Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
State Law reference— Tense of words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(7). 
Until a certain day. The term "until a certain day" includes all of such day. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(21). 
Week. The word "week" means seven (7) days. 
Whereas. The term "whereas" means "considering that." 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(22). 
Will. The word "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(24). 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3(23). 
Sec. 1-3. - Prohibition of sexist connotations. 
It is the intent of the board of commissioners that all county ordinances and resolutions shall be interpreted in an equal and nondiscriminatory manner to persons of both the male and female sexes. In furtherance of that intent, any term or phrase having a sexist connotation which may be contained in any existing county ordinance or resolution shall be interpreted and applied in a sex-neutral manner. Future amendments and revisions to county resolutions and ordinances shall likewise be written, interpreted and applied in a sex-neutral manner. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1009) 
Sec. 1-4. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, and references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of such sections, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Cross references and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles or sections are to the chapters, articles and sections of this Code unless otherwise specified. 
Sec. 1-5. - Territorial applicability. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided otherwise, this Code only applies in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  Where the county provides utility or other service to an incorporated area, the ordinances relating to such service apply in that incorporated area. 
(c)  The provisions of chapter 13 apply in the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county. 
(d)  The provisions of chapter 24 apply in the incorporated and unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Ord. No. 11-01, Pt. I, 1-14-11) 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of sewer department lines, App. B, § 1551. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance does not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal for an offense committed under the repealed ordinance. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances and resolutions, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from repealed pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances and resolutions as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances and resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted anew by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Section _____ of _____, is amended to read as follows: . . . ." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The ___________ is amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) numbered _____ to read as follows: . . . ." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the board of commissioners. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Sec. 1-10. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a county officer or county employee to perform an official duty unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Violations of this Code shall be handled as follows: 
(1)  If a summons or citation is served by leaving a copy at the premises where an ordinance violation is alleged to have occurred, mailing a copy to the owner of the premises at the address of record maintained by the tax commissioner and tax assessor, and publishing notice as required by rule or regulation of the recorder's court, a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be imposed. Any fine imposed shall be subject to immediate execution. 
(2)  If a summons, citation or accusation is personally served upon an accused, a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) days, or a combination thereof may be imposed. Any fine imposed shall be subject to immediate execution. 
(3)  The judge may probate [prorate] any part or all of any fine or jail time imposed pursuant to this section. 
(4)  For violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement adopted pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act, the maximum fine shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation by an industrial user. 
(5)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, attorneys shall not be punished under this section for failure to comply with chapter 15 of this Code. 
(d)  (Effective January 1, 2013) The imposition of a fine pursuant to this section does not prevent revocation or suspension of any county-issued registration, business occupation tax certificate, license, permit or franchise. So long as a fine remains unpaid and outstanding, and not the subject of any appeal, an application for any county-issued registration, business occupation tax certificate, license, permit, franchise, variance, sketch plat, amendment to the comprehensive plan land use map, amendment to the official zoning map, rezoning, special administrative permit, or special land use permit may not be accepted by any county employee or issued by any county employee, official, board, commission or other county entity if such application relates to the person who owes the fine as reflected in the recorder's court records or the land on which the violation(s) has been shown to exist. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1007; Ord. No. 90-17, § 1, 6-26-90; Ord. No. 92-11, § 1, 7-14-92; Ord. No. 98-10, 12-22-98; Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 11-16, Pt. I, 9-27-11; Ord. No. 11-18, Pt. I, 9-27-11) 
Cross reference— Limitations on punishment in recorder's court, App. B, § 667. 
  Organizational act reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, § 10(c). 
State Law reference— Prosecution of county ordinances in magistrate court, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those of ordinances existing as of the effective date of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Matters not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the county, or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the county. 
(3)  Any right or franchise granted by the county to any person. 
(4)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, defining, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the county. 
(5)  Any appropriation or ordinance authorizing appropriations or gifts. 
(6)  Any legislation providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting a plat or subdivision. 
(8)  Any ordinance rezoning property. 
(9)  Any ordinance establishing salaries or compensation of county officers or employees not in this Code. 
(10)  Any ordinance approving the budget. 
(11)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes that have been consummated. 
(12)  Any ordinance that is temporary, although general in nature. 
(13)  Any ordinance that is special, although permanent in nature. 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(15)  Any ordinance amending any act enacted by the General Assembly of the state. 
Sec. 1-13. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency management, Ch. 11; departments of county government, App. A. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1—2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Elections, Ch. 10; personnel, Ch. 20; departments of county government, App. A; local laws relating to pensions, App. B, § 901 et seq.; local laws relating to personnel, App. B, § 1001 et seq. 
  Organizational act reference— General authority of chief executive over county employees, § 13. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-41. - Authority to issue summonses. 
Department heads and designees of department heads may issue summonses for violations of ordinances they enforce. 
State Law reference— Issuance of citations by certain county employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-5.1. 
Sec. 2-42. - Appointment, removal of executive assistant and county attorney. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, all agents and employees of the county not covered by the county merit system regulations and who are subject to the jurisdiction of the governing authorities of the county shall be employed and discharged by the chief executive within the budgetary limits set by the board of commissioners and in accordance with procedures established by the board. All employees subject to the county merit system shall be appointed, promoted and discharged, and shall have their terms of employment and salaries fixed according to the provisions of chapter 20 or other pertinent regulations as may be adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  With regard to appointments to the positions of executive assistant and county attorney the following procedure will apply: 
(1)  The chief executive, within ninety (90) days of assuming office, shall nominate and present to the board of commissioners during the course of its regular meetings, during that ninety-day period, the names of individuals to fill the positions of executive assistant and county attorney. 
(2)  These names may be presented individually or together so long as all names are submitted within ninety (90) days. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the board of commissioners at the meeting during which these names are presented to vote to either confirm or deny the chief executive's proposed appointments. A majority vote of the board of commissioners approving the chief executive's nomination of the names presented for the positions to be filled shall be deemed to be a confirmation of the nomination. 
(4)  If a nominee is not confirmed by majority vote of the board of commissioners, the chief executive will then make and submit to the board a second nomination of a name of an individual to fill a particular position. If, after two (2) nominations for a given position, the board does not confirm a nomination, any member of the board of commissioners may then make a nomination for each of the positions where no nomination has been confirmed until a nominee's appointment has been confirmed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. 
(5)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the chief executive fails to nominate individuals to fill any of the aforementioned positions within the ninety-day period specified, any member of the board of commissioners, including the chief executive, may nominate an individual to fill the positions of executive assistant and county attorney, and a majority vote of the board shall be required to confirm the appointment. 
(c)  The chief executive may suspend or discharge the executive assistant or county attorney but any individual so suspended or discharged shall have the right of appeal to the full board of commissioners. The individual suspended or discharged shall file a written demand with the clerk of the board of commissioners asking that such appeal be placed on the first available agenda for consideration by the full board and it shall be the duty of the clerk of the board of commissioners to place the individual's appeal before the full board of commissioners on the first available agenda. Upon consideration of the appeal by the full board of commissioners, the full board of commissioners may set aside the suspension or discharge and reinstate the employee. 
(d)  In addition, the board of commissioners shall have the right to suspend or discharge for cause, the executive assistant or the county attorney by a majority vote thereof. For these purposes, "cause" shall include deliberately withholding lawful information or causing to be withheld lawful information from the board of commissioners or furnishing or causing to be furnished falsified information to the board of commissioners. 
(e)  All employees of the county who are subject to the jurisdiction of the governing authority of the county and who are not covered by the county merit system regulations, and where no contrary provisions or regulations have been or may hereafter be enacted by the board of commissioners, shall be employed, promoted, transferred, demoted and discharged by the chief executive and their salaries established and fixed by the chief executive within the budgetary limits set by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1005) 
Sec. 2-43. - Deputy clerk of board; authority to execute documents. 
The deputy clerk shall be authorized to act in the place of the clerk of the board of commissioners for the purpose of executing any and all documents, if the clerk is not available by reason of illness, travel or otherwise. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1006(e)) 
Sec. 2-44. - Compensation for members of the DeKalb County Georgia Governing Authority effective January 1, 2019. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2019, the annual salary of each of the following officials of DeKalb County shall be equal to the following respective percentages of the gross salary as of February 27, 2018, as that term is defined in Section 1 of an Act approved March 31, 1976 (Ga. L. 1976, p. 3986, now and as it may be amended hereafter), 1 [] but shall not include any supplement paid to a superior court judge for accountability courts: 
(1)  Chief executive officer       90% 
(2)  Board of commissioners       35% 
(b)  Additionally, the chief executive officer and each member of the board of commissioners shall also be entitled to any other compensation adjustment provided for members of a county governing authority by general law. 
(c)  In addition to the annual salary provided in this section, the chief executive officer and each member of the board of commissioners shall receive an expense allowance of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. 
(d)  The compensation provided for in this section shall be paid in equal monthly installments from the funds of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 18-01 , Pt. I, 2-27-18) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
Section 1 of Ga. L. 1976, p. 3986 currently reads as follows: "[a]s used in this Act, the term "gross salary" means the annual salary received by a superior court judge from State funds in effect on January 1, 1977; plus the annual amount, in effect on January 1, 1977, paid to the judges of the superior courts of the Stone Mountain Judicial Circuit as county supplements to the State salary; and plus any increases in said annual salary or said county supplement or both, hereinafter enacted into law." 

Secs. 2-45—2-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Financial disclosure by elected officials, O.C.G.A. § 21-5-50 et seq.; code of ethics for state officers and employees, O.C.G.A. § 45-10-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appointive official means the executive assistant, the county attorney, the assistant county attorney, any county employee exempt from merit system regulations who has been appointed to the position by either the chief executive and/or the board of commissioners acting independently or jointly, or any member of the county planning commission or the county board of appeals. 
Business means a corporation, a partnership, a sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
Business relationship means an agreement between parties which is designed to result in an enterprise for profit to the parties exclusive of any normal supplier/consumer relationship. 
Censure means an expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
Confidential information means any information which, by law or practice, is not available to the public. 
Contract means any lease, claim, account or demand against or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, verbal or in writing. 
Employment means any rendering of services on request, whether paid or unpaid. 
Immediate family means an official or appointive official and the spouse of an official or appointive official, and their parents, children, brothers and sisters. 
Interest means any direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit held by or accruing to an official or appointive official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the county. Unless otherwise provided, the term "interest" does not include any remote interest. For the purpose of this division, an official or appointive official shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving any of the following: 
(1)  Any person in the official's or appointive official's immediate family. 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship (either written or implied) exists, whereby the official or appointive official may receive any payment or other benefit, including an agreement for employment. 
(3)  Any business in which the official or appointive official is a director, officer, employee, prospective employee or substantial shareholder. 
Official means the chief executive or any commissioner serving in office in the county. 
Official act or action means any executive, legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of the chief executive or commissioners taken pursuant to a regular or special meeting of the board of commissioners or of an appointive official in the regular discharge of official duties. 
Paid means the receipt of, or right to receive, a salary or a commission, percentage, brokerage or contingent fee. 
Participate means to take part in official acts or actions, or proceedings personally as an official or an appointive official through approval, disapproval, decision or the failure to act or perform a duty. 
Property means any property, whether real or personal, tangible or intangible and includes currency and commercial paper. 
Reprimand means an expression of disapproval. 
Transaction means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(b)) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 2-62. - Declaration of policy. 
It is essential to the proper government and administration of the county that its chief executive, board of commissioners, appointive officials, duly appointed members of the county planning commission and the county board of appeals be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public service not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the county. Because the attainment of one (1) or more of these ends is impaired whenever there exists in fact or appears to exist a conflict between the private interests and public responsibilities of county officials, the public interest requires that the county protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the officials named above in situations where a conflict may exist. It is also essential to the efficient operation of the county that those persons best qualified be encouraged to serve in positions of public trust. Accordingly, the standards hereinafter set forth must be so interpreted and understood as not to unreasonably frustrate or impede the desire or inclination to seek and serve in public office by those persons best qualified to serve. To that end, the officials hereinabove named should not, except as otherwise provided by law, be denied the opportunity available to all other citizens to acquire and maintain private, economic and other interests except where a conflict of interest situation would necessarily result. The policy and purpose of this division, therefore, is to make clear those standards of ethical conduct that shall be applicable to the officials named above in the discharge of their official duties; to implement the objective of protecting the integrity of the county's government and to prescribe only such essential restrictions against conflict of interest as will not impose unnecessary barriers against public service. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(a)) 
Sec. 2-63. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this division do not apply to campaign contributions made to an official in compliance with the Ethics in Government Act [O.C.G.A. § 21-5-1 et seq.]. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(e)) 
Sec. 2-64. - Violations. 
Complaints regarding alleged violations of this division by an official or appointive official may be referred to the presiding officer by any person having personal knowledge of such violation. A complaint shall be in writing and specify in detail the circumstances constituting the violation, the transaction to which the violation relates and the official or appointive official alleged to have violated this division. Upon receipt of a complaint, the presiding officer shall cause a committee to be formed consisting of the presiding officer, the chief executive and one (1) member of the board of commissioners to be appointed by the official or appointive official alleged to have violated this division. If the presiding officer or the chief executive is the subject of a complaint or is otherwise unable to serve, the deputy presiding officer shall serve on the committee instead. The committee thus formed shall make such investigation of the complaint as it deems appropriate with respect to the matters contained in the complaint and, within thirty (30) days of its appointment, shall report its findings to the full board of commissioners. If the committee finds that a violation has occurred, it shall also recommend whether the board of commissioners shall either censure or reprimand the official or appointive official or take no further action. The board of commissioners at its next regular meeting, not less than fifteen (15) days after the committee makes its report, shall, by an affirmative vote of not less than four (4) members, act upon the report by either censuring or reprimanding the official or appointive official or, in its discretion, taking no further action. The report of the committee shall be made a part of the minutes of the board of commissioners and a copy thereof forwarded to the district attorney. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(m)) 
Sec. 2-65. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
No official or appointive official shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by any law now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to the official or appointive official by virtue of office. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(l)) 
Sec. 2-66. - Impartiality. 
No official or appointive official shall, by conduct, give reasonable basis for the impression that any person improperly can influence the official or appointive official or unduly enjoy the official's or appointive official's favor in the performance of official acts or actions, or that the official or appointive official is affected unduly by the kinship, rank, position or association with any person. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(c)) 
Sec. 2-67. - Gifts and favors. 
(a)  No official or appointive official shall directly or indirectly request, exact, receive or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value for the official or appointive official or another person if: 
(1)  It tends to influence the official or appointive official in the discharge of official duties; or 
(2)  The official or appointive official recently has been, or is now, or in the near future will be, involved in any official act or action directly affecting the donor or lender. 
(b)  This section shall not apply in the case of any of the following: 
(1)  An occasional, nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(d)) 
Sec. 2-68. - Use of confidential information. 
No official or appointive official shall disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of a position with the county for such official's or another person's private gain. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(f)) 
Sec. 2-69. - Representation. 
No official or appointive official shall appear on the official's or appointive official's own behalf, or represent, or appear on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person before any court or before any legislative, administrative or quasi-judicial board, agency, commission or committee appointed by the chief executive, board of commissioners or an official concerning any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the county, except in the regular discharge of official duties, or otherwise use or attempt to use the official's or appointive official's official position to secure unwarranted privileges or exemptions for the official or appointive official or other person. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(g)) 
Sec. 2-70. - Incompatible employment. 
No official or appointive official shall engage in or accept employment with or render services for any private business or professional activity when such is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(h)) 
Sec. 2-71. - Abstentions. 
An official or appointive official who has an interest that such official has reason to believe may be affected by such official's acts or actions or by official acts or actions of the county shall abstain from participating in same. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(i)) 
Sec. 2-72. - Contracts. 
No official shall violate the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-1-14 or Acts 1956, p. 1203, § 22, as amended. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(j)) 
Editor's note— Acts 1956, p. 1203 is the basic organic act and is published in this Code immediately preceding chapter 1 of the Code. 
Sec. 2-73. - Disclosure of business relationships with other county officials. 
(a)  Each person subject to this division shall inform the full board of commissioners and chief executive in writing of any business relationship entered into with another person subject to this division, within ten (10) days of any such contractual or implied relationship. 
(b)  Failure on the part of any party subject to this division to comply with the provisions of this division shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1010(k)) 
Secs. 2-74—2-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEFENSE OF EMPLOYEES AND PAYMENTS OF CLAIMS, SETTLEMENTS AND JUDGEMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, adopted March 8, 2016, repealed div. 3 in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as set out herein. Former div. 3, §§ 2-91—2-95 pertained to defense and indemnification, and derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 1-3001—1-3004; Ord. No. 91-30, § 1, adopted Dec. 27, 1991; and Ord. No. 94-10, § 2, adopted May 10, 1994. 

Sec. 2-91. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases not defined in this division, but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Claim includes any formal allegation presented against an employee prior to institution of a proceeding. 
Employee means members of the governing authority of the county; any person employed by the county; elected county officers and their employees, elected county officials and their employees, appointed members of the zoning board of appeals, ethics board, board of registration and elections, board of health, historic preservation commission and planning commission. This term does not include independent contractors of the county or persons deemed by law or the courts to be state officers or state employees. 
Ethical claim(s) means a written complaint filed with the county's ethics board or the state ethics commission currently named the Georgia Government Transparency and Campaign Finance Commission, but hereinafter referred to as "the state ethics commission," charging an employee with one (1) or more violations of applicable law or policy. Ethical claims do not include complaint(s) alleging violations related to a campaign for election. 
Final favorable decision means a final decision made by a board, commission, agency, or court in favor of the employee on some or all ethical claims. This includes decisions dismissing such claim(s); finding such claim(s) to be frivolous or without merit; or a substantive decision that the employee did not violate law or policy. A favorable decision does not become final until all appeals are concluded or no appeal is taken within the requisite time prescribed by law. 
Proceeding includes any matter of a civil nature in or before any court or agency of this state, or any board or commission of this county or this state, or any other state, or of the United States. This term also includes professional disciplinary proceedings (except for proceedings arising from an employee discipline by the county or a county official). 
Reasonable hourly rate means the customary average hourly rate charged in DeKalb County, Georgia, for similar legal work performed by attorneys within the county as determined by the county attorney. Such hourly rate shall be no more than the rate paid to the county attorney or legal counsel retained by the county or its officers for similar representation in other areas. 
Reasonable legal expenses shall mean the fee charged by an attorney and/or attorneys licensed to practice law in the State of Georgia based on the hours worked at a reasonable hourly rate. Expenses also include all applicable court costs, deposition costs, witness fees, and all other like reasonable costs and expenses as determined by the county attorney. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 2-92. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent and purpose of this division to provide for the defense of claims and proceedings against employees, and for the payment of said claims, settlements or judgments rendered against an employee as permitted by law, including O.C.G.A. § 45-9-20 et seq., now and as it may be amended hereafter, and as allowed by this division. This division shall be liberally construed to provide the fullest defense allowed by law. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 2-93. - Construction. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be deemed to constitute any waiver afforded by law, by the county or by any employee, of the governmental immunity afforded it under the United States Constitution and/or laws of Georgia. The county and its employees specifically reserve the right to assert their immunity in any claim or proceeding. Further, neither the county nor any employee is required to pay any sums based on claims from which the county and its employees are immune. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 2-94. - Defense of employees in claims or proceedings and notice requirements. 
(a)  Type of claims and proceedings. Unless limited by the requirements of this division, the county shall, upon written request, provide for an employee's defense in the event that a claim is made or proceeding is brought against the employee asserting personal liability for damages arising either out of the performance of duties, or in any way connected therewith, whether based on negligence, violation of contract rights or policies, violation of civil, constitutional, common law or other statutory rights, whether federal, state or local. 
(b)  Notice requirement. The defense of said employee may not apply unless the employee provides notice in writing of any claim or proceeding to the county attorney within thirty (30) days after the employee has notice of a claim and/or within five (5) days after the employee has been served with process in a proceeding initiated against the employee. Grounds for refusal of a defense are explained more fully below in section 2-96. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 2-95. - Defense of employees in professional disciplinary proceedings. 
Unless limited by the requirements in this division, the county shall, upon written request, provide for the employee's defense in a proceeding pending before any professional disciplinary committee, commission, board, or court (except for any proceeding arising from the employee's discipline by the county or a county official) so long as the matter involves the exercise of that employee's official county duties. The defense of an employee may not apply unless the employee provides notice in writing of any claim or proceeding to the county attorney within five (5) days after the employee has notice of a proceeding or investigation. Grounds for refusal of a defense are explained more fully below in section 2-96. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 2-96. - Grounds for refusal of defense. 
(a)  The county shall refuse to provide for the defense of a claim or proceeding brought against any employee if it determines that any of the following exists: 
(1)  The act or omission did not rise out of and in the course of employment by the county; 
(2)  The employee acted or failed to act because of actual or intentional misconduct, fraud, corruption, malice or in bad faith; 
(3)  The proceeding is a criminal prosecution; provided however that a defense shall not be refused where the criminal prosecution is one (1) for an alleged violation of the Georgia Open Records Act or Georgia Open Meetings Act, and it is determined that the charged employee, officer, or elected official, has acted in good faith to comply with the subject Act and has substantially complied with all county policies relating to the subject Act, which determination shall be made by the county attorney; 
(4)  The provisions of a defense against the claim or proceeding would not be in the best interest of the county; 
(5)  The employee acts or fails to act as a result of, or at a time when, the employee's own self-indulgence substantially impaired the employee's judgment (as for example, an employee who causes damages or injury while intoxicated or under the influence of drugs while on the job); 
(6)  The employee acts or fails to act, except in emergencies or the existence of extenuating circumstances, directly contrary to advice of the county attorney or safety personnel; 
(7)  The employee acts or fails to act in such manner as to constitute a criminal act (as for example, misappropriation of county property or funds); 
(8)  The employee fails to cooperate in the defense of the claim or proceeding; 
(9)  The employee acted or failed to act in willful disregard of county policy or specific instructions of the employee's supervisor; 
(10)  The request for representation was not timely made, or 
(11)  The act or omission giving rise to the claim or proceeding is related to the employee's actions taken as part of a campaign for election. 
(b)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to prohibit the county from providing a defense against a claim or proceeding where there is a conflict of interest between one (1) employee or group of employees of the county, as compared with another employee or group of employees. 
(c)  The determinations required by subsection (a) of this section, except for those made in subsection (a)(3), shall be made by the chief executive officer upon the advice of the county attorney, and upon any internal investigation of the claim or proceeding. The county, acting through the chief executive officer, upon the advice of the county attorney, may refuse at any time prior to or after the approval or assumption of the defense, to provide for the defense of an employee if it is determined that any of the grounds for refusal set forth in this section exist. 
(d)  Upon approval of the defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee, the chief executive officer shall refer the matter to the county attorney for disposition. However, if two (2) or more employees or groups of employees are involved, and the interest of one (1) employee or group of employees conflicts with the interest of another employee or group of employees, the county attorney shall specify which employee or group of employees shall be represented by the county attorney and shall employ counsel for the other employees or groups of employees at the expense of the county. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 2-97. - Reimbursement for employees in matters pending before the county's ethics board or the state ethics commission. 
(a)  Reimbursement for a final favorable decision. Whenever an employee is the subject of an ethics complaint filed with the county's ethics board or the state ethics commission, and said violation arises out of or in connection with the performance of his/her official county duties, the county shall reimburse reasonable legal expenses incurred by the employee. Reimbursement will occur only when the employee has: 
(1)  Received prior approval by the county attorney in the manner set forth in subsection (b); 
(2)  Hired and retained counsel to represent his/her interests; and 
(3)  Received a final favorable decision on some or all ethical claims. 
(b)  Prerequisite for reimbursement for a final favorable decision. The county shall reimburse such reasonable legal expenses only for the ethical claims for which the employee received a final favorable decision. If an employee wishes to seek reimbursement for reasonable legal expenses, prior to retaining counsel, the employee shall request, in writing to the county attorney, a determination of the reasonable hourly rate to be used in the representation. The county attorney shall determine the hourly rate and advise the employee and his/her counsel of the rate to be charged for representation of the employee. Additionally, in determining the total amount of reimbursement of reasonable legal expenses to be paid upon a final favorable decision, the county attorney shall review the bill and determine the amount of reasonable legal expenses to be paid to the employee's attorney. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Sec. 2-98. - Payment of claim, settlements and judgments. 
(a)  Where defense of a claim or proceeding against an employee is approved, all final judgments awarded in courts of competent jurisdiction against the employee in proceedings to which this division applies, or any amount payable under any settlement of such proceeding or of claims in accordance with this division shall be paid by the county as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, payment of judgments, settlements, and claims shall be limited as follows: 
(1)  No sum will be paid on behalf of any employee who admits, in any sworn statement, administrative, judicial or other legal proceeding, to knowingly and intentionally violating state or federal law and/or county's policies and procedures. 
(2)  Whenever there is a final determination by a court of competent jurisdiction that the employee, with respect to the act or failure to act giving rise to the subject claim or proceeding, acted or failed to act because of actual fraud, corruption, or actual malice, the employee shall be required to reimburse the county any amounts paid in defense of the claim, and any amounts paid as a judgment, compromise, or settlement of such claim. 
(3)  No sum will be paid on behalf of any employee in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any claim(s) or proceeding(s) arising from incident(s) of alleged wrongful acts. In the case of more than one (1) employee being defended pursuant to this chapter for any claim(s) or proceedings(s) arising from the same, related, and/or connected wrongful acts, no sum will be paid in excess of four hundred thousand dollars ($400,000.00) regardless of the number of employees or claimants involved, and with a limit of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) per employee. 
(4)  No sum shall be paid under the provisions of this division unless the claimant or party in a proceeding unconditionally releases the employee and the county from any and all claims, causes of action or judgments arising out of the subject claim or proceeding. Further, no sum shall be paid under the provisions of this division if any attempt to recover or recovery of any sum whatsoever from the employees is made by the claimant or any party as a result of the claim or proceeding. 
(5)  Excluded from this division is any claim or proceeding whereby insurance is provided by the county. There is further excluded from this division, any claim or proceeding that the county has, by resolution or otherwise, provided for the payment and defense of claims or proceedings arising from the ownership, use or maintenance of county motor vehicles. 
(6)  No sum will be paid under the provisions of this division for punitive or exemplary damages. 
(c)  The county shall be authorized to pay an award, judgment, or settlement of attorneys' fees to a plaintiff and/or his/her counsel of record, and the monetary caps set forth in this section shall not limit the amount of such payment. 
( Ord. No. 16-01 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Secs. 2-99—2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCE[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; taxation, Ch. 24; local laws relating to finance, App. B, § 71 et seq.; local laws relating to taxation, App. B, § 1501 et seq. 
State Law reference— Budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; bonds, O.C.G.A. § 36-82-1 et seq.; local government investment pool, O.C.G.A. § 36-83-1 et seq.; bids on public work, O.C.G.A. § 36-84-1 et seq.; interlocal risk management agencies, O.C.G.A. § 36-85-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-111. - Fiscal year. 
The fiscal year of the county shall be the calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1002) 
State Law reference— County required to establish fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3(a). 
Sec. 2-112. - Interest assessed under Code. 
Unless specifically provided otherwise, all interest assessed under the provisions of this Code shall be at an annual rate of twelve (12) percent per annum. Where penalties are specified, such penalties shall be assessed, in addition to specified interest charges, at the rate of ten (10) percent of the amount due for failure to file, negligence or disregard of rules or regulations; an additional penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount due shall be assessed for any fraud or intent to evade. 
(Code 1976, § 1-1007(b)) 
Sec. 2-113. - Capital improvements program. 
(a)  The chief executive shall appoint a capital improvements program committee of such number and composition as may be desired to assist in the preparation of a comprehensive capital improvements program for consideration by the board of commissioners as a part of the information submitted to it in the budget review process. Such program should include a comprehensive priority list of county capital facility needs including cost estimates, annual operating budgetary impact and potential revenue sources. The committee's efforts will be supported by the staffs of the planning and finance departments and such other staffs as the chief executive and board of commissioners may direct. 
(b)  The committee shall be established and shall hold public hearings when it is determined that some funding may be available for capital improvements program projects. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1003) 
Sec. 2-114. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 94-11, § 1, adopted June 14, 1994, repealed § 2-114. Former § 2-114 pertained to the code of divestiture. Such ordinance is also found in the session laws at Acts 1995, p. 4529. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 2-115. - Forms of payment accepted by tax commissioner. 
The tax commissioner and the deputies thereof are authorized to accept in receipt of all taxes, assessments, charges and license fees personal, certified, treasurer's or cashier's checks, or bank, postal or express money orders. Nothing in this section shall limit or relieve the tax commissioner or deputies thereof of the duty to collect taxes, assessments, charges or license fees. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3001) 
State Law reference— Authority to so provide, O.C.G.A. § 48-2-32. 
Sec. 2-116. - Miscellaneous fees. 
The fee to be paid for the following shall be in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Emergency medical services patient transport. 
(2)  Criminal history record inspection. 
(3)  Employment, visa or immigration criminal background check. 
(4)  Intoximeter inspection. 
(5)  Photographic evidence. 
(6)  Accident and other miscellaneous reports. 
(7)  Miscellaneous fingerprinting. 
(Code 1976, § 4-1004; Ord. No. 88-20a, 12-27-88) 
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD OPTION SALES AND USE TAX (HOST) APPROPRIATION PROCEDURES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-03, Pt. I, adopted Jan. 28, 2003, deleted former Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 in its entirety and added new provisions as Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2 as herein set out. Former Ch. 2, Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 2-117—2-129, pertained to Homestead Option Sales And Use Tax (HOST) budgeting and appropriation procedures and derived from Ord. No. 98-07a, §§ 1—12, adopted May 28, 1998. 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 24. 

Sec. 2-117. - Use of funds. 
The voters of DeKalb County approved the collection of the Homestead Option Sales and Use Tax (HOST) for use in capital outlay projects and in funding services within the defined special district equal to the revenue lost to the homestead exemption, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. The budgeting, appropriation and accounting of the expenditure of funds collected from HOST shall be made in accordance with the requirements of this Code and state law. In addition, by March 1 of each year, the chief executive officer shall specifically delineate in a separate section of the proposed executive annual budget submitted to the board of commissioners, the amount of HOST funds to be allocated in the proposed executive annual budget for use in capital outlay projects and in funding services within the defined special district equal to the revenue lost to the homestead exemption, which thereafter may be approved or amended by the board of commissioners in accordance with state law and this Code. Included with the proposed executive annual budget submitted to the board of commissioners shall be a proposed annual HOST projects list of proposed capital outlay projects to be funded by HOST which, with the proposed executive annual budget, may be approved or amended by the board of commissioners in accordance with state law and this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, Pt. I, 1-28-03) 
Secs. 2-118—2-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESPONSIBLE LENDING INCENTIVES 

Sec. 2-130. - Responsible lending incentives generally. 
(a)  No bidding bank or savings and loan association may be designated as a county depository if it or any of its affiliates is a predatory or high-cost lender. Every bidding bank and loan association shall, prior to any such designation, submit to the county an affidavit that neither it nor any of its affiliates is a predatory or high-cost lender. The affidavit shall be in a form prescribed by the director of finance and shall be sworn by one or more of the officers of the bank or loan association. A bidding bank or savings and loan association may be designated as a county depository if it or any of its affiliates is a threshold lender, as long as it is not a predatory lender. 
(b)  No person or business entity shall be awarded a contract with the county if the person or business entity, or any of its affiliates, is a predatory or high-cost lender. Every person or business entity seeking to do business with the county shall submit to the county an affidavit that neither it, nor any of its affiliates is a predatory or high-cost lender. The affidavit shall be in a form prescribed by the director of finance and shall be sworn by the person or one or more authorized officers of the business acceptable to the director of finance. Any contract awarded in violation of this section shall be voidable at the option of the county. A person or business entity may be awarded a contract with the county if the person or business entity, or any of its affiliates, is a threshold lender, as long as it is not a predatory lender. 
(1)  The chief executive officer, or his/her designee, may suspend the ineligibility of a person or business entity in order to allow execution of a contract with the person or entity, upon written application by the head of the county department affected by the proposed contract, setting forth facts sufficient in the judgment of the chief executive officer, or his/her designee, to establish: 
a.  That the public health or safety of residents of the county requires the goods or services of the person or business entity; and 
b.  That the county is unable to acquire the goods or services in sufficient quantity from other sources. 
(c)  At the time of affidavit, any person or business entity submitting the affidavit described in subsection (a) or (b) and that, together with its affiliates, made more than five (5) home loans during the year preceding the affidavit, shall report to the director of finance various information described below for the calendar year preceding the affidavit. The person or entity shall report for every following calendar year by March 31 of the subsequent year. The person or entity shall provide separate and distinct reports for each of its affiliate lenders. All data once submitted becomes public information upon submission. The required information includes: 
(1)  For each home loan originated in the preceding calendar year: 
a.  The location of the loan by census tract; 
b.  The date of origination; 
c.  The amount of the loan; 
d.  The race/ethnicity of borrower (white, black, Hispanic, Asian, American Indian or other); 
e.  The age of borrower; 
f.  The gender of borrower; 
g.  Loan purpose (home purchase, refinance, home improvement, other); 
h.  Loan type conventional or government (FHA/VA); 
i.  Annual percentage rate of the loan; 
j.  The points and fees of the loan; 
k.  The amount and term of credit insurance on the loan; 
l.  The amount (in percent of principal balance) and term of any prepayment penalty; and 
m.  The amount and term of any balloon payment. 
(d)  In addition, for each foreclosure filed in the calendar year in which the lender was the originator, assignee, or servicer (at time of foreclosure), the lender shall report the same items as in subsection (d)(1). Two (2) additional items should be reported for each foreclosure: 
(1)  The name and address of the originating lender if the reporting lender did not originate the loan; and 
(2)  The year of loan origination. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 2-130.1. - Definitions. 
As used in this division, the following terms shall mean: 
Affiliate is any company that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with another company, as set forth in the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, 12 U.S.C. § 1841 et seq., as amended from time to time. 
Annual percentage rate is the annual percentage rate for the loan calculated according to the provisions of the federal Truth-in-Lending Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1601 et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder by the Federal Reserve Board, as said act and regulations are amended from time to time. 
Business entity is an individual, domestic corporation, foreign corporation, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership, joint venture, or unincorporated association, including any parent company, subsidiary, exclusive distributor or company affiliated therewith, engaged in a business or commercial enterprise. 
Flipping (home loan) means the making of a home loan to a borrower that refinances an existing home loan when the new loan does not have a reasonable, tangible net benefit to the borrower considering all of the circumstances, including the terms of both the new and refinanced loans, the cost of the new loan, and the borrower's circumstances. Reduction of monthly payments alone shall not be considered a tangible net benefit to the borrower. 
High-cost lender means a business entity that has made, within the previous twenty-four-month period, high-cost loans that comprise of lessor of: 
(1)  Five (5) percent of the lender's total number of home loans, or 
(2)  Ten (10) individual home loans. 
The term "high-cost lender" shall not include a person or entity, or its affiliates, that has submitted to the director of finance a plan to discontinue the practice of making high-cost loans, if the plan is judged sufficient by the director of finance and ensures: 
(1)  The immediate disengagement from the practice of making, issuing, or arranging or assisting others in so making, issuing, or arranging high-cost loans by the person or entity, or its affiliates; and 
(2)  The complete cessation of making, issuing or arranging, or assisting others in the making, issuing or arranging of high-cost loans by the person or entity or its affiliates within ninety (90) days after the plan is submitted. Persons or entities submitting such plans must sign the appropriate affidavits in section 2-130 prior to any resumption of business with the county. 
High-cost loan is a home loan in which the terms of the loan meet one or more of the following thresholds: 
(1)  The annual percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds five (5) percentage points over the weekly average yield on United States Treasury securities with a comparable duration to the term of the home loan, as of the week immediately preceding the week in which the interest rate for the loan is established, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  If the terms of the home loan offer any initial or introductory period, and the annual percentage rate is less than that which will apply after the end of such initial or introductory period, then the annual percentage rate that shall be taken into account for purposes of this paragraph shall be the rate which applies after the initial or introductory period; and 
b.  In the case of an annual percentage rate which varies in accordance with an index, the rate shall be the maximum rate permitted at any time by the loan documents; or 
(2)  The total points and fees exceed three (3) percent of the total loan amount. 
Home loan includes any loan secured by one-to-four unit residential property located within the county. 
Lender is any entity that originated more than five (5) home loans within the past twelve-month period or acted as an intermediary between originators and borrowers on more than five (5) home loans within the past twelve-month period. 
Points and fees include: 
(1)  All items listed in 15 U.S.C. § 1605(a)(1) through (4), except interest or the time-priced differential; 
(2)  All charges listed in 15 U.S.C. § 1605(e); 
(3)  All compensation paid directly or indirectly (including but not limited to yield spread premiums) to a mortgage broker, including a broker that originates a loan in its own name in a table funded transaction, not otherwise included in subparagraph (1) or (2) of this paragraph; 
(4)  All premiums or other charges financed, directly or indirectly, in the home loan for any credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance or any other line or subline of insurance which may become accepted as credit insurance by the insurance and lending industries or for any debt cancellation or suspension agreements or contracts (whether or not the debt cancellation or suspension agreement coverage is insurance under applicable law), or similar products; 
(5)  The maximum prepayment fees or penalties that may be charged under the terms of the loan. 
Predatory lender means a business entity that has made, within the previous twenty-four-month period, predatory loans that comprise the lesser of: 
(1)  Five (5) percent of the lender's total number of home loans, or 
(2)  Ten (10) individual home loans. 
The term "predatory lender" shall not include a person or entity, or its affiliates, that has submitted to the director of finance a plan to discontinue the practice of making predatory loans, if the plan is judged sufficient by the director of finance and ensures (i) the immediate disengagement from the practice of making, issuing, or arranging, or assisting others in so making, issuing, or arranging predatory loans by the person or entity, or its affiliates, and (ii) the complete cessation of making, issuing or arranging, or assisting others in the making, issuing or arranging of predatory loans by the person or entity or its affiliates within ninety (90) days after the plan is submitted. Person or entities submitting such plans must sigh the appropriate affidavits in section 2-130 prior to any resumption of business with the county. 
Predatory loan means a threshold or high-cost loan that exhibits one (1) or more of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Fraudulent or deceptive acts or practices, including fraudulent or deceptive marketing and sales efforts to sell threshold loans. 
(2)  The direct or indirect financing of the following: 
a.  Any prepayment fees or penalties payable by the borrower in a refinancing transaction if the lender or an affiliate of the lender is the noteholder of the note being refinanced; 
b.  Any points and fees; or 
c.  Any other charges payable to third parties. 
(3)  The lender has charged or contracted to charge any prepayment fee or penalty for the voluntary or involuntary prepayment of the home loan, or the lender has charged or contracted to charge any fee for informing any person of the balance due to pay off the home loan. 
(4)  A payment schedule with regular periodic payments that result in an increase in the principal balance, a practice known as negative amortization. 
(5)  Flipping. 
(6)  Lending without due regard to repayment ability. The lender makes a loan without due regard to repayment ability if the lender does not reasonably believe at the time the loan is consummated that the borrower or borrowers who reside in the home (when considered individually or collectively) will be able to make the scheduled payments to repay the obligation based upon consideration of their current and expected income, current obligations, employment status, and other financial resources (other than the borrower's equity in the dwelling which secures repayment of the loan). A lender who follows the debt-to-income ratio listed in 38 C.F.R. § 36.4337(c)(1), as amended, and as defined in 38 C.F.R. § 36.4337(d), as amended, and follows the residual income guidelines established in 38 C.F.R. § 36.4337(e), as amended, and VA-Form 26-6393 shall benefit from a rebuttable presumption that the lender made the loan with due regard to repayment ability. 
(7)  The lender has financed, directly or indirectly, premiums or other charges for any credit life, credit disability, or credit unemployment insurance, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance or any other line or subline of insurance which may become accepted as credit insurance by the insurance and lending industries or for any debt cancellation or suspension agreements or contract whether or not the debt cancellation or suspension agreement coverage is insurance under applicable law), or other similar products. Insurance premiums calculated and paid on a monthly basis shall not be considered financed by the lender; provided, however, that in no event shall the amount of coverage for any home loan exceed the amount necessary to satisfy the borrower's obligation on any given date during the life of such home loan. 
(8)  Balloon payments. The loan calls for a schedule payment that is more than twice as large as the average of earlier scheduled payments. This provision does not apply when the payment schedule is adjusted to the seasonal or irregular income of the borrower. Bridge loans connected with the acquisition or construction of a dwelling intended to become the borrower's principal dwelling are not considered to call for balloon payments. 
(9)  The loan includes terms under which more than two (2) periodic payments required under the loan are consolidated and paid in advance from the loan proceeds provided to the borrower. 
(10)  The loan contains a provision that increases the interest rate after default. This provision does not apply to interest rate changes in a variable rate loan otherwise consistent with the provisions of the loan documents, provided the change in the interest rate is not triggered by the event of default or the acceleration of the indebtedness. 
(11)  The loan contains a provision that permits the lender, in its sole discretion, to increase the indebtedness. This provision does not apply when repayment of the loan has been accelerated by default, pursuant to a due-on-sale provision, or pursuant to some other provision of the loan documents unrelated to the payment schedule. 
(12)  The loan contains provisions which permit the lender to charge a borrower any fees or other charges to modify, renew, extend or amend a high-cost home loan or to defer any payment due under the terms of a high-cost home loan. 
(13)  The loan is subject to a mandatory arbitration clause that limits in any way the right of the borrower to seek relief through the judicial process. 
(14)  The lender has paid a contractor under a home-improvement contract from the proceeds of the loan, unless (1) the lender is presented with a signed and dated completion certificate showing that the home improvements have been completed; and (2) the instrument is payable to the borrower or jointly to the borrower and the contractor, or, at the election of the borrower, through a third-party escrow agent in accordance with terms established in a written agreement signed by the borrower, the lender, and the contractor prior to the disbursement. 
(15)  The state mortgage lending regulator, the U.S. Federal Trade Commission, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the U.S. Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Reserve Board, or a court of law has found that the lender has made or caused to make, directly or indirectly, a false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation, including, without limitation, a false, deceptive or misleading statement or representation regarding the borrower's ability to qualify for any mortgage product. A statement or representation is deceptive or misleading if it has the capacity or tendency to deceive or mislead a borrower or potential borrower. 
(16)  If any of the agencies in subparagraph (15) of this definition have found the lender to be directly or indirectly involved in discriminating against a protected class in the making of home loans. 
(17)  Encouraging default. The lender recommends or encourages default on an existing loan or other debt prior to and in connection with the closing or planned closing of a home loan that refinances all or any portion of such existing loan or debt. 
(18)  Late fees. The lender charges late fees for the late payment of an installment due on a home loan, unless: 
a.  The fee does not exceed five (5) percent of the past due installment; 
b.  The fee is not charged more than once as a result of a single late payment; and 
c.  The borrower has agreed to the imposition of the late fees in the home loan contract. 
(19)  Home ownership counseling. The lender makes a home loan without first receiving certification from a counselor approved by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development that the borrower has received counseling on the advisability of the loan transaction and the appropriate loan for the borrower. 
(20)  Charging of points, fees, or other charges in connection with a high-cost home loan if the proceeds of the high-cost home loan are used to refinance an existing high-cost home loan held by the same lender or an affiliate of the lender. 
(21)  Refinancing of a special mortgage originated, subsidized or guaranteed by or through a state, tribal or local government, or nonprofit organization, which bears either a below-market interest rate, or has nonstandard payment terms beneficial to the borrower, such as payments that vary with income, are limited to a percentage of income, or where no payments are required under specified conditions, and where, as a result of the refinancing, the borrower will lose one or more of the benefits of the special mortgage. 
Prepayment penalty is any monetary penalty imposed on a consumer for paying all or part of the principal with respect to a consumer credit transaction before the date on which the principal is due. 
Threshold lender means a business entity that has made, within the previous twenty-four-month period, predatory loans that comprise the lesser of: 
(1)  Five (5) percent of the lender's total number of home loans, or 
(2)  Ten (10) individual home loans. 
Threshold loan means a home loan in which the terms of the loan meet one (1) or more of the following thresholds: The annual percentage rate of the loan equals or exceeds four (4) percentage points but is less than five (5) percentage points over the weekly average yield on United States Treasury securities with a comparable duration to the term of the home loan, as of the week immediately preceding the week in which the interest rate for the loan is established, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  If the terms of the home loan offer any initial or introductory period, and the annual percentage rate is less than that which will apply after the end of such initial or introductory period, then the annual percentage rate that shall be taken into account for purposes of this paragraph shall be the rate which applies after the initial or introductory period; and 
(2)  In the case of an annual percentage rate which varies in accordance with an index, the rate shall be the maximum rate permitted at any time by the loan documents. 
Total loan amount is the same as the term used in Section 226.32 of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and the same shall be calculated in accordance with the Federal Reserve Board's Official Staff Commentary thereto. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
ARTICLE IV. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, adopted June 8, 2010, amended Art. IV in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Art. IV derived from Code 1976, §§ 4-2002—4-2010; Ord. No. 90-16, § 1, adopted June 26, 1990; Ord. No. 96-03, § 1, adopted March 12, 1996; and Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2001. 

Sec. 2-131. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, certain phrases and words are defined below. Words or phrases not defined in this article, but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Auction in this article means a public sale where property or goods are sold to the highest bidder either in person or through an internet auction website such as propertyroom.com. 
Public sale in this article means an auction of property or goods conducted in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 17-5-54 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-132. - Sale at auction and state law requirements. 
(a)  The county may sell at auction any and all court-awarded, unclaimed articles of personal property that come into its possession and have been abandoned, seized, or been the subject of a crime, after an effort has been made to ascertain the true owner thereof without success. Sale of such personal property shall not occur until the Superior Court of DeKalb County enters an order authorizing sale in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 17-5-54, now and as it may be amended hereafter. 
(b)  The county shall comply with applicable state law, including, but not limited to, O.C.G.A. §§ 17-5-54, 17-5-55 and 17-5-56, now and as such sections may be amended hereafter, in selling personal property at auction. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-133. - Catalog record. 
It will be the duty of the county to maintain a separate and complete catalog record of all personal property that comes into its possession. Such personal property will be identified in detail by its usual name, make and model, manufacturer's name and serial number, if any. If there is no identifying name or number, it will be fully described in this catalog record as to its physical properties and appearance. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-134. - Effort to locate owner prior to sale. 
The county will make an effort to find the true owner of any article of personal property coming into its possession. If the owner can be found, the county will release the personal property to the owner. If the true owner of the article is not found, the county will proceed to sell, destroy or retain the personal property in the manner provided in state law and in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-135. - When sales conducted; terms of sale. 
All personal property in the custody of the DeKalb County Police Department, including personal property used as evidence in a criminal trial, which is unclaimed after a period of ninety (90) days following its seizure, or following the final verdict and judgment in the case of personal property used as evidence, and which is no longer needed in a criminal investigation or for evidentiary purposes in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 17-5-55 or § 17-5-56, shall be subject to disposition by the police department. When articles of personal property in the possession of the DeKalb County Police Department have been authorized for sale by entry of an order of the DeKalb County Superior Court, as required by state law, the county will hold a public sale of all court-awarded, unclaimed articles of personal property. All articles will be sold to the highest bidder on an "as-is" basis, and the county makes no warranties of any nature, either expressed or implied, as to merchantable title, quality or performance. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-136. - Advertisement of sale. 
(a)  Notice of the public sale referred to in this article will be advertised in the legal organ of the county once a week for four (4) consecutive weeks. 
(b)  The notice shall specifically describe each item and advise possible owners of items of the method of contacting the police department; provided, however, that miscellaneous items having an estimated fair market value of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) or less may be advertised or sold, or both, in lots. Such notice shall also stipulate a date, time, and place said items will be placed for public sale if not claimed. Such notice shall stipulate whether said items or groups of items are to be sold in blocks, by lot numbers, by entire list of items, or separately. The notice will be of sufficient size and type to be easily read and understood by the general public and will state definitely the time and place of the sale, that it will be open to the public and that all sales are to be made to the highest bidder. This notice may refer to the sale as an "auction of seized, unclaimed or awarded personal property," or by any other appropriate name and will state that only court-awarded, unclaimed personal property which has come into the possession of the county is being sold; that the county makes no warranties, either expressed or implied, as to merchantable title, quality or performance; and that all articles are sold "as is." The police chief or his/her designee may also advertise notice of the sale in other newspapers, on the county's website and/or on other internet advertising sites. 
(c)  Items not claimed by the owners shall be sold at the public sale, which shall be conducted commencing not less than seven (7), nor more than fifteen (15) days, after the final notice has been run in the legal organ. The sale shall be to the highest bidder. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-137. - Conduct of sale. 
The county may conduct a public sale using an auctioneer or may utilize an on-line auction service so long as both methods of sale comply with the applicable requirements of state law and this article. The county will appoint an individual or entity, which may include an on-line auction service, to conduct the sale authorized by this article under the guidance of an employee of the county, and more than one (1) person may act as the agent who conducts the sale of court-awarded, unclaimed personal property. The individual or entity acting for the county will be the sole arbiter in the case of a disputed sale and will not make a sale until all bidding on the article offered has ceased. However, there will not be any required number of bids before a sale is made. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-138. - Announcement of terms to be made during sale. 
In the event there is an in-person auction, it will be the duty of the individual or entity holding the in-person auction authorized by this article to make or include a public announcement before opening the sale, that the county does not warrant title to any article, nor is there any other warranty, either expressed or implied, as to any article sold and that all sales are final and all articles are sold "as is." It will be the duty of the individual or entity in charge of the in-person auction to make or include this announcement at intervals during the progress of the sale. When the county uses an internet auction service to sell unclaimed personal property, there will be a statement on-line that the items are sold "as is." 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-139. - Disposition of sale proceeds. 
It will be the duty of the police department to make a true accounting to the county finance department of all the personal property sold and money collected from the sales conducted, as provided in this article. Such money will be deposited in the general fund and used as prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 2-140. - Disposition of unsold personal property. 
All unclaimed personal property that the county has offered for public sale but is not sold can be donated to charity or destroyed, depending on the condition of said personal property, at the sole discretion of the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 10-10, Pt. I, 6-8-10) 
Secs. 2-141—2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Capital improvements program committee, § 2-113; alcoholic beverage review board, § 4-56; airport advisory board, § 6-16 et seq.; development advisory board, § 7-16; electrical board of advisors, § 7-93; HVAC advisory and examining boards, § 7-83; plumbing advisory/examining board, § 7-73; CATV citizen's advisory board, § 8-10; community relations commission, App. B, § 116 et seq.; DeKalb County Coliseum Authority, App. B, § 132 et seq.; vacancies in hospital authority membership, App. B, § 401; developmental disabilities planning and coordinating council, App. B, § 426 et seq.; DeKalb County Oglethorpe Housing Development Authority, App. B, § 489 et seq.; pension board, App. B, § 902; merit system council, App. B, § 1053 et seq.; county planning commission, App. B, § 1116 et seq.; governing board of Lennox Park community improvement district, App. B, § 1305. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-156—2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DATA PROCESSING ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 2-166. - Created. 
There is created a data processing advisory committee. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2002(a)) 
Sec. 2-167. - Members. 
The data processing advisory committee shall be composed of the following: 
(1)  The executive assistant. 
(2)  The data center director. 
(3)  The finance director. 
(4)  The chief of police. 
(5)  The tax commissioner. 
(6)  A representative from the superior court's administrator's office. 
(7)  A representative from the state court's administrator's office. 
(8)  Two (2) other representatives from user departments to be appointed by the other members of the committee to serve two-year terms. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2002(b); Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 2-168. - Officers. 
The executive assistant shall be the chairperson of the data processing advisory committee. The data center director shall be the vice-chairperson of the committee. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2002(b)) 
Sec. 2-169. - Duties. 
The data processing advisory committee shall have the duty to: 
(1)  Review all requests for new and expanded data processing services. 
(2)  Recommend priorities for new and expanded data processing services to the data center director for presentation to the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Assist the data center director on related issues which the data center director brings to the committee. 
(4)  Carry out any reviews and investigations requested by the chief executive and/or board of commissioners on data processing issues. 
(Code 1976, § 2-2002(a)) 
Secs. 2-170—2-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISPOSITION OF COUNTY OWNED PROPERTY 

Sec. 2-181. - Disposition of county owned strips of land incapable of being used independently. 
(a)  As set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3(h), and as hereinafter amended, the county may sell and convey parcels of small or narrow strips of land, so shaped or so small as to be incapable of being used independently as zoned or under applicable subdivision or other development ordinances or land use plans, or as streets, whether owned in fee or used by easement, to abutting property owners where such sales and conveyances facilitate the enjoyment of the highest and best use of the abutting owner's property. 
(b)  The sale of such property to abutting property owners authorized by this section is not required to be submitted to the process of auction or the solicitation of sealed bids so long as the sale complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  The planning director shall make a written determination that the real property to be conveyed is so small, narrow or shaped that it is incapable of being used independently given its zoning or provisions of applicable subdivision or other development ordinances or land use plans; and 
(2)  The real property shall be surveyed by the county, and the county shall perform an appraisal to determine the fair market value of the property; and 
(3)  The sale or conveyance complies with all applicable requirements of Georgia law including any requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-9-3, and as hereinafter may be amended; and 
(4)  The planning director's written determination, the county's survey and appraisal shall be presented to the governing authority in an appropriate manner as authorized by state law, for a determination whether to authorize staff to proceed to sell the property to the abutting property owners and to impose such conditions on the sale as desired by the governing authority; and 
(5)  If so authorized by the governing authority, each abutting property owner shall be notified in writing by the purchasing director of the availability of the property and shall have the opportunity to purchase said property under the terms and conditions imposed by the governing authority; and 
(6)  In the event the sale is authorized, the purchaser or purchasers shall pay no less than fair market value for the property and the fair market value shall be solely determined by the appraisal performed by the county; and 
(7)  In the event a sale occurs, the purchaser or purchasers shall reimburse the county for all due diligence costs incurred by the county in conducting such a sale of property, including but not limited to the county's attorneys fees, closing costs, survey costs and appraisal costs. 
(Ord. No. 05-07, Pt. I, 5-10-05) 
Sec. 2-182. - Naming of county buildings or facilities. 
No county building or facility shall be named or renamed in honor of any person unless (1) the person is deceased or (2) is alive but no county building or facility may be named or renamed in honor of such living person if that person currently holds any elected or appointed public office. This section shall not apply to any building or facility that is owned, operated or under the jurisdiction of the state or any municipality. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07, Pt. I) 
Secs. 2-183—2-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - "DEKALB FIRST" LOCAL SMALL BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, adopted Sept. 27, 2016, repealed former Art. VII in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. VII, §§ 2-200—2-212, pertained to the local business enterprise program, and derived from Ord. No. 06-25, Pt. I, adopted Nov. 28, 2006. 

Sec. 2-200. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known as the "DeKalb First ordinance" or the "LSBE ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to create the DeKalb First which requires vendors interested in doing business with the county to employ or make good faith efforts to employ local businesses to fulfill a portion of the work. The Constitution of Georgia empowers DeKalb County with the legislative power to adopt reasonable ordinances and/or resolutions relating to its property, affairs, and local government for which no provision has been made by general law and which are not inconsistent with the Constitution of Georgia. The county spends significant revenue on purchasing supplies, materials, and equipment, and retaining contractual and professional services. The dollars used in making these purchases are derived in some measure from taxes and fees paid by local businesses; thus, funds generated in the community should, to the extent possible, be used to "DeKalb First" thereby allowing the funds to be re-invested in the local county economy. There is an inherent benefit in procuring services or goods from local small businesses who contribute to the county's economy and tax base and thus there is a substantial reason to offer a portion of publicly funded contracting opportunities to those qualified local small businesses. "DeKalb First" means that whenever possible, appropriate and authorized by applicable law, the county intends to buy its materials, and procure services from certified, qualified local small businesses in DeKalb County and the metropolitan Atlanta area. To encourage larger contractors, vendors and professional firms to partner with such local small businesses, the county enacts this article giving certain incentives to larger businesses if they use qualified, certified local small businesses or at least make a good faith effort to secure subcontracts with such local small businesses when performing services for or selling goods to the county. "DeKalb First" is an initiative that protects and enhances the economic development of the county and improves the financial well- being of its citizenry because the program creates local jobs and improves the county's economic base by helping DeKalb businesses grow. As DeKalb County businesses grow and expand tax revenue and fees paid by such businesses increases and opportunities for taxpayers to work in the county where they live increases. Enactment of this ordinance encourages local small businesses to remain in DeKalb County and grow and prosper thereby directly and indirectly increasing the financial stability of DeKalb County government. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-201. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases not defined in this chapter, but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Affiliate means any business, including, but not limited to, a parent business, subsidiary business or a sibling business, that has any of the following relationships to another business: 
(1)  Directly or indirectly owns or holds with the power to vote, five (5) percent or more of the outstanding voting securities of such other business; 
(2)  Five (5) percent or more of whose outstanding voting securities are directly or indirectly owned or held with power to vote by such other business; or 
(3)  Directly or indirectly controlling, controlled by, or under common control with such other business. For the purposes of this definition, the term "control" means the power to exercise a controlling influence over the management policies of a business. 
Business shall mean any association, cooperative, corporation, individual, joint venture, limited liability corporation (hereinafter referred to as "LLC"), partnership, sole proprietorship, trust or other legal entity. 
Business concern shall mean a business entity organized for profit interested in doing business with DeKalb County. 
Decertification event shall mean any occurrence, infraction, or event that causes a business to be decertified as an LSBE or denied recertification as an existing LSBE. 
Director shall mean the director of the DeKalb County Purchasing and Contracting Department or his/her designee. 
DeKalb County shall mean DeKalb County, Georgia (hereinafter referred to as "DeKalb County" or "county"). 
Invitation to bid shall mean the complete assembly of related documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, furnished through advertisement to prospective bidders for the purpose of inviting bids. 
Local and small business enterprise (hereinafter referred to as "LSBE") shall mean a business concern, certified under the requirements of this article as a local LSBE or a MSA LSBE. 
LSBE DeKalb firm shall mean a business located and operated in DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(1)  For the purposes of this definition, to be "located" in DeKalb County means to have a physical presence within the geographic boundaries of DeKalb County such as having office space, a plant, warehouse, or other physical business facility presence (not including a post office box), for at least one (1) year prior to submitting an application for LSBE certification. 
(2)  For the purpose of this definition, to "operate" in DeKalb County means to be the current holder of a valid business license issued by DeKalb County at least one (1) year prior to submitting an application for LSBE certification. 
LSBE MSA firm shall mean a business located and operated outside the geographical boundaries of DeKalb County, Georgia but within the MSA. 
(1)  For the purposes of this definition, to be "located" in the MSA means to have a physical presence within the geographic boundaries of the counties within the MSA, but outside of DeKalb County such as having office space, a plant, warehouse, or other physical business facility, but specifically excluding the existence of a post office box without any other physical presence, for at least one (1) year prior to submitting an application for LSBE certification. 
(2)  For the purposes of this definition, to "operate" in the MSA means to be the current holder of a valid business license issued by a local government within the MSA for at least one (1) year prior to submitting an application for LSBE certification. 
LSBE review panel shall mean a panel of decision makers comprised of the director, the executive assistant, and the user department director or designee. If more than one (1) user department exists, the director will select one (1) representative to serve as the third panelist on the LSBE review panel. 
Metropolitan statistical area (MSA) shall mean the geographical area consisting of Cherokee, Clayton, Cobb, Douglas, Fayette, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry and Rockdale counties. 
Principal place of business shall mean the business location where the business' high level officers direct, control, and coordinate the business activities and where business records are kept. 
Prime contractor means (i) business concern, bidder or proposer who submits a qualified sealed solicitation to the county or (ii) a business concern that enters into a contract with the county. 
Protest meeting shall mean any meeting between an LSBE and the executive assistant in response to a possible or potential denial of certification or a decertification event. 
Public works construction has the same meaning as it is given in state law, O.C.G.A. § 36-91-2, now and as it may be amended hereafter. 
Purchasing and contracting department (hereinafter referred to as "department") shall mean the DeKalb County Purchasing and Contracting Department. 
Qualified sealed solicitation shall mean any invitation to bid or request for proposal issued by DeKalb County and released for response to bidders and proposers after the effective date of this article. 
Receipts shall mean total income (or in the case of sole proprietorship, "gross income") plus "cost of goods sold" as these terms are defined or reported on Internal Revenue Service (IRS) federal tax return forms; Form 1120 for corporations; Form 1120S for Subchapter S corporations; Form 1065 for partnerships; and Form 1040, Schedule F for farm or Schedule C for sole proprietorships. 
Request for proposals shall mean the complete assembly of related documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, furnished to prospective responders for the purpose of soliciting proposals. 
Small business shall mean an independently owned and operated business concern who meets the requirements of section 2-203. 
Subcontract shall mean an agreement between a subcontractor and a contractor, pursuant to which the subcontractor will provide to the contractor equipment, goods, materials, services, or supplies. 
Subcontractor shall mean a business providing equipment, goods, materials, service or supplies to a contractor. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-202. - Program administration. 
(a)  The director shall have the primary responsibility to ensure that DeKalb First is effectively and equitably implemented in DeKalb County. 
(b)  The DeKalb First program shall be evaluated on a semi-annual basis. A written semi-annual report shall be compiled by the director and shall compare the current year with the previous year. The semi-annual report shall be provided to the chief executive officer and each member of the board of commissioners. The semi-annual report should include, at a minimum: 
(1)  Number of LSBEs certified and de-certified; 
(2)  Number and financial impacts of mentor/protégé partnerships; 
(3)  Evaluation of the effectiveness of the LSBE in relation to the achievement of DeKalb County's goals set forth under this article, including the utilization of LSBE's on contracts; 
(4)  Number of LSBEs subcontracted by non-LSBE prime contractors; 
(5)  Number of LSBEs contracted as a prime contractor; 
(6)  Total LSBE contracted dollars and total contracted dollars; and 
(7)  Other information about DeKalb First, if requested by the board of commissioners or the chief executive officer. 
(c)  In order to encourage the participation of prime contractors, the department shall create a trade-specific categorization of potential LSBE subcontractors and make it available via electronic and hard copy to all prime contractors who seek to participate in DeKalb County contracts. 
(d)  The department shall encourage other county departments to use LSBEs for emergency contracts although specific goal(s) shall not be set. 
(e)  The department will keep LSBEs aware of County solicitations by advertising and/or posting them on DeKalb County's website. 
(t)  The department shall implement a training program to provide quarterly seminars and workshops to LSBEs addressing how to do business with DeKalb County and encouraging participation in DeKalb County's solicitation process and affiliated programs. 
(g)  The department shall require every business concern who desires to submit a response to a qualified sealed solicitation to attend a mandatory LSBE meeting, in person or via video conference, with interested LSBE(s) in an effort to encourage partnerships and use of LSBEs. Such meeting shall occur at a designated place within a county building within two (2) weeks of issuance of the qualified sealed solicitation. Notice of the time, date, and location of such meeting shall be posted on the county's website at the time of the solicitation's posting. At the LSBE meeting, prime contractors shall provide relevant information about the plans, requirements, and specifications of the contract. Each LSBE will be allowed the opportunity to submit an email address to the prime contractor at the LSBE meeting and the prime contractor shall advise those LSBE's by email of any new relevant information, if any, at least five (5) business days prior to submission of the prime contractor's bid or proposal. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-203. - LSBE certification. 
(a)  Criteria for LSBE certification. Through appropriately promulgated written procedures, the director or his/her designee shall certify as an LSBE any business concern that meets the following criteria: 
(1)  The business concern must qualify as a LSBE as defined in this article; 
(2)  The business concern must be owned and controlled by individuals who are citizens or lawfully admitted permanent residents of the United States; 
(3)  The business concern must be a for-profit enterprise that performs a commercially useful function, including a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, or any other business or professional entity; 
(4)  The business concern owner(s) applying for certification must own at least fifty-one (51) percent of the business and have maintained this ownership for at least one (1) year prior to application; 
(5)  If the business concern is publicly owned, the applicant owner must own at least fifty-one (51) percent of all classes of stock; 
(6)  The principal place of the business concern must be located in DeKalb County, Georgia or within the MSA, as defined in this article; 
(7)  The business concern's average gross annual receipts from the prior three (3) fiscal years must not exceed the following amounts: 
a.  Construction: thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000.00). 
b.  Professional services: five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). 
c.  Commodity suppliers: three million dollars ($3,000,000.00). 
(b)  Qualifications. The director shall certify each LSBE in a particular area or areas of expertise. To obtain certification, the LSBE shall prove it is qualified in a demonstrated area of expertise, by providing certain information to the director, including but not limited to, a resume and/or list of previous contracts or work in the LSBE' s demonstrated area of expertise; references from individuals who have contracted with the LSBE in its demonstrated area of expertise; and all relevant licenses and certifications. 
(c)  Prior certification. All businesses certified as a LSBE prior to the enactment of this article, shall remain certified until their current certification expires or a decertification event occurs. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-204. - Benchmarks and incentives. 
(a)  To qualify for incentives under the DeKalb First ordinance, a prime contractor shall be a certified LSBE or submit written documentation showing that at least twenty (20) percent of the total contract award will be performed by a LSBE(s) unless the prime contractor can demonstrate sufficient good faith efforts as set forth in this article. 
(b)  The LSBE review panel, stating the reason in writing, may waive, decrease, or increase this twenty-percent benchmark for any particular contract prior to release of the qualified sealed solicitation or as an addendum to such solicitation. The department shall grant lower incentives if the LSBE review panel lowers the LSBE benchmark for participation as outlined in this section. The percentage by which the benchmark is lowered shall be used to calculate the lower amount of incentive. 
(c)  The incentives are: 
Requests for proposals. 
(1)  Ten (10) points in the initial evaluation of a response to a request for proposal for meeting the LSBE benchmark with a prime contractor who is a local LSBE or is a prime contractor using local LSBE(s); 
(2)  Five (5) points in the initial evaluation of responses to any request for proposal for meeting the applicable LSBE benchmark with a prime contractor that is an MSA LSBE or a prime contractor utilizes MSA LSBE(s); and 
(3)  Prime contractors who demonstrate sufficient good faith efforts in accordance with the requirements of this article shall be granted two (2) points in the initial evaluation of responses to a request for proposal. 
Invitations to bid. 
(4)  If a prime contractor who is deemed responsible and remains responsive to an invitation to bid because it is or has obtained twenty (20) percent participation of an LSBE DeKalb or LSBE MSA firm, submits the lowest bid price in response to a qualified sealed solicitation, that prime contractor shall be deemed the lowest responsible and responsive bidder and submitted to the chief executive officer or the governing authority, whichever is appropriate under law, for award of the contract; 
(5)  In addition to meeting all other requirements for responsiveness, prime contractors who demonstrate sufficient good faith efforts in accordance with the requirements of this article shall be deemed responsive in the initial evaluation of responses to an invitation to bid. 
(6)  If a prime contractor who is deemed responsible and remains responsive to an invitation to bid because of its good faith efforts, submits a lower bid price than a prime contractor who actually achieves the twenty-percent or otherwise required benchmark, then the prime contractor who actually met the benchmark will be given the opportunity to match the lowest bid price of the prime contractor who only made good faith efforts. If that prime contractor chooses NOT to match that bid price, the prime contractor who made the good faith effort will be deemed the lowest responsible responsive bidder and submitted to the chief executive officer or the governing authority, whichever is appropriate under law, for award of the contract. 
(d)  Where a mixture of LSBE DeKalb and LSBE MSA firms are utilized, pro-rated points shall be granted by the department based upon the utilization for each based upon the terms of the qualified sealed solicitation. 
(e)  If the prime contractor fails to meet the required benchmark for LSBE participation or fails to make sufficient good faith efforts as set forth in section 2-206 in response to an invitation to bid or a request for proposal, then the prime contractor's bid or proposal shall be deemed nonresponsive. If the bid or proposal is deemed nonresponsive, the cost proposal shall not be considered. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-205. - Calculation of LSBE participation. 
(a)  The entire amount of that portion of a subcontract that is performed by the LSBE shall be counted as its participation, including the cost of supplies and materials obtained by the LSBE for the work for the subcontract, and supplies purchased or equipment leased by the LSBE. Supplies and equipment the LSBE purchases or leases from the prime contractor or its affiliate shall not count as LSBE participation. 
(b)  The entire amount of fees or commissions charged by a LSBE for providing a bona fide service, such as professional, technical, consultant or managerial services, or for providing bonds or insurance specifically required for the performance of a contract shall be counted as LSBE participation. 
(c)  If an LSBE has a decertifying event during the term of a contract, the dollar value of work performed under a contract with that business after it is decertified shall not be counted toward the prime contractor's LSBE participation goal. No contractor shall be penalized as a result of the failure of a project to achieve the benchmarks set forth in its contract if the LSBE fails to meet the conditions of section 2-207. 
(d)  In determining the achievement of a benchmark, the participation of a LSBE shall not be counted until the dollar amount being counted has been received by that LSBE. 
(e)  Achievement of benchmarks authorized by this article shall be evaluated after the project is twenty-five (25) percent, fifty (50) percent, and then seventy-five (75) percent complete. Meeting or failing to meet contractual benchmarks may be used for evaluative and/or award purposes in considering the prime contractor and/or LSBE in future qualified sealed solicitations. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-206. - Good faith efforts in lieu of meeting benchmarks. 
(a)  A prime contractor must meet the required LSBE benchmark of twenty (20) percent (unless otherwise modified in the qualified sealed solicitation), unless it can demonstrate that good faith efforts yielded no qualified LSBEs and document those good faith efforts in writing. 
(b)  Prime contractors are expected to make sufficient good faith efforts at the outset of preparing a response to a qualified sealed solicitation, so that LSBEs have an adequate opportunity to partner with prime contractors in response to a solicitation. Failure of any prime contractor to attend the mandatory LSBE meeting required in this article, in person or via video conference, shall mean that the prime contractor has not demonstrated sufficient good faith efforts and its bid or proposal, if submitted, shall be deemed non- responsive without any further review by the department. 
(c)  Factors for determining if sufficient good faith efforts were made, shall include but are not limited to the compilation of a contact log including the date of contact, name, address and contact number or email address used to contact the proposed LSBE subcontractors, the name and title of the person making the effort for the prime contractor; the nature of work requested and full detailed description of the scope of work for which a quote was requested; the amount of the quoted price, if one (1) was obtained; and any additional LSBE subcontractor information as requested on forms promulgated by the department. The director also maintains the right to interview any proposed LSBE subcontractor included on the contact log to verify the effort made. 
(d)  During the evaluation of the bid or proposal, the director shall determine if sufficient good faith efforts were made by the prime contractor. If the determination is made that a prime contractor did not make sufficient good faith efforts, the bid/proposal will be deemed non- responsive and shall not receive any further review by the department. 
(e)  The department of purchasing and contracting shall maintain documentation of all good faith efforts performed by a prime contractor, and a copy of these records shall be kept with the official bid/contract file, in compliance with all record retention laws or two (2) years, whichever is longer. 
(f)  If all prime contractors for a particular qualified sealed solicitation fail to meet the required benchmark for LSBE participation and fail in making good faith efforts, as defined by this article, the LSBE benchmark requirement may be waived by the chief executive officer or designee. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-207. - Prime contractor responsibility. 
(a)  Any business concern may submit a response to a qualified sealed solicitation regardless of their certification status under section 2-203. 
(b)  When subcontracting, every prime contractor must independently evaluate each LSBE and confirm qualifications, and previous practical, demonstrable experience in the area in which the LSBE intends to perform services and references prior to including the LSBE in a qualified sealed solicitation. Information obtained by the county in this regard may be provided to the prime contractor by the director upon request, but each prime contractor understands that it must investigate, and independently verify an LSBE's qualifications and ability to perform the service or work at issue. 
(c)  In each qualified sealed solicitation, all prime contractors shall identify a portion of the work available to LSBEs consistent with their previous demonstrable expertise, and shall submit a proposed work schedule that identifies the work to be completed by the LSBE(s) with their bid/proposal, if any. This proposed work schedule shall be finalized and submitted to the county within ten (10) days of the notice to proceed meeting. This work schedule shall become the basis for determining compliance with the terms of this article after execution of the contract. 
(d)  The prime contractor shall attend the LSBE meeting in person or via video conference and shall provide interested LSBEs with timely, adequate information about the plans, specifications, and other such requirements of the qualified sealed solicitation to facilitate their bid or proposal submission and document all communications, in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(e)  The prime contractor shall submit a notarized schedule of LSBE participation detailing all LSBE businesses from which the prime contractor solicited bids. This schedule shall be submitted at the qualified sealed solicitation due date and time in order to be granted any preferential points. 
(f)  Each prime contractor shall be required to sign an affidavit declaring under penalty of perjury its intention to comply fully with the provisions of this article, and attesting to the truth and accuracy of all information provided to the county. All prime contractors and LSBEs must adhere to all federal, state, and local law, and applicable provisions of this Code. All such affidavits shall also contain a provision whereby the prime contractor declares under penalty of perjury that no subcontract(s), LSBE or otherwise, shall contain language requiring mandatory, binding arbitration or in any other way limit subcontractor(s) from addressing disputes with the prime contractor(s) through any and all legal means. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 18-03 , Pt. I, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 2-208. - LSBE subcontractor responsibilities. 
(a)  A current LSBE certification letter and a signed letter of intent from all LSBEs describing the work, materials, equipment or services to be performed or provided by the LSBE and the agreed upon dollar value shall be submitted to the prime contractor to be included with the qualified sealed solicitation. 
(b)  Post-award, the LSBE shall deliver a monthly report to the department listing the work completed and payment received from the prime contractor. The report shall be supported by copies of checks, invoices and any other relevant documents to substantiate that payment has been received. 
(c)  The LSBE shall review and comply with applicable federal, state, and local law, and applicable provisions of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-209. - Contract performance compliance. 
(a)  At or around the time of award, but no later than the kickoff meeting, the director shall verify that a subcontract for the agreed upon percentage or dollar amount of the total contract price adopted and approved by the governing authority, has been executed by the prime contractor and the LSBE(s), and the prime contractor shall provide each LSBE's subcontract and an email address for the LSBE for notification purposes, to the director. The director shall also verify that all subcontract(s), including LSBE subcontracts, do not require mandatory, binding arbitration or in any other way limit the subcontractor(s) from addressing disputes with the prime contractor(s) through any and all legal means. Failure to provide the requisite subcontract(s) shall be grounds for rejection of a qualified sealed solicitation and/or termination of the prime contract. 
(b)  The prime contractor cannot make changes to the notarized schedule of LSBE participation or substitute subcontractors named in the notarized schedule of LSBE participation without the prior written consent of the LSBE review panel. Unauthorized changes or substitutions shall be a violation of this section, and may constitute grounds for rejection of a qualified sealed solicitation or cause termination of the contract for breach. In such instances, DeKalb County may withhold payment and/or impose other sanctions. Written consent for changes shall not be unreasonably withheld from the prime contractor. 
(c)  All requests for changes or substitutions of the subcontractors named in the notarized schedule of LSBE participation shall be made in writing to the LSBE review panel and shall clearly and fully set forth the basis for the request, including documentary proof or affidavits of individuals, where necessary. The LSBE review panel will review the request and make a final decision. The facts supporting the request must not have been known nor reasonably should have been known by either party prior to the submission of the notarized schedule of LSBE participation. Post-award LSBE shopping is prohibited and may be cause for cancellation, rejection or other punitive remedies against the prime contractor. 
(d)  Performance issues between the prime contractor and LSBE are governed by the subcontract between the prime contractor and the LSBE, and should be resolved by the LSBE and the prime contractor. If a prime contractor alleges poor performance by an LSBE and desires a substitution for that reason, the prime contractor shall submit a detailed written report with supporting documentation to the director. The director will meet with representatives from the prime contractor, the LSBE, and the county's user department with the goal of moving the project forward. If there is no meaningful resolution, the prime contractor may then submit a request to substitute LSBE(s) to the LSBE review panel. 
(e)  If a prime contractor plans to hire a subcontractor on any scope of work that was not previously disclosed in the notarized schedule of LSBE participation the prime contractor shall inform the existing LSBE(s) of the new scope of work and if the LSBE(s) accepts the offer of work, the percent of work shall flow to the LSBE subcontractor in the same manner as outlined in the original contract. If the existing LSBE subcontractor declines the work, the prime contractor shall obtain the approval of the LSBE review panel to modify the notarized schedule of LSBE participation and must make good faith efforts to ensure that LSBEs have a fair opportunity to bid on the new scope of work. 
(f)  Changes to the scopes of work shall be recorded and reported by the DeKalb County department responsible for overseeing the work to be performed at the time they arise, to establish the reasons for the change and the effect on achievement of the benchmarks identified in this article. 
(g)  In the event a "stop work" order is issued to the prime contractor, the director shall notify the LSBE(s) and provide the LSBE(s) with a copy of the stop work order via the email address provided in the LSBE subcontract. 
(h)  In the event of non-payment by a prime contractor to any LSBE, the LSBE has the right to request a meeting with the director. This meeting will include representatives from the prime contractor, the LSBE, the county's user department and the director with the goal of payment for performance. A finding of repeated non-payment by any prime contractor without reasonable cause may be cause for contract cancellation for breach, and other administrative remedies as allowed under applicable county policy. 
(i)  Each prime contractor shall deliver a monthly report form to the director and to the LSBE, listing all work completed by the LSBE and payments made. The report shall be supported by copies of checks, invoices and any other documents to substantiate that work and payments to the subcontractor have been made. Failure to submit a report may result in declaring a contract in default and subsequent termination of the contract. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 18-03 , Pt. I, 7-24-18) 
Sec. 2-210. - Payment obligations. 
(a)  Upon award of a contract by DeKalb County that includes the applicable LSBE benchmarks identified in this article, the prompt pay obligations in DeKalb County's contract with the prime contractor, and the contract between the prime contractor and the subcontractors, become covenants of performance by the contractor in favor of DeKalb County. The applicable LSBE benchmarks shall be included as terms and conditions of the contract between DeKalb County and the contractor and failure to achieve or maintain the agreed upon applicable LSBE benchmarks may constitute a breach of the contract. 
(b)  The department shall require prompt payment for all contracts with DeKalb County for performance of work or procurement of goods. 
(1)  The department shall ensure that all contracts covered by this article contain a provision requiring the prime contractor to certify in writing that all subcontractors and suppliers have been promptly paid for acceptable work and materials, no later than seven (7) calendar days from prime contractor's receipt of payment from DeKalb County. 
(2)  Upon request, such prompt pay certifications shall be emailed to any LSBE(s) at the email address listed in the LSBE subcontract. It is the prime contractor's sole and exclusive responsibility to pay the LSBE subcontractor promptly for acceptable work and materials. 
(c)  The contractor shall provide a listing of all LSBEs and any other subcontractors to be used in the performance of the contract, with each request for payment submitted to DeKalb County. The director shall monitor LSBE subcontractor participation during the course of the contract. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-211. - Renewal of certification. 
(a)  All certifications issued under the LSBE program shall be reviewed every three (3) years and may be renewed by the director. 
(b)  Each LSBE must submit a complete recertification application to be reconsidered for the LSBE program. Failure to seek recertification within ninety (90) days of certification expiration shall result in decertification of the LSBE. 
(c)  It is the responsibility of the LSBE to notify the department of any change in its circumstances affecting its continued eligibility for the program. Failure to do so may result in the LSBE's decertification and preclusion from future participation in the LSBE program. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-212. - Decertification, denial and protest meeting for a LSBE. 
(a)  The director may, upon written notice to a business concern, deny LSBE certification, decertify a LSBE or deny re-certification of a LSBE for failing to comply with the LSBE program requirements and the applicable provisions of this article, this Code or state law. 
(b)  A business concern that has been denied certification, recertification or has been decertified may protest the action, in writing, within thirty (30) days of receipt of notification of any of the aforementioned actions. Upon the filing of a protest, the decertification shall not become effective and the following shall occur: 
(1)  A protest meeting shall be scheduled with the business concern and the executive assistant at which time the business concern may present additional facts and evidence in support of its eligibility. The director and the business concern may present up to two (2) witnesses. The director and the business concern have the right to be represented by a lawyer, at their own expense. The director may request the business concern to produce documents relevant to the denial or decertification event. The business concern's failure to comply within ten (10) days of these requests may be grounds for denial of the protest at the discretion of the executive assistant. 
(2)  The executive assistant shall make the final determination based on the information presented at the protest meeting and supplemental information provided, if any, within ten (10) days of the protest meeting. However, the executive assistant may direct the business concern to cure any certification, recertification, or decertification matter within a set time period and issue a final determination within ten (10) days of the cure period. 
(3)  A business concern denied or found to be ineligible for certification or recertification may not reapply for certification for one (1) year after the effective date of the final determination issued by the executive assistant. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-213. - Graduation. 
(a)  The director shall graduate a LSBE from eligibility, at the expiration of the certification period, if the LSBE grows to exceed the limits as specified in this article. 
(b)  If an LSBE graduates from the LSBE program and later becomes eligible for re-entry, it may reapply for certification under section 2-203. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-214. - Mentor-protégé initiative. 
(a)  In an effort to develop local small business talent and provide technical, administrative, and other assistance as required for contracting with DeKalb County, all projects valued over five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) are required to be performed by entities who have engaged in a mentor-protégé partnership. 
(b)  Prime contractors must agree to become mentors and take on an LSBE protégé in an effort to enhance the potential of future LSBEs. These protégés will include all LSBEs on the certified LSBE list maintained by the county. 
(c)  If participation in the mentor-protégé initiative is required to submit a bid or proposal, prime contractors must also comply with all other applicable sections of this article including section 2-204 and section 2-206. 
(d)  Qualifying projects shall be performed by both mentor and protégé through a subcontract between those parties. 
(e)  The protégé will perform an agreed-upon amount of the contract assuming full responsibility for and supervision of that portion of the work and should be given credit or acknowledgement as the prime contractor for that portion of the work in future solicitations. 
(f)  During the term of the contract the mentor and protégé business must collectively provide to the department, a quarterly summary of the skills provided to the protégé, which shall include: 
(1)  The type of collaborations and training being provided to the protégé to assist in the growth and development of their business. The areas of assistance that are encouraged include but are not limited to, bonding and insurance support, management and scheduling support; 
(2)  Names and titles of the individuals from the mentor who are responsible for working directly with the protégé in the areas identified above; 
(3)  Names and titles of the individuals from the protégé who are responsible for working directly with the mentor in the areas identified above; 
(4)  The amount of time, nature and extent of managerial, technical, financial and bonding assistance provided; 
(5)  A summary and explanation of any projects bid on or undertaken by the mentor-protégé partnership in the private sector or for a governmental entity other than DeKalb County; and 
(6)  Any additional or further information required by the director. 
(g)  Protégés agree not to subcontract any of their work to other contractors without the written approval of the director. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 2-215. - Disclaimer. 
By enacting this article, DeKalb County is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, DeKalb County, its officers, agents, or its employees are not to be considered joint employers with a contractor and do not control the relationship between a prime contractor and an LSBE. DeKalb County, its officers, agents, and employees shall not be liable to any person or business concern claiming that the enactment, enforcement or violation of this article caused injury or loss of any kind. 
( Ord. No. 16-11 , Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 2-216—2-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FIRST SOURCE JOBS[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, adopted Sept. 12-2006, set out provisions pertaining to a new Art. VII. As Art. VII already existed, said provisions have been included herein as Art. VIII, comprised of §§ 2-231—2-237 at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 2-231. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the first source program. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 11-13, Pt. I, 8-23-11) 
Sec. 2-232. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to create the first source program, which requires beneficiaries and contractors of eligible projects to use the first source job register to fill jobs created as a direct result of public funding. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 11-13, 8-23-11) 
Sec. 2-233. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement means any type of agreement with the county, including purchase orders, regardless of what they may be called, for the procurement or disposal of supplies, services, construction, or professional or consultant services. 
Beneficiary means the immediate recipient of grants or community development block funds administered by the county. The term shall only apply to those entities benefiting from funds in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more, where permissible under the terms of the grants or community development block funds. 
Contractor means an individual or entity entering into any type of agreement with the county, funded in whole or part with county funds, which specifies the contractor is to receive fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more. 
Eligible project means any project funded in whole or in part with county funds. 
First source job listing means the listing of all available jobs that have been created by eligible projects. 
First source register means the database of employable DeKalb County residents. 
Good faith effort means the efforts undertaken by a beneficiary or contractor to fill jobs created by an eligible project with individuals from the first source register. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 11-13, Pt. I, 8-13-11) 
Sec. 2-234. - Duties of purchasing and contracting department. 
In administering the first source program, the director of purchasing and contracting or designee shall have the power to: 
(a)  Notify any contractor or beneficiary in writing, including specific reasons, who has not complied with this article; 
(b)  Provide any contractor or beneficiary who has not complied with this article with a reasonable time to cure; 
(c)  Determine whether noncompliance amounts to a breach of contract; 
(d)  Provide written determinations of noncompliance to the appropriate officials, stating the specific nature of noncompliance; and 
(e)  Incorporate a provision regarding this article into every agreement. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 11-13, Pt. I, 8-23-11) 
Sec. 2-235. - Duties of workforce development department. 
In administering the first source program, the workforce development department director or designee shall do the following: 
(a)  Manage the first source program; 
(b)  Create written operating procedures to effectuate the provisions of this article; 
(c)  Compile and maintain a database of citizens of the county that will serve as the first source register; 
(d)  Create and provide all necessary forms, applications, documents and papers necessary to comply with this article; 
(e)  Create a methodology to determine what jobs will be created by an eligible project; 
(f)  Compile and maintain a listing of available jobs created by eligible projects that will serve as the first source job listing; 
(g)  Notify the director of purchasing and contracting or designee of any contractor or beneficiary who has not complied with the requirements of this article; and 
(h)  Annually review and report to the chief executive officer or designee to determine the need for this article's continued implementation. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 11-13, Pt. I, 8-23-11) 
Sec. 2-236. - First source requirements. 
(a)  The county shall require every beneficiary or contractor for every eligible project to do the following: 
(1)  Advertise each job created by an eligible project on the first source job listing; 
(2)  Make a good faith effort to fill fifty (50) percent of the jobs created by the eligible project with individuals from the first source register within one hundred twenty (120) days of executing any agreement with the county; 
(3)  Agree that each beneficiary and contractor who does not make a good faith effort to reach the fifty (50) percent goal set forth in this article may be deemed ineligible to qualify for any future project; 
(4)  Allow open inspection of payroll records; and 
(5)  Agree to work with the workforce development department to comply with the spirit of this article. 
(b)  All solicitations and agreements from eligible projects shall include a provision referencing the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Each contractor and beneficiary working under an eligible project shall ensure that the first source program will be binding upon each subcontractor, sub-lessee or other ultimate recipient of the county funds. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 11-13, Pt. I, 8-23-11) 
Sec. 2-237. - Disclaimer. 
By enacting this article the county is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, the county, its officers, agents, or its employees are not to be considered joint employers with a contractor or beneficiary. The county, its officers, agents and employees shall not be liable to any person, including but not limited to contractors, beneficiaries, and persons whose names appear on the First Source job register, who claim that the enactment, enforcement or violation of this article caused injury or loss of any kind. This article is not intended to and does not require a contractor or beneficiary to hire a particular individual who does not satisfy the minimum qualifications or other requirements of the job as set forth by the beneficiary or the contractor. This article does not give the county, its officers agents, or employees any right to control or determine any of the terms or conditions of employment of a First Source register candidate hired by a beneficiary or contractor. 
(Ord. No. 06-16, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFICE OF THE INTERNAL AUDITOR[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-03 , Pt. I, adopted March 10, 2015, repealed art. IX in its entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Former art. IX, §§ 2-238—2-241, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an ordinance adopted Aug. 24, 2010, Pt. I. 

Sec. 2-238. - Composition and selection. 
(a)  The office of the internal auditor is hereby established and shall consist of, at a minimum, one (1) full-time position of chief internal auditor. The chief internal auditor shall be approved by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) members of the board of commissioners, after recommendation by the board of commissioners' audit committee. 
(b)  The audit committee shall establish a process of screening candidates for recommendation and shall establish the position's job description which is recommended to include requirements that a candidate: 
(1)  Be either a certified public accountant, certified chartered accountant, or a certified internal auditor; 
(2)  Have five (5) years of managerial or supervisory experience; and 
(3)  Have the knowledge, skills, and abilities to implement the requirements of the position. 
(c)  Additional staff and funding for the office of the internal auditor shall come under the authority of the chief internal auditor subject to the annual budgeting process. The chief internal auditor shall work with the director of human resources to hire qualified staff, and it is recommended that each staff person who will conduct or assist in the conducting of audits possess a bachelor's degree in business or public administration, accounting or a related field. It is further recommended that the chief internal auditor consider retaining an investigator, if appropriate or necessary. 
(d)  An internal audit oversight committee ("oversight committee") is hereby established to provide professional guidance and insure the independence of the internal auditing function. The oversight committee shall evaluate and recommend well qualified candidates for the chief internal auditor position to the audit committee and the board of commissioners; recommend approval of an annual work plan, review completed audits, publish its findings and recommendations to the chief executive officer, the board of commissioners and the public. The oversight committee shall also recommend an annual department budget to the chief executive officer. 
(e)  The oversight committee shall be comprised of five (5) voting members appointed as follows: two (2) members shall be appointed by the chief executive officer; and three (3) members shall be appointed by a majority vote of the board of commissioners. Of the three (3) members appointed by the board of commissioners, one (1) member must reside in the north end of the county, one (1) member must reside in the central part of the county and one (1) member must reside in the southern part of the county. All members shall be residents of DeKalb County and shall hold no other county office or county compensated position. No member of the oversight committee shall have a financial interest in any county contract or work for any entity that has a contract with the county. No official elected by the voters of DeKalb County who has held that elected office within the previous eight (8) years may be a member of the oversight committee. Each member shall have an expertise in performance auditing, and have a minimum of five (5) years' experience as a certified public accountant, a certified internal auditor, or as a certified performance auditor, or eight (8) years of other relevant experience. Members of the oversight committee shall be appointed for five-year terms with the initial appointments to be staggered as follows. The initial appointments by the chief executive officer shall be for initial terms of two (2) years and successive appointments shall be for terms of five (5) years. The initial appointments by the board of commissioners shall be for initial terms of three (3) years and successive appointments shall be for terms of five (5) years. Members shall serve until a successor is appointed and members may be reappointed to successive terms without limitation. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. If a member moves outside the county, that action shall constitute a resignation from the oversight committee, effective immediately. 
(f)  It shall be the responsibility of the oversight committee to recommend qualified candidates for the chief internal auditor position to the audit committee of the board of commissioners, and any individual may submit names to the oversight committee of potential candidates for the position of chief internal auditor. The board of commissioners shall select or reject a chief internal auditor within ninety (90) days from the date of the written recommendation of a candidate by the oversight committee. If a candidate is rejected, the oversight committee shall recommend another candidate to the board of commissioners. The recommendation process and time limitations set forth in this subsection shall apply until the board of commissioners selects a chief internal auditor. 
( Ord. No. 15-03 , Pt. I, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 2-239. - Independence and removal. 
(a)  The chief internal auditor may act independently of the board of commissioners, the chief executive officer, and all other officials of DeKalb County. The chief internal auditor shall notify the board of commissioners and the chief executive officer, in writing, in the event he or she perceives inappropriate influence or pressure exerted on the office of the internal auditor. Such notification shall state the source and nature of the perceived influence or pressure. The chief internal auditor shall be subject to the same requirements as the executive assistant in the Organizational Act, Section 14(e) whereby he or she shall be discharged for participation in the management of any political campaign or holding office in a political party or body. 
(b)  The chief internal auditor will serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners, but the affirmative vote of at least five (5) members of the board of commissioners shall be required to discharge the chief internal auditor. 
( Ord. No. 15-03 , Pt. I, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 2-240. - Term. 
The chief internal auditor shall be a full time employee of the board of commissioners and his or her contract shall be for five (5) continuous years with the option to renew for one (1) additional five-year term. The chief internal auditor may not serve for more than ten (10) years in total. 
( Ord. No. 15-03 , Pt. I, 3-10-15) 
Sec. 2-241. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The existence of the office of internal auditor will create public trust and encourage transparency in government. The chief internal auditor shall have the power to audit the various departments, officers, and agencies of the county government on a continuing basis. Such audits may go into areas such as preventing waste, fraud, and abuse; promoting legal, fiscal, and ethical accountability; and reviewing the effectiveness and efficiency of programs and operations of county government and elected and appointed county officers. 
(b)  The chief internal auditor shall be authorized to request any information from any department, officer, or agency of the county government on behalf of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The chief internal auditor, upon official request of and on behalf of the board of commissioners, shall be authorized to request the chief judge of the Stone Mountain Judicial Circuit to submit to the judges of superior court the question of impaneling a special grand jury charged to facilitate the work of the chief internal auditor in order to compel compliance with audits and investigations conducted by the office of the internal auditor. In the instance that any audit or investigation conducted by the office of the internal auditor or any information presented to the special grand jury in conjunction with any audit or investigation conducted by the office of the internal auditor exposes any evidence that suggests possible criminal activity, the chief internal auditor shall consult with the district attorney of the Stone Mountain Judicial Circuit for further guidance and direction. 
(d)  The chief internal auditor will direct his or her office, subject to an annual work plan which the chief internal auditor must submit to the audit committee for approval within six (6) months of appointment. The chief internal auditor may amend the plan during a term. The chief internal auditor must consider recommendations and may seek suggestions for the work plan from the chief executive officer, the board of commissioners, elected and appointed county officers, and employees of county government. When advance public or agency knowledge of an audit included in the annual work plan would substantially impede the work of the office, the chief internal auditor may keep that portion of the work plan confidential, but must comply with the applicable requirements of the Georgia Open Records Act. 
(e)  The chief internal auditor shall, immediately upon completion of any and all audits, present a written copy of the audit report to each member of the board of commissioners and the chief executive officer delivered simultaneously to each official by email and by hand delivery. The audit report must describe the purpose of the audit, the research methods used, and the chief internal auditor's findings and recommendations. Each affected department or agency must be given a reasonable opportunity to respond to the chief internal auditor's final draft of the audit report, and upon receipt, the chief internal auditor shall provide the response simultaneously via email and hand delivery to the chief executive officer and each member of the board of commissioners. 
(f)  Subject to federal and state law, the chief internal auditor, in order to maintain the integrity of audits performed by the office of the internal auditor, shall keep any and all reports prepared pursuant to this article, and any and all information received in connection with that report, confidential until the report is released to the public. 
(g)  In performing his/her duties and work, the chief internal auditor or his/her designees will adhere to national auditing standards/principles in matters impacting work performance, finance, and governance within the county. The chief internal auditor shall follow all applicable guidelines and recommendations of the Association of Local Government Auditors (ALGA) and the Institute of Internal Auditors and will conduct all internal auditing functions in accordance with all applicable law and requirements of the industry. 
(h)  The chief internal auditor, or his or her designee, shall attend each and every meeting of the board of commissioners audit committee. 
( Ord. No. 15-03 , Pt. I, 3-10-15) 
Secs. 2-242—2-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX-A. - 9-1-1 CHARGE ON PREPAID WIRELESS SERVICE (Effective January 1, 2012)[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-17, Pt. I, adopted Sept. 27, 2011, added a new Art. IX to Ch. 2. Inasmuch as Art. IX already existed, the new material has been redesignated as Art. IX-A at the county's instruction. 

Sec. 2-300. - Prepaid wireless transactions charge. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4), upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the public safety answering point in the amount of seventy-five cents ($0.75). 
(Ord. No. 11-17, Pt. I, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 2-301. - Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. 
Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(Ord. No. 11-17, Pt. I, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 2-302. - Administrative provisions. 
The clerk of the board of commissioners and chief executive officer is hereby directed to file with the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Revenue a certified copy of this ordinance and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten (10) days of approval of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-17, Pt. I, 9-27-11) 
Sec. 2-303. - Depositing of funds; use of funds. 
In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by the county from charges imposed by this ordinance shall be deposited in the emergency telephone system fund maintained by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134, and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction; all such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Ord. No. 11-17, Pt. I, 9-27-11) 
Secs. 2-304—2-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX-B. - ENTREPRENEURIAL CONTRACTS[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-09, Pt. I, adopted July 127, 2011, added a new Art. IX to Ch. 2. Inasmuch as Arts. IX and IX-A already existed, the new material has been redesignated as Art. IX-B at the county's instruction. 

Sec. 2-400. - Entrepreneurial contracts. 
(a)  Definitions . "Entrepreneurial contracts" shall mean any contract entered into by DeKalb County with a third party whereby DeKalb County is selling its property in the form of raw materials or byproducts to a third party in exchange for monetary compensation. The term "entrepreneurial contracts" does not include intergovernmental agreements between the county and other public entities authorized by article IX, section 3, paragraph 1 of the Georgia Constitution; county contracts or purchase orders regulated by section 18 of the Organizational Act of DeKalb County, Georgia; contracts executed by elected county officers; or county contracts or purchase orders regulated by state law or federal law, including but not limited to public works construction contracts as that term is defined in state law. 
(b)  Process . The director of purchasing and contracting will utilize a procurement method appropriate to the particular property proposed to be sold. The director of purchasing and contracting will draft a scope consistent with the procurement method. Prior to execution of any entrepreneurial contract, the chief executive officer shall implement a public notice and competitive process to ensure all interested third parties have an opportunity to be considered for that entrepreneurial contract with the county, and shall provide notice to the board of commissioners when such public notice and competitive process is to commence. Public notice of an entrepreneurial contract opportunity need not be placed in the county's legal organ; it may be placed on the county's web-site, other internet advertising opportunities, or with other publications. 
(Ord. No. 11-09, Pt. I, 7-12-11) 
Secs. 2-401—2-419. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX-C. - DEKALB FILM, MUSIC AND DIGITAL ENTERTAINMENT COMMISSION[15] 

Footnotes: 
--- (15) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-06 , Pt. I, adopted May 10, 2016, enacted new provisions designated as art. X, §§ 2-260—2-262. Inasmuch as art. X, art. IX-A and art. IX-B already exist, said provisions have been redesignated as art. IX-C, §§ 2-420—2-422, at the discretion of the editor, in order to conform to the Code format. 

Sec. 2-420. - Creation and composition. 
(a)  The DeKalb Film, Music, and Digital Entertainment Commission will be composed of key stakeholders who are professionals in the film, music, and entertainment industries. 
(b)  The film, music, and digital entertainment commission will work closely with DeKalb County and Decide DeKalb to help market and attract film, music entertainment production and supporting industries. 
(c)  The film, music, and digital entertainment commission shall be composed of nine (9) members and one (1) ex officio member. 
(d)  Each of the following organizations shall submit one (1) recommended individual to the chief executive officer for nomination and confirmation by the board of commissioners. The chief executive officer may act on this recommendation or request an additional candidate for consideration. 
(1)  Georgia Game Developers Association. 
(2)  Georgia Film Academy. 
(3)  Georgia Music Partners. 
(4)  Georgia Production Partners. 
(5)  International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, Moving Picture Technicians, Artists, and Allied Crafts of the United States. 
(6)  Screen Actors Guild. 
(7)  Studio Infrastructure Alliance. 
(8)  Media Education Foundation of Georgia. 
(9)  Georgia State University. 
(10)  Georgia Piedmont Technical College. 
Nominees should be individuals actively involved in education related to or production, promotion and/or support of motion pictures, television series, commercials, music, music videos, digital production, interactive games and animation. The chief executive officer may act on any recommendation or request additional candidate(s) from the same organization for consideration. The commission member from the Georgia Film Academy shall be an advisory, non-voting, ex officio member of the commission. 
(e)  Each entertainment commission member shall preferably be a resident of DeKalb County, shall serve a two-year term, and may be appointed to serve successive terms. 
( Ord. No. 16-06 , Pt. I, 5-10-16; Ord. No. 16-12 , Pt. I, 11-7-16) 
Sec. 2-421. - Film, music and digital entertainment commission powers and meetings. 
(a)  The DeKalb Film, Music, and Digital Entertainment Commission is authorized to: 
(1)  Work closely with Decide DeKalb and DeKalb County, providing leadership and strategic direction on issues related to the film, music recording and production, and entertainment industries; 
(2)  Assist Decide DeKalb and DeKalb County with the identification and marketing of ideal sites for filming, film production, music recording and production, and other entertainment purposes; 
(3)  Provide leadership for the development of a film, music, and entertainment strategic plan for DeKalb County; 
(4)  Make recommendations regarding policy and procedural changes that would improve DeKalb's business climate to grow the film, music, and entertainment industries; 
(5)  Serve as ambassadors to DeKalb County and the Metropolitan Atlanta region; 
(6)  Develop an annual work program in furtherance of their mission; and 
(7)  Undertake all necessary and appropriate activities pursuant to their mission, subject to budgetary constraints. 
(b)  Facilitate industry training and education based in DeKalb County. 
(c)  The film, music and entertainment commission will elect a chair, vice-chair, and secretary to preside over the meetings and keep minutes. The entertainment commission shall meet on a quarterly basis and as needed at other times. 
(d)  The film, music and entertainment commission chair may move to remove a commission member if he or she fails to attend three (3) consecutive regular meetings. This motion must be approved by a majority of the entertainment commission. 
( Ord. No. 16-06 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 2-422. - Staffing and budget. 
DeKalb County will partner with Decide DeKalb to ensure the film, music and digital entertainment commission maintains appropriate staffing to perform its essential functions. Annually, the film commission shall recommend to the board of commissioners budgetary expenditures to enable the work of the entertainment commission and/or develop, enhance, promote, improve or encourage film, music and entertainment production within DeKalb County. Such proposals shall be consistent with an adopted work program, and may be funded at the discretion of the governing authority, using revenue in the tourism promotion fund. 
( Ord. No. 16-06 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Secs. 2-423—2-449. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - SPECIAL SEWER TAX DISTRICTS[16] 

Footnotes: 
--- (16) --- 
Editor's note— Part I of Ord. No. 13-10, adopted May 28, 2013, added provisions designated as Art. X, §§ 2-300—2-310. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, and to maintain the format of the Code, the provisions have been redesignated as Art. X, §§ 2-450—2-460, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 2-450. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the Georgia Constitution gives the governing authority the power to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts, and to levy and collect taxes within such districts to pay for the cost of providing such services. 
(b)  Private sewer systems collect, treat, transport, and dispose of sewage, which is water-carried waste including human excrement and grey water. 
(c)  If a private sewer system is deficient and in need of repair, blockages, seepage, and overflows of sewage can occur. Often, private sewer systems are not constructed in compliance with current county specifications, and are not repaired in a manner that reduces or eliminates blockages, spills and deficiencies. 
(d)  When blockages and overflows occur in private sewer systems, untreated sewage may spill over into the county's waterways, which adversely affects the county's water quality and jeopardizes the health and welfare of county citizens. 
(e)  The governing authority finds that failing private sewer systems may create potentially significant public health and safety hazards for all residents of the county. The governing authority further finds that costs associated with seepages, blockages and overflows can be burdensome and, thus, it is in the best interests of all residents of the county to assist in the repair and upgrade of failing private sewer systems so that such systems can be incorporated into the county's public sewer system. 
(f)  To achieve this public purpose, the governing authority wants to make available a process to correct the failings in private sewer systems and thereafter incorporate these private sewer systems into the county's public sewer system. 
(g)  This article establishes a process to improve, regulate, maintain and operate sewer systems in special sewer tax districts (hereinafter referred to as "sewer tax districts") comprised of defined areas of the unincorporated county served by failing private sewer systems, as that term is defined in this article. 
(h)  Once a sewer tax district is created and the county repairs and upgrades the failing private sewer system, then the chief executive officer shall formally accept the private sewer system into the county's public sewer system. After the sewer improvements are completed, and the cost of the repair and upgrade is fully paid by the collection of taxes within the sewer tax district, then the sewer tax district shall be dissolved by operation of law. 
(i)  Once a failing private sewer system is upgraded to current specifications and/or repaired and incorporated in the county's public sewer system, then the governing authority believes that blockages, seepages and overflows of untreated sewage in the county's waterways will be reduced. Therefore, creating special sewer tax districts as provided in this article protects the health and welfare of the county's citizens by improving the water quality of the county's waterways, and is a cost-efficient method of reducing blockages, spills and overflows from failing private sewer systems. 
G)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the governing authority to approve any request to establish a sewer tax district, and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the governing authority to approve the establishment of any such sewer tax district. 
(k)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the governing authority from creating a sewer tax district if it determines that the sewer tax district is required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the governing authority to make a determination to establish any such sewer tax district. 
(l)  This article shall not be used to create a sewer tax district to repair individual sewer service lines or laterals that run from a public or private sewer main to a structure, as such sewer service lines or laterals are regulated in chapter 25 of this Code. Repair, upgrade, and replacement of such sewer service lines or laterals remain the responsibility of the owner of the structure. 
(m)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to provide a mechanism to create sewer tax districts to service property that houses apartments, or to service a commercial, business, industrial, or office structure, enterprise or development. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-451. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment means a building containing four (4) or more independent, self-contained, residential units; each independent, self-contained, residential unit must be comprised of one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities. The term "apartment" does not include a condominium as that term is defined in state law. 
Complete petition means a petition that includes: (i) the signatures of the required number of owners of the property lying within the proposed sewer tax district in favor of such designation; and (ii) an accurate description of the property to be included in the proposed sewer tax district, including tax map parcel identification numbers, as used by the tax assessor and the tax commissioner. The petition is subject to verification of property owner signature(s) and property owner(s) boundary lines by the director of watershed management. 
Costs or costs incurred within a sewer tax district means the actual cost of designing, repairing, upgrading and constructing the sewer improvements in the sewer tax district, including the actual cost of surveying; engineering design; fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisition; construction, financing, legal and other related expenses; and the county's administrative costs. Costs shall be amortized over a period of ten (10) years for each individual sewer tax district. 
Failing private sewer system means a private sewer system that has been determined to be in need of repair and deficient in a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. To qualify as a lot, the property must be residentially zoned, must house a single-family detached or attached dwelling(s), and legal ownership of the lot must be held in fee simple. The term "lot" includes lots that house common areas such as clubhouses, swimming pools, tennis courts, or recreational areas designed to be used by residents of a neighborhood or development and owned in fee simple by an individual or entity such as a homeowner's association. 
Private sewer system means a sanitary sewer system that: (i) has not been accepted by the county as part of the public sanitary sewer system, and (ii) services lots or condominium units. A sanitary sewer system is accepted by the county as part of the public sewer system only if: (i) it is designed, constructed, inspected, and tested according to county standards, and either (ii) a written, fully executed easement, right-of-way. deed, or agreement conveying the sanitary sewer system to DeKalb County, Georgia, as grantee, exists and is recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County, or (iii) a final plat exists that includes a dedication and conveyance of the sewer main and is accepted and approved by the board of commissioners or the chief executive officer and filed with the clerk of superior court in the manner required by the applicable provisions of the law. 
Property owner means an owner of land, and includes a condominium unit owner as that term is defined by state law. The term property owner does not include owners of land utilized as apartments, or commercial, business, industrial, or office structures, enterprises or developments. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe that is designed and constructed to carry sewage. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-452. - Authority and responsibility. 
(a)  The chief executive officer shall be responsible for administering the sewer tax district program set forth in this article, and shall have the authority to promulgate policies, procedures, and forms necessary to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The executive assistant shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Advise prospective petitioners for a proposed sewer tax district of the procedures required for the establishment of such districts pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Establish the boundaries of a proposed sewer tax district in accordance with such criteria and in such manner as is necessary and appropriate; 
(3)  Establish an orderly system of numbering sewer tax districts created pursuant to this article, in consultation with the tax assessor and the tax commissioner; 
(4)  Provide standard form petitions for use by prospective petitioners which shall include a requirement to provide the name and address of an individual who shall serve as the petition originator and who shall agree to be the designated person to receive required notices from the county; 
(5)  Advise the petition originator of estimated assessment rates for owners of property lying within the proposed sewer tax district; 
(6)  Examine all filed petitions for accuracy and compliance with the provisions of this article; 
(7)  Submit the petition, if the petition is complete, accurate, and approved by the director of watershed management in the manner set forth in this article, to the governing authority together with estimated assessment rates for owners of property lying within the proposed sewer tax district, the date of dissolution of the proposed sewer tax district, and such other recommendations as the chief executive officer may deem appropriate; 
(8)  Coordinate the installation, repair, and upgrade of private sewer systems within sewer tax districts approved by the governing authority; 
(9)  Obtain the necessary surveys, engineering designs, plans, specification cost estimates, bid forms, and other documents necessary for the repair and/or upgrade of a private sewer system so that it can be accepted as part of the public sewer system; 
(10)  Seek establishment of a sewer tax district where appropriate and necessary, even if residents of the community served by the private sewer system do not petition the governing authority for creation of a sewer tax district; and 
(11)  Perform any and all other acts or duties necessary or proper to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-453. - Creation of a sewer tax district upon the petition of fifty-one percent of the property owners in areas where private sewer systems are located within a county easement or right-of-way. 
(a)  The owner(s) of not less than fifty-one (51) percent of the property within an area that is being served by a failing private sewer system located within a county easement or right-of-way in the unincorporated area of the county may file with the executive assistant a petition requesting creation of a sewer tax district. Each property owner in favor of designating a sewer tax district must sign a petition and print or type thereon his/her name, address of the property within the proposed sewer tax district, and the date of signature. The petition must also contain an accurate description of the property to be contained within the sewer tax district, including tax map parcel identification numbers, as used by the tax assessor and the tax commissioner. The petition must include copies of easements, right-of-way deeds, or other documents that conclusively show that the private sewer system is located within a county easement or right-of-way. Owners of private sewer systems that are not located within a county right-of-way or easement are not eligible to petition the governing authority for creation of a sewer tax district pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition, the executive assistant shall review the petition to determine if it is complete and accurate. If complete and accurate, the executive assistant shall have an additional ten (10) days to forward the complete and accurate petition to the director of watershed management for approval. The director of watershed management shall determine if the boundaries of the proposed sewer tax district are definable and contiguous. If the boundaries of the proposed sewer tax district are determined to be definable and contiguous, the director of watershed management shall obtain a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia to determine if the private sewer system is in need of repair and deficient. The report shall include a professionally prepared cost estimate to repair the system and bring it into compliance with the current requirements of federal and state law, and this Code. The director of watershed management shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of the written, sealed engineering report to review and approve, or disapprove, the petition. The director of watershed management's review and approval of the petition shall be based on sound engineering and accounting practices, and the compatibility of the proposal with existing county facilities and systems. The director of watershed management shall not approve a petition until he/she has notified the affected county departments and county officials of the petition and secured their review and approval of the petition. The director of watershed management shall not approve a petition if the private sewer system is not located in a county easement or right-of-way. If disapproved, the director of watershed management shall provide written notice to the petition originator of the decision to disapprove the petition, and the reasons for that decision, within the sixty-day review period. The director of watershed management's decision in this regard is final. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete and accurate petition approved by the director of watershed management, the executive assistant shall submit to the governing authority a proposed agenda item and enabling resolution to create the sewer tax district, and provide such other information as is necessary and appropriate to authorize the creation of the sewer tax district. 
(d)  If decisions by county employees are not made in accordance with the time constraints set forth in subsections (a), (b) and (c) directly above, then the petition shall stand disapproved without further action by the county. 
(e)  Prior to the creation of a sewer tax district, the governing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider the creation of such district. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once within the thirty (30) days immediately preceding the public hearing. 
(f)  The governing authority shall make a decision on the creation of the sewer tax district within ninety (90) days of the first time the enabling resolution appears on the agenda for consideration by the governing authority. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-454. - Creation of a sewer tax district upon the petition of one hundred percent of the property owners in areas where private sewer systems are located on private property. 
(a)  All property owners within an area that is being served by a failing private sewer system located on private property in the unincorporated area of the county may file with the executive assistant a petition requesting creation of a sewer tax district. Each property owner in the proposed sewer tax district must sign a petition and print or type thereon his/her name, address of the property within the proposed sewer tax district, and the date of signature. The petition must also contain an accurate description of the property to be contained within the proposed sewer tax district, including tax map parcel identification numbers, as used by the tax assessor and the tax commissioner. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition, the executive assistant shall review the petition to determine if it is complete and accurate. If complete and accurate, the executive assistant shall have an additional ten (10) days to forward the complete and accurate petition to the director of watershed management for approval. The director of watershed management shall determine if the boundaries of the proposed sewer tax district are definable and contiguous. If the boundaries of the proposed sewer tax district are determined to be definable and contiguous, the director of watershed management shall obtain a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia to determine if the private sewer system is in need of repair and deficient. The report shall include a professionally prepared cost estimate to repair the system and bring it into compliance with the current requirements of federal and state law, and this Code. The director of watershed management shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of the written, sealed engineering report to review and approve, or disapprove, the petition. The director of watershed management's review and approval of the petition shall be based on sound engineering and accounting practices, and the compatibility of the proposal with existing county facilities and systems. The director of watershed management shall not approve a petition until he/she has notified the affected county departments and county officials of the petition and secured their review and approval of the petition. If disapproved, the director of watershed management shall provide written notice to the petition originator of the decision to disapprove the petition, and the reasons for that decision, within the sixty-day review period. The director of watershed management's decision in this regard is final. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete and accurate petition approved by the director of watershed management, the executive assistant shall submit to the governing authority a proposed agenda item and enabling resolution to create the sewer tax district, and provide such other information as is necessary and appropriate to authorize the creation of the sewer tax district. 
(d)  If decisions by county employees are not made in accordance with the time constraints set forth in subsections (a), (b) and (c) directly above, then the petition shall stand disapproved without further action by the county. 
(e)  The governing authority shall make a decision on the creation of the sewer tax district within ninety (90) days of the first time the enabling resolution appears on the agenda for consideration by the governing authority. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-455. - Creation of a sewer tax district by the governing authority. 
(a)  The governing authority shall be authorized and empowered to create sewer tax districts in unincorporated areas of the county that are served by failing private sewer systems, and the creation of such sewer tax districts shall be upon such terms and conditions and in such manner as the governing authority may deem necessary or proper. 
(b)  Sewer tax districts created pursuant to this section shall not require a petition and shall not be required to comply with section 2-453 or 2-454. Sewer tax districts created pursuant to this section do not require consent or support of the owners of the private sewer system or the property owners served by the private sewer system. Creation of sewer tax districts pursuant to this section shall not abrogate in any way the applicable legal requirements that a county must adhere to when seeking to acquire an interest in privately owned land. 
(c)  The governing authority shall not create a sewer tax district pursuant to this section until it has received a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, showing that a private sewer system is in need of repair and deficient. The report shall include a professionally prepared cost estimate to repair the system and bring it into compliance with the current requirements of federal and state law, and this Code. 
(d)  Prior to the creation of a sewer tax district, the governing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider the creation of such district. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once within the thirty (30) days immediately preceding the public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-456. - Individual sewer service lines or laterals, and other exemptions. 
(a)  No sewer tax district shall be forwarded to the governing authority or created by the governing authority to repair individual sewer service lines or laterals that run from a public or private sewer main to a structure, as such sewer service lines or laterals are regulated in chapter 25 of this Code. Repair, upgrade, and replacement of such sewer service lines or laterals remain the responsibility of the owner of the structure. 
(b)  No sewer tax district shall be forwarded to the governing authority or created by the governing authority for property that houses apartments, or a commercial, business, industrial, or office structure, enterprise or development. 
(c)  Property in a sewer tax district that is exempt from payment of ad valorem property taxes pursuant to state law shall be exempt from payment of any sewer tax imposed pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-457. - Fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisitions necessary to complete sewer improvements and construction services. 
All fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisitions necessary for the completion of sewer improvements within a sewer tax district created pursuant to section 2-453 or 2-454 shall be conveyed at no cost to the county at an appropriate time designated by the chief executive officer after approval of the sewer tax district by the governing authority. The construction services in a sewer tax district shall not commence until the governing authority has approved the sewer tax district and all necessary fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisitions have been conveyed. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-458. - Acceptance of the private sewer system as part of the county public sewer system. 
(a)  Private sewer systems located within a county easement or right-of-way. If the governing authority creates a sewer tax district for a private sewer system located within a county easement or right-of-way, and if the director of watershed management certifies in writing that the necessary sewer improvements in the sewer tax district have been completed so that the sewer system is no longer failing and complies with all applicable requirements of law, including the time requirements in subsection (c), then upon receipt of such written certification, the chief executive officer shall execute the necessary documents, if any are needed, to accept the private sewer system as part of the county's public sewer system. Thereafter, the sewer system in the sewer tax district shall be part of the county's public sewer system, subject to county repair, upgrade requirements, and conditions for that system. 
(b)  Private sewer systems located on private property. If the governing authority creates a sewer tax district for a private sewer system located on private property, and if the director of watershed management certifies in writing that the necessary sewer improvements in the sewer tax district have been completed so that the sewer system is no longer failing and complies with all applicable requirements of law, including the time requirements in subsection (c), then upon receipt of such written certification, the chief executive officer shall execute the necessary legal documents, if any are needed, to accept the private sewer system as part of the county's public sewer system. Title shall not be conveyed to the sanitary sewer without prior conveyance of necessary written fee simple, easement or right-of-way deeds, or a fully executed agreement conveying the sanitary sewer system to DeKalb County, as grantee. If all such documents are executed and recorded in the deed records of the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County, and the requirements of this article have been met, thereafter, the sewer system in the sewer tax district shall be part of the county's public sewer system, subject to county repair, upgrade requirements, and conditions for that system. 
(c)  No private sewer system shall be formally accepted as part of the county's public sewer system until January 1 of the year after the finance director and the tax commissioner have adjusted all the property owners' estimated assessment rates to accurately reflect their pro rata shares of all costs incurred within the sewer tax district. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-459. - Calculation of taxes to be assessed in the sewer tax district. 
(a)  The property owners in the sewer tax district collectively shall pay fifty (50) percent of the costs incurred within a sewer tax district, but in no event shall each property owner's share of costs exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). The county shall pay fifty (50) percent of the same costs, or a greater amount if necessary to enforce the seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) cap. Each property owner in the sewer tax district shall be responsible for and pay his/her pro rata share of the costs, which shall be divided equally among all property owners within such district on the basis of the number of lots, whether improved or unimproved, or on the basis of the number of condominium units, as that term is defined by state law. Owners of exempt properties shall not be included in the calculation of costs. 
(b)  Each year, the finance director shall be responsible for calculating each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The tax commissioner shall be responsible for collecting from the property owners payment of their pro rata share of the fifty (50) percent of costs incurred within a sewer tax district. The finance director and tax commissioner shall be notified by the executive assistant at such time as the sewer tax district is approved to commence the collection and receipt of monies in payment of estimated assessment rates. Beginning January 1 of the year following the creation of the tax district and for each year thereafter, the tax statement issued to each such property owner shall include a separate line item tax showing each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs until paid. When all work within an approved sewer tax district is complete, the finance director and tax commissioner shall adjust estimated assessment rates pursuant to subsection 2-458(c) to reflect all costs incurred within a sewer tax district. 
(c)  The fifty (50) percent of costs, as limited by the seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) cap, shall be the special services sewer tax and shall become due and payable at the same time that other county taxes are due and payable. If such tax remains unpaid, the tax commissioner shall have the authority to issue a writ of fieri facias or execution against the property served, which writ shall have the same lien dignity and priority as writs of fieri facias or executions issued for other county taxes. Each annual special services sewer tax shall become a lien against the property served on January l of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for other county taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such special services sewer tax is paid. Any unpaid amount shall accrue penalty, interest and charges in the same manner and at the same rate as other delinquent county taxes. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-460. - Dissolution of the sewer tax district. 
On December 31 of the tenth year following creation of a sewer tax district, the sewer tax district shall stand dissolved by operation of law. Dissolution of a sewer tax district in no way affects or invalidates enforcement and collection of any outstanding lien(s) for costs owed pursuant to this article in a sewer tax district. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Secs. 2-461—2-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - SPECIAL WATER TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-500. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the Georgia Constitution gives the governing authority the power to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts, and to levy and collect taxes within such districts to pay for the cost of providing such services. 
(b)  Private water systems collect, pump, and distribute treated potable water. 
(c)  If a private water system is deficient and in need of repair, water main leaks and breaks can occur. Often, private water systems are not constructed in compliance with current county specifications, and are not repaired in a manner that reduces or eliminates water main leaks and breaks. 
(d)  When water main leaks and breaks occur in private water systems, the county's public water system may experience contamination, lower pressure, deterioration and wastage, which adversely affects water quality and jeopardizes the health and welfare of county citizens. 
(e)  The governing authority finds that failing private water systems may create potentially significant public health and safety hazards for all residents of the county. The governing authority further finds that costs associated with private water main leaks and breaks can be burdensome and, thus, it is in the best interests of all residents of the county to assist in the repair and upgrade of failing private water systems so that such systems can be incorporated into the county's public water system. 
(f)  To achieve this public purpose, the governing authority wants to make available a process to correct the failings in private water systems and thereafter incorporate these private water systems into the county's public water system. 
(g)  This article establishes a process to improve, regulate, maintain and operate water systems in special water tax districts (hereinafter referred to as "water tax districts") comprised of defined areas of the unincorporated county served by failing private water systems, as that term is defined in this article. 
(h)  Once a water tax district is created and the county repairs and upgrades the failing private water system, then the chief executive officer shall formally accept the private water system into the county's public water system. After the water improvements are completed, and the cost of the repair and upgrade is fully paid by the collection of taxes within the water tax district, then the water tax district shall be dissolved by operation of law. 
(i)  Once a failing private water system is upgraded to current specifications and/or repaired and incorporated in the county's public water system, then the governing authority believes that contamination, lower pressure, deterioration and wastage of the county's water supply will be reduced. Therefore, creating special water tax districts as provided in this article protects the health and welfare of the county's citizens by improving the water quality of the county's waterways, and is a cost-efficient method of reducing water line breaks. 
(j)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the governing authority to approve any request to establish a water tax district, and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the governing authority to approve the establishment of any such water tax district. 
(k)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the governing authority from creating a water tax district if it determines that the water tax district is required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the governing authority to make a determination to establish any such water tax district. 
(l)  This article shall not be used to create a water tax district to repair individual water service lines or laterals that run from a public or private water main to a structure, as such water service lines or laterals are regulated in chapter 25 of this Code. Repair, upgrade, and replacement of such water service lines or laterals remain the responsibility of the owner of the structure. 
(m)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to provide a mechanism to create water tax districts to service property that houses apartments, or to service a commercial, business, industrial, or office structure, enterprise or development. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-501. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment means a building containing four (4) or more independent, self-contained, residential units; each independent, self-contained, residential unit must be comprised of one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities. The term "apartment" does not include a condominium as that term is defined in state law. 
Complete petition means a petition that includes: (i) the signatures of the required number of owners of the property lying within the proposed water tax district in favor of such designation; and (ii) an accurate description of the property to be included in the proposed water tax district, including tax map parcel identification numbers, as used by the tax assessor and the tax commissioner. The petition is subject to verification of property owner signature(s) and property owner(s) boundary lines by the director of watershed management. 
Costs or costs incurred within a water tax district means the actual cost of designing, repairing, upgrading and constructing the water improvements in the water tax district, including the actual cost of surveying; engineering design; fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisition; construction, financing, legal, interest and other related expenses; and the county's administrative costs. Costs shall be amortized over a period of ten (10) years for each individual water tax district. 
Failing private water system means a private water system that has been determined to be in need of repair and deficient in a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. To qualify as a lot, the property must be residentially zoned, must house a single-family detached or attached dwelling(s), and legal ownership of the lot must be held in fee simple. The term "lot" includes lots that house common areas such as clubhouses, swimming pools, tennis courts, or recreational areas designed to be used by residents of a neighborhood or development and owned in fee simple by an individual or entity such as a homeowner's association. 
Private water system means a water system that: (i) has not been accepted by the county as part of the public water system, and (ii) services lots or condominium units. A water system is accepted by the county as part of the public water system only if: (i) it is designed, constructed, inspected, and tested according to county standards, and either (ii) a written, fully executed easement, right-of-way deed, or agreement conveying the water system to DeKalb County, Georgia, as grantee, exists and is recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County, or (iii) a final plat exists that includes a dedication and conveyance of the water main and is accepted and approved by the board of commissioners or the chief executive officer and filed with the clerk of superior court in the manner required by the applicable provisions of the law. 
Property owner means an owner of land, and includes condominium unit owner as that term is defined by state law. The term property owner does not include owners of land utilized as apartments, or a commercial, business, industrial, or office structures, enterprises or developments. 
Water main means a pipe that is designed and constructed to carry potable water. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-502. - Authority and responsibility. 
(a)  The chief executive officer shall be responsible for administering the water tax district program set forth in this article, and shall have the authority to promulgate policies, procedures, and forms necessary to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The executive assistant shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Advise prospective petitioners for a proposed water tax district of the procedures required for the establishment of such districts pursuant to this article; 
(2)  Establish the boundaries of a proposed water tax district in accordance with such criteria and in such manner as is necessary and appropriate; 
(3)  Establish an orderly system of numbering water tax districts created pursuant to this article, in consultation with the tax assessor and the tax commissioner; 
(4)  Provide standard form petitions for use by prospective petitioners which shall include a requirement to provide the name and address of an individual who shall serve as the petition originator and who shall agree to be the designated person to receive required notices from the county; 
(5)  Advise the petition originator of estimated assessment rates for owners of property lying within the proposed water tax district; 
(6)  Examine all filed petitions for accuracy and compliance with the provisions of this article; 
(7)  Submit the petition, if the petition is complete, accurate, and approved by the director of watershed management in the manner set forth in this article, to the governing authority together with estimated assessment rates for owners of property lying within the proposed water tax district, the date of dissolution of the proposed water tax district, and such other recommendations as the chief executive officer may deem appropriate; 
(8)  Coordinate the installation, repair, and upgrade of private water systems within water tax districts approved by the governing authority; 
(9)  Obtain the necessary surveys, engineering designs, plans, specification cost estimates, bid forms, and other documents necessary for the repair and/or upgrade of a private water system so that it can be accepted as part of the public water system; 
(10)  Seek establishment of a water tax district where appropriate and necessary, even if residents of the community served by the private water system do not petition the governing authority for creation of a water tax district; and 
(11)  Perform any and all other acts or duties necessary or proper to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-503. - Creation of a water tax district upon the petition of fifty-one percent of the property owners in areas where private water systems are located within a county easement or right-of-way. 
(a)  The owner(s) of not less than fifty-one (51) percent of the property within an area that is being served by a failing private water system located within a county easement or right-of-way in the unincorporated area of the county may file with the executive assistant a petition requesting creation of a water tax district. Each property owner in favor of designating a water tax district must sign a petition and print or type thereon his/her name, address of the property within the proposed water tax district, and the date of signature. The petition must also contain an accurate description of the property to be contained within the water tax district, including tax map parcel identification numbers, as used by the tax assessor and the tax commissioner. The petition must include copies of easements, right-of-way deeds, or other documents that conclusively show that the private water system is located within a county easement or right-of-way. Owners of private water systems that are not located within a county right-of-way or easement are not eligible to petition the governing authority for creation of a water tax district pursuant to this section. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition, the executive assistant shall review the petition to determine if it is complete and accurate. If complete and accurate, the executive assistant shall have an additional ten (10) days to forward the complete and accurate petition to the director of watershed management for approval. The director of watershed management shall determine if the boundaries of the proposed water tax district are definable and contiguous. If the boundaries of the proposed water tax district are determined to be definable and contiguous, the director of watershed management shall obtain a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia to determine if the private water system is in need of repair and deficient. The report shall include a professionally prepared cost estimate to repair the system and bring it into compliance with the current requirements of federal and state law, and this Code. The director of watershed management shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of the written, sealed engineering report to review and approve, or disapprove, the petition. The director of watershed management's review and approval of the petition shall be based on sound engineering and accounting practices, and the compatibility of the proposal with existing county facilities and systems. The director of watershed management shall not approve a petition until he/she has notified the affected county departments and county officials of the petition and secured their review and approval of the petition. The director of watershed management shall not approve a petition if the private water system is not located in a county easement or right-of-way. If disapproved, the director of watershed management shall provide written notice to the petition originator of the decision to disapprove the petition, and the reasons for that decision, within the sixty-day review period. The director of watershed management's decision in this regard is final. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete and accurate petition approved by the director of watershed management, the executive assistant shall submit to the governing authority a proposed agenda item and enabling resolution to create the water tax district, and provide such other information as is necessary and appropriate to authorize the creation of the water tax district. 
(d)  If decisions by county employees are not made in accordance with the time constraints set forth in subsections (a), (b) and (c) directly above, then the petition shall stand disapproved without further action by the county. 
(e)  Prior to the creation of a water tax district, the governing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider the creation of such district. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once within the thirty (30) days immediately preceding the public hearing. 
(f)  The governing authority shall make a decision on the creation of the water tax district within ninety (90) days of the first time the enabling resolution appears on the agenda for consideration by the governing authority. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-504. - Creation of a water tax district upon the petition of one hundred percent of the property owners in areas where private water systems are located on private property. 
(a)  All property owners within an area that is being served by a failing private water system located on private property in the unincorporated area of the county may file with the executive assistant a petition requesting creation of a water tax district. Each property owner in the proposed water tax district must sign a petition and print or type thereon his/her name, address of the property within the proposed water tax district, and the date of signature. The petition must also contain an accurate description of the property to be contained within the proposed water tax district, including tax map parcel identification numbers, as used by the tax assessor and the tax commissioner. 
(b)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of the petition, the executive assistant shall review the petition to determine if it is complete and accurate. If complete and accurate, the executive assistant shall have an additional ten (10) days to forward the complete and accurate petition to the director of watershed management for approval. The director of watershed management shall determine if the boundaries of the proposed water tax district are definable and contiguous. If the boundaries of the proposed water tax district are determined to be definable and contiguous, the director of watershed management shall obtain a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia to determine if the private water system is in need of repair and deficient. The report shall include a professionally prepared cost estimate to repair the system and bring it into compliance with the current requirements of federal and state law, and this Code. The director of watershed management shall have sixty (60) days from receipt of the written, sealed engineering report to review and approve, or disapprove, the petition. The director of watershed management's review and approval of the petition shall be based on sound engineering and accounting practices, and the compatibility of the proposal with existing county facilities and systems. The director of watershed management shall not approve a petition until he/she has notified the affected county departments and county officials of the petition and secured their review and approval of the petition. If disapproved, the director of watershed management shall provide written notice to the petition originator of the decision to disapprove the petition, and the reasons for that decision, within the sixty-day review period. The director of watershed management's decision in this regard is final. 
(c)  Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete and accurate petition approved by the director of watershed management, the executive assistant shall submit to the governing authority a proposed agenda item and enabling resolution to create the water tax district, and provide such other information as is necessary and appropriate to authorize the creation of the water tax district. 
(d)  If decisions by county employees are not made in accordance with the time constraints set forth in subsections (a), (b) and (c) directly above, then the petition shall stand disapproved without further action by the county. 
(e)  The governing authority shall make a decision on the creation of the water tax district within ninety (90) days of the first time the enabling resolution appears on the agenda for consideration by the governing authority. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-505. - Creation of a water tax district by the governing authority. 
(a)  The governing authority shall be authorized and empowered to create water tax districts in unincorporated areas of the county that are served by failing private water systems, and the creation of such water tax districts shall be upon such terms and conditions and in such manner as the governing authority may deem necessary or proper. 
(b)  Water tax districts created pursuant to this section shall not require a petition and shall not be required to comply with sections 2-503 or 2-504. Water tax districts created pursuant to this section do not require consent or support of the owners of the private water system or the property owners served by the private water system. Creation of water tax districts pursuant to this section shall not abrogate in any way the applicable legal requirements that a county must adhere to when seeking to acquire an interest in privately owned land. 
(c)  The governing authority shall not create a water tax district pursuant to this section until it has received a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, showing that a private water system is in need of repair and deficient. The report shall include a professionally prepared cost estimate to repair the system and bring it into compliance with the current requirements of federal and state law, and this Code. 
(d)  Prior to the creation of a water tax district, the governing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider the creation of such district. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once within the thirty (30) days immediately preceding the public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-506. - Individual water service lines or laterals, and other exemptions. 
(a)  No water tax district shall be forwarded to the governing authority or created by the governing authority to repair individual water service lines or laterals that run from a public or private water main to a structure; as such water service lines or laterals are regulated in chapter 25 of this Code. Repair, upgrade, and replacement of such water service lines or laterals remain the responsibility of the owner of the structure. 
(b)  No water tax district shall be forwarded to the governing authority or created by the governing authority for property that houses apartments, or a commercial, business, industrial, or office structure, enterprise or development. 
(c)  Property in a water tax district that is exempt from payment of ad valorem property taxes pursuant to state law shall be exempt from payment of any water tax imposed pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-507. - Fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisitions necessary to complete water improvements and construction services. 
All fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisitions necessary for the completion of water improvements within a water tax district created pursuant to sections 2-503 or 2-504 shall be conveyed at no cost to the county at an appropriate time designated by the chief executive officer after approval of the water tax district by the governing authority. The construction services in a water tax district shall not commence until the governing authority has approved the water tax district and all necessary fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisitions have been conveyed. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-508. - Acceptance of the private water system as part of the county public water system. 
(a)  Private water systems located within a county easement or right-of-way. If the governing authority creates a water tax district for a private water system located within a county easement or right-of-way, and if the director of watershed management certifies in writing that the necessary water improvements in the water tax district have been completed so that the water system is no longer failing and complies with all applicable requirements of law, including the time requirements in subsection (c), then upon receipt of such written certification, the chief executive officer shall execute the necessary documents, if any are needed, to accept the private water system as part of the county's public water system. Thereafter, the water system in the water tax district shall be part of the county's public water system, subject to county repair, upgrade requirements, and conditions for that system. 
(b)  Private water systems located on private property. If the governing authority creates a water tax district for a private water system located on private property, and if the director of watershed management certifies in writing that the necessary water improvements in the water tax district have been completed so that the private water system is no longer failing and complies with all applicable requirements of law, including the time requirements in subsection (c), then upon receipt of such written certification, the chief executive officer shall execute the necessary legal documents, if any are needed, to accept the private water system as part of the county's public water system. Title shall not be conveyed to the water system without prior conveyance of necessary written fee simple, easement or right-of-way deeds, or a fully executed agreement conveying the water system to DeKalb County, as grantee. If all such documents are executed and recorded in the deed records of the Clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County, and the requirements of this article have been met, thereafter, the water system in the water tax district shall be part of the county's public water system, subject to county repair, upgrade requirements, and conditions for that system. 
(c)  No private water system shall be finally accepted as part of the county's public water system until January 1 of the year after the finance director and the tax commissioner have adjusted all the property owners' estimated assessment rates to accurately reflect their pro rata shares of all costs incurred within the water tax district. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-509. - Calculation of taxes to be assessed in the water tax district. 
(a)  The property owners in the water tax district collectively shall pay fifty (50) percent of the costs incurred within a water tax district, but in no event shall each property owner's share of costs exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). The county shall pay fifty (50) percent of the same costs, or a greater amount if necessary to enforce the seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) cap. Each property owner in the water tax district shall be responsible for and pay his/her pro rata share of the costs, which shall be divided equally among all property owners within such district on the basis of the number of lots, whether improved or unimproved, or on the basis of the number of condominium units, as that term is defined by state law. Owners of exempt properties shall not be included in the calculation of costs. 
(b)  Each year, the finance director shall be responsible for calculating each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The tax commissioner shall be responsible for collecting from the property owners payment of their pro rata share of the fifty (50) percent of costs incurred within a water tax district. The finance director and tax commissioner shall be notified by the executive assistant at such time as the water tax district is approved to commence the collection and receipt of monies in payment of estimated assessment rates. Beginning January 1 of the year following the creation of the tax district and for each year thereafter, the tax statement issued to each such property owner shall include a separate line item tax showing each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs until paid. When all work within an approved water tax district is complete, the finance director and tax commissioner shall adjust estimated assessment rates pursuant to subsection 2-508(c) to reflect all costs incurred within a water tax district. 
(c)  The fifty (50) percent of costs, as limited by the seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) cap, shall be the special services water tax and shall become due and payable at the same time that other county taxes are due and payable. If such tax remains unpaid, the tax commissioner shall have the authority to issue a writ of fieri facias or execution against the property served, which writ shall have the same lien dignity and priority as writs of fieri facias or executions issued for other county taxes. Each annual special services water tax shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for other county taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such special services water tax is paid. Any unpaid amount shall accrue penalty, interest and charges in the same manner and at the same rate as other delinquent county taxes. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-510. - Dissolution of the water tax district. 
On December 31 of the tenth year following creation of a water tax district, the water tax district shall stand dissolved by operation of law. Dissolution of a water tax district in no way affects or invalidates enforcement and collection of any outstanding lien(s) for costs owed pursuant to this article in a water tax district. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Secs. 2-511—2-699. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - SPECIAL PUBLIC SEWER AND WATER TAX DISTRICTS 

Sec. 2-700. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  Article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the Georgia Constitution gives the governing authority the power to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts, and to levy and collect taxes within such districts to pay for the cost of providing such services. 
(b)  The county's public sewer, as that term is defined in section 25-145, now and as it may be amended hereafter, collects, treats, transports, and disposes of sewage, which is water-carried waste including human excrement and grey water, from residences, businesses, buildings and institutions. 
(c)  The county's public water system, as that term is defined in section 25-26, now and as it may be amended hereafter, collects, pumps, and distributes treated potable water to residences, businesses, buildings and institutions. 
(d)  When blockages and overflows occur, untreated sewage may spill over into the county's waterways, which adversely affects the county's water quality and jeopardizes the health and welfare of county citizens. 
(e)  When water main leaks and breaks occur, the county's public water system may experience contamination, reduced pressure and wastage, which adversely affects water quality and jeopardizes the health and welfare of county citizens. 
(f)  The governing authority finds that costs associated with sewer seepages, blockages and overflows, and water contamination, lower water pressure and water wastage can be burdensome and, thus, it is in the best interests of all residents of the county to assist in the repair and upgrade of the county's public sewer and water system. 
(g)  This article establishes a process to improve, regulate, maintain and operate the county's public sewer and water system in special sewer or water tax districts (hereinafter referred to as "public sewer or water tax districts") comprised of defined areas of the unincorporated county served by the county sewer or water system. 
(h)  After the sewer and water improvements are completed, and the cost of the repair and upgrade is fully paid by the collection of taxes within the public sewer or water tax district, then the public sewer or water tax district shall be dissolved by operation of law. 
(i)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the governing authority to approve any request to establish a public sewer or water tax district, and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the governing authority to approve the establishment of any such public sewer or water tax district. 
(j)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the governing authority from creating a public sewer or water tax district if it determines that the public sewer or water tax district is required to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county, and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the governing authority to make a determination to establish any such public sewer or water tax district. 
(k)  This article shall not be used to create a public sewer or water tax district to repair individual sewer and water service lines or laterals that run from a public or private sewer and water main to a structure, as such sewer and water service lines or laterals are regulated in chapter 25 of this Code. Repair, upgrade, and replacement of such sewer and water service lines or laterals remain the responsibility of the owner of the structure. 
(l)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to provide a mechanism to create sewer and water tax districts to service property that houses apartments, or to service a commercial, business, industrial, or office structure, enterprise or development. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-701. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment means a building containing four (4) or more independent, self-contained, residential units; each independent, self-contained, residential unit must be comprised of one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities. The term apartment does not include a condominium as that term is defined in state law. 
Costs or costs incurred within a public sewer or water tax district means the actual cost of designing, repairing, upgrading and constructing the sewer and water improvements in the sewer and water tax district, including the actual cost of surveying; engineering design; fee simple, right-of-way and/or easement acquisition; construction, financing, legal and other related expenses; and the county's administrative costs. Costs shall be amortized over a period of ten (10) years for each individual public sewer or water tax district. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. To quality as a lot, the property must be residentially zoned, must house a single-family detached or attached dwelling(s), and legal ownership of the lot must be held in fee simple. The term "lot" includes lots that house common areas such as clubhouses, swimming pools, tennis courts, or recreational areas designed to be used by residents of a neighborhood or development and owned in fee simple by an individual or entity such as a homeowner's association. 
Property owner means an owner of land, and includes condominium unit owner as that term is defined by state law. The term property owner does not include owners of land utilized as apartments, or commercial, business, industrial, or office structures, enterprises or developments. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-702. - Authority and responsibility. 
(a)  The chief executive officer shall be responsible for administering the public sewer and water tax district program set forth in this article, and shall have the authority to promulgate policies, procedures, and forms necessary to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The executive assistant shall, at a minimum: 
(1)  Establish the boundaries of a proposed public sewer or water tax district in accordance with such criteria and in such manner as is necessary and appropriate; 
(2)  Establish an orderly system of numbering public sewer and water tax districts created pursuant to this article, in consultation with the tax assessor and the tax commissioner; 
(3)  Submit a resolution to the governing authority together with estimated assessment rates for owners of property lying within the proposed public sewer or water tax district, the date of dissolution of the proposed public sewer or water tax district, and such other recommendations as the chief executive officer may deem appropriate; 
(4)  Coordinate the installation, repair, and upgrade of the public sewer and water system within public sewer or water tax districts approved by the governing authority; 
(5)  Obtain the necessary surveys, engineering designs, plans, specification cost estimates, bid forms, and other documents necessary for the repair and/or upgrade of the county's sewer and water system; 
(6)  Perform any and all other acts or duties necessary or proper to effectuate the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-703. - Creation of a public sewer or water tax district by the governing authority. 
(a)  The governing authority shall be authorized and empowered to create public sewer or water tax districts in unincorporated areas of the county, and the creation of such public sewer or water tax districts shall be upon such terms and conditions and in such manner as the governing authority may deem necessary or proper. 
(b)  Public sewer or water tax districts created pursuant to this article do not require consent or support of the owners of property within the public sewer or water district. 
(c)  The governing authority shall not create a public sewer or water tax district pursuant to this article until it has received a written, sealed engineering report prepared by a civil engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, showing that the county's public sewer and water system is in need of repair and deficient. The report shall include a professionally prepared cost estimate to repair the system and bring it into compliance with the current requirements of federal and state law, and this Code. 
(d)  Prior to the creation of a public sewer or water tax district, the governing authority shall hold a public hearing to consider the creation of such district. A notice of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation once within the thirty (30) days immediately preceding the public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-704. - Individual sewer and water service lines or laterals, and other exemptions. 
(a)  No public sewer or water tax district shall be forwarded to the governing authority or created by the governing authority to repair individual sewer and water service lines or laterals that run from a public or private sewer and water main to a structure; as such sewer and water service lines or laterals are regulated in chapter 25 of this Code. Repair, upgrade, and replacement of such sewer and water service lines or laterals remain the responsibility of the owner of the structure. 
(b)  No public sewer or water tax district shall be forwarded to the governing authority or created by the governing authority for property that houses apartments, or a commercial, business, industrial, or office structure, enterprise or development. 
(c)  Property in a public sewer or water tax district that is exempt from payment of ad valorem property taxes pursuant to state law shall be exempt from payment of any public sewer and water tax imposed pursuant to this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-705. - Calculation of taxes to be assessed in the public sewer or water tax district. 
(a)  The property owners in the public sewer or water tax district collectively shall pay fifty (50) percent of the costs incurred within a public sewer and water tax district, but in no event shall each property owner's share of costs exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00). The county shall pay fifty (50) percent of the same costs, or a greater amount if necessary to enforce the seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) cap. Each property owner in the public sewer and water tax district shall be responsible for and pay his/her pro rata share of the costs, which shall be divided equally among all property owners within such district on the basis of the number of lots, whether improved or unimproved, or on the basis of the number of condominium units, as that term is defined by state law. Owners of exempt properties shall not be included in the calculation of costs. 
(b)  Each year, the finance director shall be responsible for calculating each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs, in accordance with the provisions of this article. The tax commissioner shall be responsible for collecting from the property owners payment of their pro rata share of the fifty (50) percent of costs incurred within a public sewer and water tax district. The finance director and tax commissioner shall be notified by the executive assistant at such time as the public sewer and water tax district is approved to commence the collection and receipt of monies in payment of estimated assessment rates. Beginning January 1 of the year following the creation of the tax district and for each year thereafter, the tax statement issued to each such property owner shall include a separate line item tax showing each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs until paid. When all work within an approved public sewer and water tax district is complete, the finance director and tax commissioner shall adjust estimated assessment rates pursuant to subsection (c) to reflect all costs incurred within a public sewer and water tax district. 
(c)  The fifty (50) percent of costs, as limited by the seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) cap, shall be the special services public sewer and water tax and shall become due and payable at the same time that other county taxes are due and payable. If such tax remains unpaid, the tax commissioner shall have the authority to issue a writ of fieri facias or execution against the property served, which writ shall have the same lien dignity and priority as writs of fieri facias or executions issued for other county taxes. Each annual special services public sewer and water tax shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for other county taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such special services public sewer and water tax is paid. Any unpaid amount shall accrue penalty, interest and charges in the same manner and at the same rate as other delinquent county taxes. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Sec. 2-706. - Dissolution of the public sewer and water tax district. 
On December 31 of the tenth year following creation of a public sewer and water tax district, the public sewer and water tax district shall stand dissolved by operation of law. Dissolution of a public sewer and water tax district in no way affects or invalidates enforcement and collection of any outstanding lien(s) for costs owed pursuant to this article in a public sewer and water tax district. 
( Ord. No. 13-10 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
Secs. 2-707—2-899. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Part I of Ord. No. 12-07, adopted May 8, 2012, repealed the former Art. I, § 3-1, and Art. II, §§ 3-26—3-29, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Arts. I and II pertained to alarm systems in general and police alarms, and derived from the 1976 codification, §§ 10-1001, 4-2041—4-2044; Ord. No. 89-13, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 11, 1989; Ord. No. 90-14, § 1, adopted June 12, 1990; and Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 2001. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - ALARM ORDINANCE 

Sec. 3-1. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known as the "Alarm Ordinance" and may be cited as such. 
(b)  Purpose and intent. This article governs the responsible use and operation of alarm systems and implements measures to minimize the financial burden placed on the county by alarm system calls and false alarms. This article is not intended to create new or to expand existing, if any, legal obligations of the county. The registration fees set forth in this article are intended to require alarm system owners and alarm system companies to bear some of the cost of fire and police responses to all alarms system calls. The assessments set forth in this ordinance [from which this article is derived] are intended to ensure compliance with this article to defray a portion of the cost of false alarms, and to help reduce the number of false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-2. - Definitions. 
Words or terms not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means any system, device or mechanism which, when activated, transmits a telephonic, wireless, electronic, video, or other form of message or signal to an alarm system company, or emits an audible or visible signal that can be heard or seen by persons outside the protected premises, or transmits a message or signal beyond the protected premises in some other fashion. An alarm system may consist of one (1) or more components (e.g., motion detector, window breach detector, or similar components) all reporting to a central unit/system panel which, in turn, is connected or reports to an alarm system company, or constitutes a non-monitored alarm system, i.e., a system that does not transmit a message or signal to an alarm system company. The term "alarm system" does not include any system, device or mechanism primarily protecting a motor vehicle or constituting an individual medical alert. 
Alarm system company means a company that charges a fee to monitor an alarm system placed, located, or protecting premises in unincorporated DeKalb County, Georgia, including alarm system companies whose offices are physically located outside of DeKalb County's geographical boundaries. 
Alarm system owner means a person or company that owns or operates an alarm system and is not a customer of an alarm system company. 
Company means an individual, sole proprietorship or organization, whether the organization is operated by an individual, association, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
Customer of an alarm system company means a person who pays a fee to an alarm system company to monitor an alarm system placed, located, or protecting premises in unincorporated DeKalb County. 
Dispatch means the point in time when police officers, emergency medical service providers, or fire personnel are directed to go to a particular location in response to the activation of an alarm system. 
Executive assistant means the individual or his/her designee occupying the position of executive assistant as defined in section 14 of the Organizational Act of DeKalb County. 
False alarm means any activation of an alarm system that elicits a response from the police department, or the fire department when there is no appearance of an actual emergency or threatened criminal activity necessitating a police or fire response. This definition includes, but is not limited to, any alarm system activated as a result of weather, negligence, accident, mechanical failure, electrical failure, or electrical surge. Activation of an alarm system shall not be considered a false alarm if: 
(a)  The police department or fire department is notified prior to dispatch to cancel any response; 
(b)  The alarm system was intentionally activated based upon a reasonable belief that an emergency or actual or threatened criminal activity requiring immediate police or fire response existed; or 
(c)  The alarm system was activated by an attempted illegal entry of which there is some evidence. 
Fire department means the DeKalb County Fire Rescue Department. 
Local means within the geographical boundaries of the following counties: Cherokee, Clayton, DeKalb, Fulton, Gwinnett, Henry, Newton, Paulding and Rockdale. 
Police chief means the DeKalb County Police Chief. 
Police department means the DeKalb County Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-3. - Registration of alarm system companies. 
(a)  Registration required. No alarm system company may monitor an alarm system placed, located, or protecting premises in unincorporated DeKalb County unless such alarm system company registers with the police department and, as part of such registration, identifies the name, local address and local telephone number of at least one (1) person who resides or works at a designated local address who shall serve as the authorized agent of the alarm system company. The authorized agent shall be the individual who is authorized by the alarm system company to receive all notices, citations and to pay all registration fees or fines assessed against the alarm system company pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Reporting updated information. Whenever there is a change in any information recorded in an alarm system company's registration, the alarm system company must, within thirty (30) days of the change, update the registration on file with the police department. Registration information on file remains effective until ten (10) days after receipt of updated information. 
(c)  Address information. Every alarm system company shall provide to the police department, in whatever format the police chief may specify, including an electronic and searchable format, a complete listing of all customers of the alarm system company which shall include all addresses located in unincorporated DeKalb County that the alarm system company monitors, and the name and address of the person or company who receives the monitoring bill. Each alarm system company shall update the list in a manner and on a schedule as specified by the police chief. 
(d)  Registration fee. Alarm system companies shall be required to pay an annual registration fee in the amount established by official action of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-4. - Registration of alarm system owners. 
(a)  Registration required. No alarm system owner may operate an alarm system within unincorporated DeKalb County unless such alarm system is registered with the police department. 
(b)  Transfer of possession. Whenever there is any change in ownership of an alarm system and/or premises or property protected by an alarm system, the new owner must, within thirty (30) days of the change, register as an alarm system owner; alarm system registration is not transferable. 
(c)  Reporting updated information. Whenever there is a change in any information recorded in an alarm system owner's registration, the alarm system owner must, within thirty (30) days of the change, update the registration on file with the police department. Registration information on file remains effective until ten (10) days after receipt of updated information. 
(d)  Multiple registrations required. If more than one (1) alarm system protects a single property, each alarm system must be registered separately. If one (1) alarm system protects more than one (1) structure or property, then the alarm system must be registered multiple times, once as to each structure or property. 
(e)  Registration fee. Alarm system owners shall be required to pay an annual registration fee in an amount established by official action of the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-5. - Duties of an alarm system company and an alarm system owner. 
An alarm system company or owner shall: 
(a)  Appear, or cause another person to appear, at the location of the alarm system within forty-five (45) minutes of a request from the police department or fire department in order to provide access to the alarm system and/or de-activate a malfunctioning alarm system; 
(b)  Limit any externally audible sounds triggered by an alarm system to a duration of no more than fifteen (15) minutes after being activated; and 
(c)  Make readily available instructions about how to operate the alarm system. This obligation can be met by indicating on the alarm system how it operates; indicating on the alarm system where written instructions are to be found, provided that such written instructions are kept in the same room or space in which the alarm system is located; making someone available no more than forty-five (45) minutes after notice to answer questions posed by a police officer or fire personnel; or by any other means that may be approved by the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-6. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article if any alarm system owner, customer of an alarm system company, or an alarm system company: 
(1)  Fails to register if required to do so by this article; 
(2)  Fails to pay all applicable registration fees when due; 
(2)  Fails to update any information as required by this article; 
(3)  Activates any alarm system for the purpose of summoning a police officer or fire personnel with actual knowledge that there is no emergency; 
(4)  Uses an auto-dialer or telephonic recording, message, signal or warning to notify the DeKalb County Emergency 9-1-1 System of any alarm system activation; 
(5)  Connects directly to an alarm display panel located in the communications center of the police department and/or fire department without authorization; or 
(6)  Aids or abets in the commission of an act prohibited by this section. 
(b)  The police department is authorized to disable immediately any alarm system, communication or device that is directly connected to an alarm display panel located in the communications center of the police department and/or fire department without authorization. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-7. - Jurisdiction and penalties. 
Any alarm system company, customer of an alarm system companies or alarm system owner who does anything prohibited by sections 3-3, 3-4, 3-5 and 3-6, or who fails to do anything required by these sections, upon citation or summons by the police chief, code enforcement officer or other authorized county employee, and judgment or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the Recorders Court of DeKalb County, shall be subject to appropriate penalties as imposed by the court. If convicted of violating any provision of sections 3-3, 3-4, 3-5 and 3-6, the court shall impose a minimum fine of four hundred and ninety-nine dollars ($499.00) in addition to any other authorized punishment imposed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-8. - False alarms and assessments. 
(a)  An alarm system owner shall not activate or allow a false alarm to be activated through the owner's alarm system. 
(b)  A customer of an alarm system company shall not activate or allow a false alarm to be activated through alarm systems placed, located, or protecting premises in unincorporated DeKalb County. Customers of alarm system companies shall be subject to an assessment for multiple false alarms only where the false alarm occurs at the same location within the preceding twelve-month period. 
(c)  For a failure to abide by the terms of this section, assessments will be as follows: 
(1)  No assessment for a first false alarm. 
(2)  An assessment of fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second false alarm. 
(3)  An assessment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a third false alarm. 
(4)  An assessment of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a fourth false alarm. 
(5)  An assessment of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for a fifth false alarm. 
(6)  An assessment of four hundred dollars ($400.00) for a sixth false alarm. 
(7)  An assessment of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a seventh false alarm. 
(8)  An assessment of six hundred dollars ($600.00) for an eighth false alarm. 
(9)  An assessment of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for a ninth false alarm. 
(10)  An assessment of eight hundred dollars ($800.00) for a tenth false alarm. 
(11)  An assessment of nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for each false alarm after the tenth false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-9. - Notification and appeal process for assessments. 
(a)  The police chief shall have the authority to issue a notice of assessment, hereinafter referred to as the "notice," to alarm system owners, and/or customers of alarm system companies who do not abide by the requirements of section 3-8 of this article. The notice shall briefly describe the facts forming the basis for the assessment, include the date and address of the incident, the amount of the assessment owed, and advise the person of the right to appeal the notice. The notice shall be sent via United States mail to the alarm system owner or customer of an alarm system company at the address on file as provided by this article. 
(b)  If no appeal is filed in the manner required by this article, the assessment shall be paid to the police department. Should the alarm system owner or a customer of an alarm system company desire to appeal a notice, an appeal must be filed with the police chief within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date reflected on the notice. The person or entity filing the appeal, hereinafter referred to as the "appellant," must pay to the police department an appeal bond in an amount equal to the assessment at issue, and a non-refundable appeal filing fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) at or before the appeal will be accepted for processing. The appeal shall be in the form of a letter, and shall identify all of the reasons that appellant believes the notice is improper or invalid. If the police chief agrees with reasons cited by the appellant in the appeal, the notice may be dismissed and no assessment shall be charged. 
(c)  If the notice is not dismissed by the police chief, he/she shall enter or docket the appeal and notify the appropriate county representative(s) or witness(es) and the appellant(s), in writing, of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The hearing shall be held before the executive assistant within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date the appeal is entered or docketed. The parties may be represented by counsel, may present evidence, and may examine and cross-examine witnesses; the standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. A party is permitted no more than fifteen (15) minutes to present that party's case. Presentation of arguments and evidence may be in oral or written form. The executive assistant shall grant or deny the appeal by issuing and mailing a written decision to the police chief and the appellant(s) within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the hearing. 
(d)  The executive assistant shall grant the appeal if he/she finds that issuance of the notice was based on an erroneous finding of material fact, or was arbitrary or capricious. If an appeal is granted, no assessment shall be charged to the appellant(s) and the appeal bond shall be returned to the appellant(s) by United States mail. If the appeal is denied, the appeal bond shall be kept by the county, and deposited into the special services tax district fund for basic and nonbasic police services. Should the executive assistant fail to issue a timely decision, the appeal will be deemed granted and no assessment shall be charged to the appellant(s). The decision of the executive assistant shall be final. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent or limit the county from pursuing any and all available legal and equitable remedies to collect fines, assessments and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-10. - Enforcement and awareness classes. 
The police chief shall develop guidelines and forms, make recommendations and take such other steps as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. The police chief may create and implement awareness classes and may request the assistance of alarm system companies to develop and implement such classes. The classes shall be open to the public and shall provide instruction on how to reduce false alarms. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Sec. 3-11. - Disclaimer/immunities. 
(a)  By enacting this article, the county is seeking only to promote the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens and is not waiving any of the immunities provided to it or its officers by state or federal law. 
(b)  By enacting this article, no special duty or special relationship is created between the county, including its police officers and fire personnel, and persons who own real or personal property protected by an alarm system, persons who are physically present at or in the vicinity of property protected by an alarm system, or anyone else who may be relying upon or operating an alarm system in any way, including without limitation alarm system owners or alarm system companies. There is no intent to create liability to any person who claims that the enactment, enforcement or violation of this article caused injury or loss of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 12-07, Pt. I, 5-8-12) 
Secs. 3-12—3-49. - Reserved. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages in parks, § 19-30. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; general authority of local governing authority to license and regulate alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2, 3-4-49, 3-4-50, 3-4-90 et seq., 3-50-40 et seq., 3-6-40 et seq., 3-4-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult entertainment establishment means any one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Adult bookstore. An establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, printed material, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this subsection, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It may be presumed that a business has a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in adult material if any one (1) of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; or 
(2)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; or 
(3)  Twenty (20) percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; or 
(4)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the retail floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); or 
(5)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
(b)  Adult business. An establishment, other than those expressly specified in this section, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. 
(c)  Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(d)  Adult minimotion picture theater. An enclosed building, or enclosed or semi-enclosed room or booth within an enclosed building, with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(e)  Adult motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(f)  Adult video store. An establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, digital video devices (DVDs), movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this subsection, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It may be presumed that a business has a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in adult material if any one (1) of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; or 
(2)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; or 
(3)  Twenty (20) percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; or 
(4)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); 
(5)  Twenty (20) percent of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
(g)  Erotic entertainment/dance establishment. A nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by dancers, entertainers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. These establishments are also regulated pursuant to section 4-104 of the Code. 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Bottle club means any restaurant, music hall, theater or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
Day means a period of time from 12:00 a.m. through 11:59 p.m. 
Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Family means and includes any person related to the person indicated within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity, as determined according to civil law. 
Fixed salary means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include a commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities that are added to the bills under club regulation shall not be considered as profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Full service kitchen means a kitchen consisting of a commercial sink and refrigerator and either a commercial stove, grill or microwave oven approved by the health director and the police department. 
Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of partnership or corporation, all partners, officers and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
Liter means metric measurement currently used by the United States. 
Mainstream performance establishment means: theater, movie theatre, concert hall, museum, educational institution which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description, or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description, or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. An adult entertainment establishment within the meaning of section 15-401 of this Code is not a traditional or mainstream performance establishment within the meaning of this section. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. "Manufacturer" also means: 
(a)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying or blending any distilled spirits. 
(b)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer. 
(c)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state that meets all of the following criteria: 
(a)  Has been in existence at least one (1) year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Has at least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members. 
(c)  Owns, hires or leases a building space within a building for the reasonable use of its members with all of the following: 
(1)  Full service kitchen and dining room space and equipment. 
(2)  A sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guests. 
(d)  Has no member, officer, agent or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
Retailer, retail dealer, retail licensee or retail outlet means any person or other legal entity selling alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(b)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(a)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(b)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(c)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(d)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks or female breasts; or 
(e)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(f)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(g)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. "Wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-2002, 7-2081; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, § I, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 20A-03, Pt. I, 8-12-03) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2(24). 
Secs. 4-2—4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND TAXATION OF RETAIL SALES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and occupational taxes, § 15-26 et seq.; local taxes on alcohol, App. B, § 1504. 
State Law reference— Local licensing and taxation of retail sales of alcohol, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2, 3-4-40 et seq., 3-4-80, 3-4-90 et seq., 3-5-40 et seq., 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-40, 3-6-60 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-26. - Inspection of premises. 
The police department, the development department, and/or the finance department may inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the county during the establishments hours of operation. Such inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2008; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-27. - Agent for service of process. 
All establishments licensed under this article must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person must be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the county in such form as the county prescribes. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2010(j); Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-28. - Collection of delinquent sums. 
If any person fails to pay the sum due under this article, the finance department shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent and such person's property for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2011; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-29. - Audits. 
If the finance department deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of a licensee under the provisions of this article, it shall so notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2009; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-30. - Temporary permits. 
Any nonprofit civic organization may be issued a temporary alcoholic beverage permit for two (2) events annually for a period of one (1) day per event. Such a permit shall have the effect of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and shall authorize sale by the drink of such alcoholic beverages as are specified in the permit. The nonprofit civic organization must make application and pay a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file with the clerk of the board of commissioners. Such civic organizations shall comply with all the general ordinances and the licensing and regulations for a consumption-on-the-premises establishment, with the exception of having a full-service kitchen requirement. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2101; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Secs. 4-31—4-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES 

Sec. 4-46. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage without a license from the county to sell or possess for sale alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)  The county license shall not be valid without current state license(s). 
(c)  A retail establishment shall not have alcoholic beverages on the sales floor or in cooler unless the establishment has a current county alcoholic beverage license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2003; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-47. - Sale in unincorporated area of county; scope of license. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the unincorporated area of the county under a license granted by the board of commissioners upon the terms and conditions provided. 
(b)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this Code and state law. 
(c)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be revoked and annulled, and is subject to any future ordinances which may be enacted." 
(Code 1976, § 7-2001; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-48. - Separate license for each location. 
A separate application for an alcoholic beverage license must be made for each location and a separate license must be issued. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2005; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-49. - Application. 
(a)  All persons or entities desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the finance department. 
(b)  The application shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The proposed business to be carried on; 
(3)  If a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; 
(4)  If a corporation, the names and addresses of the officers; 
(5)  The name and address of the agent for service of process; 
(6)  The name and address of the manager; 
(7)  The names and addresses of all stockholders holding more than ten (10) or more percent or of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment; and 
(8)  Such other information as may be required by the finance department and/or the police department. If the manager changes, the applicant must furnish the finance department and the police department with the name and address of the new manager and other information as is requested within ten (10) days of such change. 
(c)  All applications for a package liquor license, both original and renewals, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include names and addresses of all persons possessing a legal ownership in the subject establishment, together with any interest that each person or that any family member of each person has in any other retail liquor store located in the county or any other place; the ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; the amount of rental paid for the land and building, the manner in which such rental is determined, and to whom and at what intervals the rental is paid; the names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sublessor of the land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other legal interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and any other information called for by the finance department to ensure compliance with the provisions of this division. Any change in relationship herein declared must be filed when made with the finance department and failure to so file within a period of ten (10) days after this change is made shall be grounds for the county to cancel the license. 
(d)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the finance department or the police department and failure to furnish this data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of the request shall automatically dismiss, with prejudice, the application. By filing an application, applicants agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the finance department or the police department and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the license. The failure to produce the person within thirty (30) days after being requested shall result in the automatic dismissal, with prejudice, of the application. An application shall not be considered complete until the applicant has furnished all data, information and records requested of them by the finance department or the police department. 
(e)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(f)  In all instances in which an application is denied or dismissed with prejudice under the provisions of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the final date of such denial. 
(g)  The finance department shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provisions of this chapter within thirty (30) days of filing a properly completed application. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal to the alcohol beverage review board under the provisions of this division within fifteen (15) days from date of notice. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-2007, 7-2146; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, §§ II, III, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-50. - Persons eligible. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person or entity, where the majority of stock or partnership interests are controlled by individual(s) who are not citizens of the United States or aliens lawfully admitted for permanent residence. If, an entity is owned by other entities, then this requirement shall apply to the majority stockholders of the other entities to insure that a license is not granted to an ineligible person or entity. 
(b)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person that has not attained the age of eighteen (18). 
(c)  No retailer or consumption on premises license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be granted where the applicant is not a resident of the county or municipality within the state where the sales of distilled spirits is authorized. 
(d)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, the provisions of this section shall apply to all stockholders with ownership of ten (10) or more percent, corporate officers and all partners. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued to jointly to the corporation and local manager of the business or to the registered agent designated pursuant to section 4-27. In the case of a partnership, the license shall be issued to the partner(s) with the highest ownership percentage. In the case of a sole proprietorship, the sole proprietor shall be the applicant and the licensee. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person, or the spouse of any person, who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within the last ten (10) years, has been on felony probation or parole within the last five (5) years, or released from prison on felony charges within the last five (5) years prior to filing an application. The term conviction includes any adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person, or the spouse of any person, who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years prior to filing an application. The term "conviction" includes any adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. The term "moral turpitude" shall include any violation that involves gambling, drugs, or a driving while intoxicated conviction in less than five (5) years from a prior driving while intoxicated conviction, and sale of alcohol with the exception of any violations of sections 4-106 or 4-108. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any county employee of a department regulating alcoholic beverages, or the employee's spouse or minor children, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the county. 
(h)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the county previously revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. 
(i)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person or entity that has violated this Code section within one (1) year prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(j)  The finance department may decline to issue a license when any person having any interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this article for the licensee. 
(k)  The inability of the finance department or the police department to verify any statement or information required to be disclosed or to be able to adequately conduct a full investigation of an applicant or a place of business due to foreign background, ties or interest or for any reason beyond the finance department or the police department's control shall be, in addition to all other grounds, cause for dismissal of any license, with prejudice and if any license has been granted shall be cause for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2010(a)—(i); Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, §§ IV—VI, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-51. - Issuance of license and employee permits; adult entertainment employee permits; employee permit fees. 
(a)  Before a license shall be granted under this division, the applicant shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the board of commissioners regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant for a license to sell alcohol shall pay a license fee in the amount to be established by action of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  A license will be issued or the issuance of a license will be denied within thirty (30) days after submission of a properly completed application. If a license is not issued or denied within the time frame specified herein, the license shall be automatically approved. 
(c)  All employees of any licensed establishment must hold a permit. A permit fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit the amount of which shall be established by action of the board of commissioners. The conditions and procedures governing the issuance of alcohol permits for employees are set forth herein and in sections 4-127, 4-148 and 4-163 of this Code. 
(d)  Any employee permit identified in this article will be issued or the issuance of a permit will be denied within thirty (30) days after submission of a properly completed application. A permit shall be valid for twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. If a permit is not issued or denied within the time frame specified herein, the permit shall be automatically approved. 
(e)  Employees employed in an adult entertainment establishment where alcohol is consumed, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall be required to have a permit in addition to the alcohol permit provided for in section 4-51(c). A permit fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the permit in the amount to be established by action of the board of commissioners. The amount of that fee may vary for different categories of employee. The categories of adult entertainment employee permit, shall include, but are not limited to, dancers/performer, bartender/waiter, bouncer and others. Permits issued to dancers/entertainers and bartenders/waiters shall authorize the holder to work in such capacity in any adult entertainment establishment in the county. Accordingly, the fee for such category of employee will be fixed at a higher rate. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors, such as entertainers, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment, shall be licensed as employees regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. Each independent contractor shall be required to have and maintain his or her separate business license. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair, or maintenance services for licensee. 
(f)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments shall not be less than eighteen (18) years of age. No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment as defined in Article I until such person has filed an application, paid the fee for and obtained a work permit from the police department. 
(1)  No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including but not limited to performers, entertainers, waiters, bouncers, bartenders, discjockeys, and musicians who has been convicted in this or any other county or state or in any federal court within five (5) years immediately prior to the application for employment for soliciting for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors or any felony or misdemeanor of moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. "Be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the premises, for compensation or otherwise. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair or maintenance services for the licensee. 
(2)  No person requiring a permit may be employed or work in any adult entertainment establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee for and obtained a work permit from the police department. 
(3)  An application for a permit shall include the applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases and/or any other name by which the applicant has ever been known, address, business name and address, date of birth with written proof thereof, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The police department shall make a complete search relative to any police record of the applicant. If there is no record of a violation of this section of the Code, or of any other section of the Code, the police department shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(4)  Any permit for employment issued hereunder shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked or suspended. The police department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employment. 
(5)  Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times during their working hours have said permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(6)  Employees shall provide their employer with a legible copy of the same which copy shall be maintained by the employer as part of its business records. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2018; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, § VII, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 01-12, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
State Law reference— License fees authorized and limitations thereon, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-50, 3-5-42. 
Sec. 4-52. - Expiration; renewal. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. A licensee who desires to renew the license shall file application, with the requisite fee heretofore provided, with the finance department on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. All applications for renewal will be reviewed by the finance department. Licensees do not have a right to automatic renewal and must be in compliance with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year; otherwise penalties and interest will be assessed. No renewal license shall be granted after December 31, but such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(b)  All licenses granted under this division shall be for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. License fees shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. License fees are not refundable. 
(c)  Any person renewing any license issued under this division who pays the required fee or any portion thereof after the date set by law for such payment shall pay, in addition to the annual fee, a late-payment penalty in addition to an assessment of interest at the rate specified by section 2-112. 
(d)  Failure to fully complete the renewal application, as required by the finance department will delay the renewal. The failure to furnish complete information within thirty (30) days after being requested shall result in automatic denial of the renewal. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2017; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-53. - Transferability. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of the licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of death, or until expiration of the license, or until approval of a new license, whichever occurs first, provided however that the finance department must be notified of the licensee's death within ten (10) days of the death or the license shall automatically terminate on the eleventh day following the death of the licensee. 
(c)  If a license in surrendered, or a licensee severs the association with the licensed establishment, the establishment may continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of surrender, or from the date determined to be the date of severance, provided however that the finance department must be notified of the change within ten (10) days of the severance or the license shall automatically terminate on the eleventh day following the date of the severance. Upon issuance of a new license, the authorization to sell under the previous license shall be revoked by operation of law. No additional license fees shall be required during the period for which the original license was issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one (1) or more of the partners in the partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one (1) or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of issuance of the license; nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing stock holdings to a total of ten (10) or more percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having a financial interest in the entity. 
(e)  Should a transfer of location be approved, with no change of ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(f)  Except as provided above, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license issued under this division automatically, without the necessity of a hearing. 
(g)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each on the new ownership and the old ownership. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the county for one (1) year from the date of the violation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2006; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, §§ VIII, IX, 3-14-00) 
Sec. 4-54. - Display. 
The county alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view at the place of business of the licensee. The finance director or designee shall ensure that all licenses for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages show: 
(1)  Any special land use permit conditions imposed by the board of commissioners for the establishment, 
(2)  The allowed hours of operation for the location and 
(3)  Written notice to the licensee that the license with the hours of operation must be posted in a public and conspicuous place within the licensee's establishment. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2004; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 09-04, Pt. I, 2-10-09) 
Sec. 4-55. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be suspended or revoked by the finance department if the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the original, renewal or transfer application for a license or omits information required in the original, renewal or transfer application for a license and for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Whenever the state revokes any permit or license to sell alcoholic beverages, the county license shall thereupon be automatically revoked. The police department, upon notice of such revocation from the finance department, shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease. 
(c)  Any licensed establishment that is found to be in violation of section 4-104 shall be subject to immediate license revocation in addition to all other penalties. 
(d)  The finance department shall revoke the Sunday sales license of any licensee where the establishment has been found in violation of the Sunday sales ordinance. 
(e)  The finance department shall revoke the license of any licensee where the licensee has sold alcoholic beverages at a time other than the time permitted by the license. 
(f)  The finance department shall revoke the license of any licensee whose license has been suspended three (3) or more times in any consecutive twenty-four-month period. 
(g)  The finance department shall revoke the license for any premises where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(h)  The finance department may suspend or revoke the license of any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this division at any time such knowledge becomes known to it. 
(i)  An act or omission of a licensee, majority stockholder, general or managing partner, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of the license in accordance with the provisions of this division when evidence is submitted to the finance department that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues. In the case of a violation by an employee, the licensee may submit evidence to the finance department that the acts of the employee were not known to or under reasonable circumstances should not have been known to the licensee, were not condoned by the licensee, and that the licensee has established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring, and that the licensee has not failed to properly train or supervise employees to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(j)  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, a violation of sections 4-106 or 4-108 by a licensee, majority stockholder, general or managing partner or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment shall result in the following action by the finance department: 
(1)  The first violation shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than two (2) days, which shall be scheduled to include a Friday and Saturday. 
(2)  The second violation within a consecutive twenty-four (24) month period shall result in license suspension for a period of not less than ten (10) days which shall be scheduled to begin on a Friday. 
(3)  The third violation within a consecutive twenty-four (24) month period shall result in license revocation. 
(k)  The finance department shall revoke the license of any licensee where the establishment has been declared a public nuisance or has created a danger to public safety as determined by the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2022; Ord. No. 92-28, § 1, 9-8-92; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-56. - Alcoholic beverage review board. 
(a)  There is established an alcoholic beverage review board which shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To hear appeals from decisions of the finance department denying the issuance or renewal of any license pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the county; 
(2)  To hear appeals from the decisions of the finance department revoking or suspending any license pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the county; 
(3)  To hear appeals from the decisions of the police department denying the issuance of permits pertaining to employment in a licensed establishment; 
(4)  To hear appeals from the decisions of the police department revoking or suspending an employee permit to an employee of a licensed establishment. 
(b)  The alcoholic beverage review board shall be composed of the deputy public works director for development, the deputy director for finance, the chief of police, the director of the department of fire and rescue services, and the health director, or their designees. The deputy director for finance or his designee shall not sit as a member of the alcohol beverage review board when the hearing relates to a license or permit issued by the finance department. The chief of police or his designee shall not sit as a member of the alcohol beverage review board when the hearing relates to a permit issued by the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2023; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 01-12, Pt. I, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 5, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-57. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license or permit under Articles II and III shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter set forth, provided however that upon conviction or plea of nolo contendere by a court of competent jurisdiction that results in the suspension or revocation of a license or permit, the license or permit shall be deemed immediately revoked or suspended by the alcoholic beverage review board appealable pursuant to subsection (f). 
(b)  The issuing department shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license or permit. Such written notification shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right of appeal. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the issuing department may have a review thereof by appeal to the alcoholic beverage review board. Such appeal shall be by written petition filed with the county within fifteen (15) days after the final decision or action by the county. 
(c)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty days of the date of filing with the issuing department, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the issuing department. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(d)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be forwarded to the relevant issuing department at the conclusion of the hearing. The issuing department shall have the duty to notify the appellant of the action of the action of the alcoholic beverage review board. 
(e)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall not be set aside unless found to be any of the following: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by substantial evidence on the record as a whole; 
(3)  Unreasonable. 
(f)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2024; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 01-12, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 4-58. - Service of notices. 
For the purpose of this section, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2025; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-59. - Consumption sales only. 
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell liquor by the package or bottle, except as provided in section 4-191. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2044; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-60. - Fee deposit and investigative and administrative costs. 
(a)  Each application for a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(b)  Each application for a license to sell beer and wine for on-premises consumption shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to its being issued, the license fee shall be refunded but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(c)  Each application for a license as a private club shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the sum paid for investigation and administrative cost shall be retained. 
(d)  Each application for a license to sell distilled spirits by the package shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused or if the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(e)  Each application for a license to sell beer and wine by the package shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount established by the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws the application prior to issuance of the license, the license fee shall be refunded but the sum paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-2042, 7-2062, 7-2084, 7-2146, 7-2164; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Secs. 4-61—4-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TAX ON SALES BY THE DRINK[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-131 et seq. 

Sec. 4-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means that person designated by a licensee in the application for a permit to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink in the county. 
Alcoholic beverage means any beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation including rum, whiskey, gin and other spirituous liquors by whatever name called; but not including malt beverages, fermented wines or fortified wines. 
Drink means any alcoholic beverage served for consumption on the premises which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
Licensee means any person who holds a license or permit from the county to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
Monthly period means the calendar month of the year. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee to the purchaser, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverage by the drink. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this division. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4001; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-72. - Imposed; rate. 
There is imposed and levied upon every sale of an alcoholic beverage purchased by the drink in the county a tax in the amount of three (3) percent of the purchase price of such beverage. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4002; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
State Law reference— Maximum tax rate, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-131. 
Sec. 4-73. - Purchaser's receipt; credit or deferred payment. 
Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink operating a place of business in the county shall maintain detailed sales records indicating each transaction by beverage and food served, its price and total. Where the charges for food and drink are satisfied by credit or deferred payment, the payment of the tax to the licensee may be deferred in a like manner; however, the licensee shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that such credits are incurred. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4003; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-74. - Liability for tax; authority to collect. 
Every licensee or the licensee's agent shall collect the tax herein imposed from purchasers of alcoholic beverages by the drink sold within the licensee's licensed premises. Such licensee or agent shall furnish such information as may be requested by the finance department to facilitate the collection of the tax. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4004; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-75. - Determinations, returns and payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All taxes collected by any licensee or agent under this division shall be due and payable to the finance department monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Return; limit of filing; persons required to file; execution. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance department in such form as the finance department may prescribe by every licensee or agent liable for the payment of tax. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, amount of tax collected or authorized due for the related period, and such other information as may be required by the finance department. 
(d)  Delivery of return and readmittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the finance department. 
(e)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, chap. 8, art. 1 [§ 48-8-1 et seq.]. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4005; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-132; rate of deduction established, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
Sec. 4-76. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the finance department is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax to be paid to the finance department by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One (1) or more than one (1) deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more than one (1) monthly period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate specified by section 2-112. Interest shall be assessed for each month or fraction thereof from the close of the monthly period in which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments, for another period, against penalties, and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on overpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 4-77, subsection (c). 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, the penalty amount specified in section 2-112 shall be added to the amount of the deficiency. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provision of this division or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of determination. The finance department shall give to the licensee written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 9-11-4 and shall be addressed to the licensee at the licensee's address as it appears in the records of the county. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this division, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States Post Office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this division or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of every month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period expires last. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4006; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-77. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any licensee fails to make a return, the finance department shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total sales in the county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the licensee failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in or may come into the possession of the finance department. Upon the basis of this estimate, the finance department shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the county, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to ten (10) percent thereof. One (1) or more determinations may be made for one (1) or for more than one (1) period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments for a period or penalties against penalties and/or interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate specified in section 2-112. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof from the close of the monthly period in which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this division or rules and regulations, penalties shall be assessed in accordance with section 2-112. 
(e)  Notice; manner of service. Promptly after making a determination, the finance department shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4007; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-78. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax. 
Any licensee who fails to pay the tax to the county, or fails to pay any amount of such tax required to be collected and paid to the county, within the time required, shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax, or amount of the tax, in addition to the tax or amount of the tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as set forth in section 4-77, subsection (c). 
(Code 1976, § 3-4008; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-79. - Collection of tax; security deposit; refunds. 
(a)  The finance department, whenever deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this division, may require any person subject hereto to deposit such security as the department may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the department, shall be the greater of twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which the return was filed, determined in such a manner as the department deems proper, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The amount of the security may be increased by the department subject to the limitations herein provided. The department may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the board of commissioners, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination, and shall be addressed to the person at the person's address as it appears in the records of the department. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid, or if a determination has been made against the person which remains unpaid, the finance department may, not later than three (3) years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the county having in their possession or under their control any credits or other personal property belonging to the delinquent, or owing any debts to the delinquent. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the finance department consents to a transfer or disposition or until twenty (20) days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within five (5) days after receipt of the notice advise the finance department of all these credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance department may bring an action in the courts of this state, or any other state, or of the United States in the name of the county to collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  If any operator liable for any amount under this division sells out the business or quits the business, the successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover the tax liability until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance department showing that same has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the finance department shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the finance department of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this division, it may be offset as provided in section 4-76, subsection (c), or it may be refunded, provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the finance department within three (3) years from the date of payment. The claim may be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the finance department. If the claim is approved by the finance department and the board of commissioners, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid, and the balance may be refunded to this person, or such person's administrators or executors. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4009; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-80. - Administration. 
(a)  The finance department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this division. 
(b)  The finance department may make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this division or other laws of the county and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this division and the collection of taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Every licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in this county to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance department may require. 
(d)  The finance department may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  In administration of the provisions of this division, the finance department may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having possession or custody of information relating to sales of alcoholic beverages which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance department when required by the department and shall set forth the price charged for each sale, the date of each sale and such other information as the department may require. 
(f)  The finance department shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this division, except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, and assignees, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4010; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-81. - Revocation or suspension of license. 
The failure to timely pay the tax imposed by this division for three (3) consecutive months or four (4) times in a twelve-month period shall render the dealer or person liable therefor subject to suspension of the alcoholic beverage license for ten (10) consecutive days beginning on a Friday. The failure to timely pay the tax imposed by this section six (6) times within a twelve-month period shall render the dealer or person liable therefor subject to revocation of the alcoholic beverage license. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4011) 
Sec. 4-82. - No county excise tax in municipalities. 
No excise tax shall be imposed, levied and collected in any portion of the county wherein such tax is being imposed, levied and collected by a municipality within the county. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4012) 
Secs. 4-83—4-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPERATIONAL RULES FOR RETAILERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— General authority to regulate retail sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-101. - Posting of regulations. 
(a)  All licensees under this chapter shall post in a prominent location on licensed premises, in a manner whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons, an approved sign setting forth or summarizing the laws of the county and the state in regard to the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage or intoxicated persons. 
(b)  Each such sign shall be of a size and configuration approved by the police department, and shall include either the language of the applicable sections, or summaries approved by the police department. 
(c)  The police department may design and have printed approved signs, which shall be made available to licensees at a price to be established by the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2013; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-101.1. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell at retail, except as allowed under subsection (b): 
(1)  Any wine or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds, educational facility, college campus or adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  Any distilled spirits in or within two hundred (200) yards of any residence or church or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, school grounds, educational building, educational facility, college campus or adult entertainment establishment. 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within two hundred (200) yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(b)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell for consumption on the premises, except as allowed under subsection (h): 
(1)  Any wine or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any school, school grounds, educational facility or college campus; 
(2)  Any distilled spirits in or within two hundred (200) yards of any church or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, school grounds, educational facility or college campus; 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within two hundred (200) yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(c)  The school building, school grounds, college campus, educational facility or educational building referred to in this section applies only to state, county, city, church school, day care, kindergarten or buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, distance shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Every license application shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises, showing the distance of the uses described in this section and a certificate of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer that the location complies with these distance requirements. 
(e)  No license in effect as of April 30, 1998, shall be revoked before its date of expiration or renewal or transfer denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this section, if the license was granted in reliance on another method of measurement. No application for a license shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this section if a prior license for the same location was in effect on April 30, 1998. No application for a license or renewal shall be denied by reason of the method of measurement set out in this section, if such application is pending on April 30, 1998. 
(f)  Where an existing licensed location is interfered with by government action under the power of eminent domain, and not by a voluntary act of the licensee, the licensed use may relocate elsewhere on the property, and the new building site will be treated as an existing non-conforming use eligible for license renewal for purposes of the distance requirements of this section. 
(g)  The school building, school grounds, educational building, educational facility and college campus distance requirements set forth in this section shall not apply to the sales of malt beverages and wine on property owned by the DeKalb County Board of Education and known as DeKalb County Memorial Stadium which is located within the boundary of Memorial College Avenue, Indian Creek Drive and Memorial Drive adjacent to campus of Georgia Perimeter College Clarkston ("the stadium"), when subject to the approval of the DeKalb County Board of Education, the stadium is being used for professional soccer games. The sale of malt beverages and wine shall be limited to sales within the boundaries of the stadium and not taken off of the stadium grounds. 
(h)  The distance restrictions contained in subsection (b) do not apply to a restaurant as that term is defined in chapter 27 of this Code, if the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The restaurant must be located on property bearing the zoning district classification pedestrian community 1 ("PC-1"), pedestrian community 2 ("PC-2"), pedestrian community 3 ("PC-3"), or office-commercial-residential ("OCR"), as those terms are defined in chapter 27 of this Code; or 
(2)  The restaurant must be located on property within an overlay district regulated in chapter 27 of this Code, except restaurants, if any, located in residential infill overlay districts as defined in chapter 27 of this Code; and 
(3)  Restaurants located in zoning districts identified in subsections (h)(1) and (2) that desire to offer alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall be situated at least fifty (50) feet from any pre-existing single-family detached dwelling as that term is defined in chapter 27 of this Code. This fifty-foot buffer shall be measured from the property line of the single-family detached dwelling to the side wall of the restaurant closest to that property line; and 
(4)  The distance restrictions contained in subsection (b) shall continue to apply to nightclubs and late-night establishments as those terms are defined in chapter 27 of this Code. The distance restrictions contained in subsection (b) shall continue to apply to restaurants, if any, located in residential infill overlay districts as defined in chapter 27 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2015; Ord. No. 89-31, § 1, 7-25-89; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 99-07, Pt. 1, 2-23-99; Ord. No. 99-12, Pt. 1, 3-23-99; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, §§ X, XI, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 31-02, Pt. I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 34-02, Pt. I, 8-27-02; Ord. No. 09-11, Pt. I, 7-14-09) 
Sec. 4-102. - Age restriction for employees in licensed establishments. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be employed in or about the premises of any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages at retail, nor shall any person under the age of eighteen (18) years sell, take orders for, or deliver alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not be construed to apply to establishments licensed for retail sale of beer and/or wine by the package, where such sales constitute less than fifty (50) percent of the gross revenue of the establishment; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is employed by such an establishment to sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to discriminate against or impede the employment of any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to work as an entertainer in any establishment licensed hereunder. An entertainer shall include, but is not limited to, live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers or strippers whose performances are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined in Chapter 15, Adult Entertainment Establishments. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2012; Ord. No. 94-03, § 1, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-103. - Advertising. 
(a)  Each licensee for the retail sale of liquors hereunder, except consumption-on-the-premises establishments, shall have printed on a front window or entrance of the licensed premises the name of the licensed establishment together with the inscription "Dekalb County Retail License No. _____" in uniform letters not less than four (4) nor more than eight (8) inches in height. 
(b)  Each retail licensee, except consumption-on-the-premises establishments, shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four (4) copies of a printed price list of the liquors offered for sale or the licensee may have the price placed on the bottles or on the front of the shelf where liquors are exhibited for sale. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2014; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 4-104. - Prohibited types of entertainment, attire and conduct. 
(As adopted by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners on April 30, 1998, this section shall not apply to licenses in effect on April 30, 1998 until those licensees apply for renewal for 2000.) 
The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverage while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
(2)  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in paragraph (1) of this section or where such person(s) perform(s) any of the following act(s) or simulates any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
b.  Clearly depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
c.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
d.  Fondling or touching or nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts; or 
e.  Masochism, erotic or sexually-oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; or 
f.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling, or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
g.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(3)  The holding, promotion, sponsoring, or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment in paragraphs (1) and (2) above; provided however, that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a traditional or mainstream performance establishment which derives less than twenty (20) percent of its gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
Gross annual income from the sale of alcoholic beverages for the purposes of this section shall be based on the gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages for the twelve-month period immediately preceding the licensed year for which an alcohol license is to be issued. In the event the establishment has not been licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for a twelve-month period immediately preceding the year for which an alcohol license is sought, gross annual income shall be based on the average monthly gross income for the preceding months during which the establishment had an alcoholic beverage license. In the event that an applicant is a new establishment, it shall complete a form and an affidavit furnished by the finance department showing projected anticipated gross income and anticipated gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages. A temporary license for no more than three (3) months shall be issued by the finance department for such establishments if such establishments otherwise qualify for a license under the provisions of this chapter. At the expiration of the temporary license period, said establishment must demonstrate gross income of less than twenty (20) percent in the preceding three (3) months from the sale of alcoholic beverages. In the event that such business establishes the gross income from the sale of alcoholic beverages as required under this section, and otherwise meets all qualifications for a license a new temporary license will be issued for the remainder of the calendar year. 
The finance department may, at any time, require that a licensed mainstream performance establishment obtain an audit prepared by a certified public accountant at the licensee's expense, to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals incorrect, incomplete, or misleading information was submitted, then the permit issued pursuant to this section shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2016; Ord. No. 91-06, § 2, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 94-03, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, §§ XII—XIV, 3-14-00) 
Sec. 4-105. - Sales on days of national or state elections. 
Licensees may open their establishments for the sale of alcoholic beverages on any election day, except within two hundred (200) yards of any polling place. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2019; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-106. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
(a)  It is unlawful not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served or possesses alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. In this section "identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(b)  Licensee must have written policies and procedures and train, instruct and supervise employees to insure compliance with this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2020; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-107. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2021; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-108. - Happy hour promotions. 
(a)  No licensee under this chapter or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  The sale of two (2) or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(3)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than one-half the price customarily charged for such alcoholic beverage, provided nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit reducing the price of a drink or drinks by up to one-half the price customarily charged. 
(4)  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed, by any one (1) person. 
(5)  Increasing the volume of alcoholic beverage contained in a drink without proportionately increasing the price customarily charged for such beverage. 
(6)  Selling, offering to sell, or delivering to any person or persons, any alcoholic beverage made with more than three (3) ounces of distilled spirits. 
(7)  Selling offering to sell, or delivering to any person, any beer or wine in a container of more than twelve (12) ounces or its metric equivalent. 
(b)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as "happy hour." 
(c)  In this section "customarily charged" means the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2028; Ord. No. 89-28, § 1, 6-27-89; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-109. - Locations where sales by the drink permitted; entrance to establishment. 
No distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises where sold except in eating establishments regularly serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour they are open. When located in hotels, motels and high-rise office and apartment buildings, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2041; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-110. - Certain organizations exempt from food establishment requirements. 
Veterans' organizations, fraternal organizations and other nonprofit organizations currently having tax-exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the O.C.G.A. tit. 47, ch. 7 [§ 48-71-1 et seq.] shall not be required to operate a food establishment serving prepared food. However, any such organization selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption-on-the-premises establishments. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2083; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Secs. 4-111—4-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSED FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF DISTILLED SPIRITS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Food service establishments, § 13-281. 
State Law reference— Local regulation of sale of distilled spirits by the drink, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-110. 

Sec. 4-126. - Hours of sale and operation. 
Distilled spirits shall be sold and delivered to the customer for consumption on the premises during the following hours: 
(a)  Monday through Wednesday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  Thursday through Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 a.m. of the following day. 
(c)  Sunday hours are from 11:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday as permitted by section 4-128. 
(d)  Sales and deliveries during all other hours are prohibited. There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for one-half (½) hour. All licensed establishments must likewise close their premises to the public and clear their premises of patrons within one-half (½) hour after the time set by this chapter for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises and shall not reopen their premises to the public until 9:00 a.m. or thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2043; Ord. No. 89-14, § 1, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 10-12, Pt. I, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 17-06 , Pt. I, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 18-07 , Pt. I, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 4-127. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of beer, wine distilled spirits on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license under this chapter until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be eighteen (18) years of age or older and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Nonalcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes but is not limited to host, hostess, doorperson and bouncer. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include the applicant's name, all of the applicant's aliases and/or any other name by which the applicant has ever been known, address, telephone number, the applicant's social security number, the date of birth with written proof thereof, and prior arrest record of applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this division, the police department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person fingerprinted or cleared is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted is not eligible for employment, the police department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the police department or the finance department. 
(6)  This section does not apply to employees whose duties are limited solely to those of a busperson, cook or dishwasher. 
(7)  No licensee under this chapter shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(8)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the county, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(10)  It shall be the responsibility of each licensee to provide all new employees at the time of their employment, and all employees annually, with an orientation and training on the DeKalb County Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance. Failure of the employee to participate shall not be a defense for an employer whose worker or agent violates any provisions of this ordinance; and provided that a licensee shall keep a record of such orientation and training, which shall be subject to inspection by DeKalb County. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2045; Ord. No. 94-03, § 3, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 00-21, Pt. 1, §§ XV, XVI, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 01-12, Pt. I, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-128. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of sixty (60) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least sixty (60) percent of their total annual income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve distilled spirits by the drink from 11:00 a.m. on Sunday until 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday. Failure to adhere to these standards shall result in the automatic revocation or denial of a Sunday sales permit by the county. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the finance department. The finance department may, at anytime, require that the licensee obtain an audit prepared by a certified public accountant, at the licensee's expense, to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals that incorrect, incomplete or misleading information was submitted on and/or with the Sunday sales form and/or affidavit, then, the permit shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. No later than March 31st of the license year, licensee shall submit a report on monthly sales by category for the prior calendar year. 
(c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the finance department not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits may be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Establishments which qualify for a Sunday sales license are authorized to apply for a temporary Sunday sales permit if they desire to open for special events or holidays. The temporary permit shall be valid for one (1) calendar month and partial months shall be counted as a full month. Licensees must apply thirty (30) days in advance of the issuance date. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2046; Ord. No. 93-05, § 1, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 17-06 , Pt. I, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 18-07 , Pt. I, 11-13-18) 
State Law reference— Local authorization and regulation of Sunday sales, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7. 
Sec. 4-129. - Open area and patio sales. 
No consumption and/or sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed in open areas and patios unless first permitted and approved by the finance department. The department shall prepare such appropriate regulations as to ensure the safe and orderly operation of these establishments, including but not limited to regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2047; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Secs. 4-130—4-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ESTABLISHMENTS LICENSED FOR ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION OF BEER AND WINE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Food service establishments, § 13-281 et seq. 

Sec. 4-146. - Types of retail establishments. 
(a)  No beer or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except in eating establishments having a full-service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour they are open. These establishments must be located in zoning districts which permit restaurants and drive-in restaurants as conforming uses or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(b)  A golf course within a planned development, as authorized by the 1970 zoning ordinance, as amended, a stadium facility during the playing of professional athletic competitions, and a licensed or leased athletic complex within a park owned by DeKalb County, may be issued a beer and wine consumption-on-the-premises license without meeting the full-service kitchen requirement. No license may be issued for use at a park or stadium at which the consumption of alcohol is not permitted under sections 19-30(c) or 4-101.1 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2061; Ord. No. 97-09, § 1, 5-13-97; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 99-07, Pt. 1, 2-23-99) 
Sec. 4-147. - Hours of sale and operation. 
Beer and/or wine shall be sold and delivered to the customer for consumption on the premises only during the following hours: 
(a)  Monday through Wednesday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  Thursday through Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 a.m. of the following day. 
(c)  Sunday hours are from 11:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday as permitted by section 4-149. 
(d)  Sales are deliveries during all other hours are prohibited. There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for one-half (½) hour. All licensed establishments must likewise close their premises to the public and clear their premises of patrons within one-half (½) hour after the time set by this chapter for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises and shall not reopen their premises to the public until 9:00 a.m. or thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2063; Ord. No. 89-14, § 2, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 10-12, Pt. I, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 17-06 , Pt. I, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 18-07 , Pt. I, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 4-148. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of beer and/or wine on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for this employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be eighteen (18) years of age or older and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Nonalcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes but is not limited to host, hostess, doorperson and bouncer. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this division, the department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation may be terminated by the finance department or the police department. 
(6)  This section does not apply to employees whose duties are limited solely to those of a busperson, cook or dishwasher. 
(7)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(8)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the county and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2064; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-149. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of sixty (60) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least sixty (60) percent of their total annual income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve distilled spirits by the drink from 11:00 a.m. on Sunday until 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday. Failure to adhere to these standards shall result in the automatic revocation or denial of a Sunday sales permit by the county. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the finance department. The finance department may, at anytime, require that the licensee obtain an audit prepared by a certified public accountant, at the licensee's expense, to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals that incorrect, incomplete or misleading information was submitted on and/or with the Sunday sales form and/or affidavit, then, the permit shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. No later than March 31st of the license year, licensee shall submit a report on monthly sales by category for the prior calendar year. 
(c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the finance department not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits may be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Establishments which qualify for a Sunday sales license are authorized to apply for a temporary Sunday sales permit if they desire to open for special events or holidays. The temporary permit shall be valid for one (1) calendar month and partial months shall be counted as a full month. Licensees must apply thirty (30) days in advance of the issuance date. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2065; Ord. No. 93-05, § 1, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 17-06 , Pt. I, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 18-07 , Pt. I, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 4-150. - Open area and patio sales. 
No consumption and/or sale of beer and wine shall be allowed in open areas and patios unless first permitted and approved by the finance department. The department shall prepare such appropriate regulations as to ensure the safe and orderly operation of these establishments, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2066; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Secs. 4-151—4-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PRIVATE CLUBS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Food service establishments, § 13-281 et seq. 
State Law reference— Sale of distilled spirits by private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-161. - Generally. 
Private clubs may sell and dispense alcoholic beverages upon compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the county governing the sale of such beverages and upon payment of such license fees and taxes as may be required by the existing ordinances, rules and regulations of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2082; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate private clubs, O.C.G.A. § 3-7-40 et seq. 
Sec. 4-162. - Hours of sale and operation. 
Alcoholic beverages shall be sold and delivered to patrons for consumption on the premises only during the following hours: 
(a)  Monday through Wednesday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(b)  Thursday through Saturday hours are from 9:00 a.m. until 2:30 a.m. of the following day. 
(c)  Sunday hours are from 11:00 a.m. until 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday as permitted by section 4-164. 
(d)  Sales and deliveries during all other hours are prohibited. There shall be no consumption on the premises after prohibited hours have been in effect for one-half (½) hour. All licensed establishments must likewise close their premises and clear their premises of patrons within one-half (½) hour after the time set by this chapter for discontinuance of the sale of alcoholic beverages on the premises and shall not reopen their premises to patrons until 9:00 a.m. or thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2085; Ord. No. 89-14, § 3, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 10-12, Pt. I, 6-22-10; Ord. No. 17-06 , Pt. I, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 18-07 , Pt. I, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 4-163. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all private clubs holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and a permit issued indicating that such person is eligible for employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be either of the following: 
a.  Alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be eighteen (18) years of age or older and who sells, serves or dispenses alcoholic beverages. 
b.  Nonalcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued to a person whose employment includes but is not limited to host, hostess, doorperson and bouncer. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this division, the police department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the police department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the police department. 
(6)  This section does not apply to employees whose duties are limited solely to those of a busperson, cook or dishwasher. 
(7)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work or train on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(8)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(9)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the county, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2086; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-164. - Sunday sales. 
(a)  Licensed establishments deriving a minimum of sixty (60) percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food, or licensed establishments deriving at least sixty (60) percent of their total annual income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging, are authorized to apply for a Sunday sales permit to sell and serve distilled spirits by the drink from 11:00 a.m. on Sunday until 2:00 a.m. of the following Monday. Failure to adhere to these standards shall result in the automatic revocation or denial of a Sunday sales permit by the county. 
(b)  Applicants for a Sunday sales permit shall complete a form and affidavit furnished by the finance department. An audit may be required at any time to ensure compliance. If an audit reveals that incorrect, incomplete or misleading information was submitted on and/or with the Sunday sales form and/or affidavit, then, the permit shall be automatically revoked by the finance department. 
(c)  All annual permit renewals shall be filed with the finance department not later than November 30 of the year preceding the license year for which the permit is to be issued. All renewals are subject to audit prior to being renewed to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Sunday sales permits may be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. The permit fee shall be prorated based on the number of months remaining in the calendar year; partial months shall be counted as a full month. Fees are not refundable and permits shall not be transferable. 
(e)  Establishments which qualify for a Sunday sales license are authorized to apply for a temporary Sunday sales permit if they desire to open for special events or holidays. The temporary permit shall be valid for one (1) calendar month and partial months shall be counted as a full month. Licensees must apply thirty (30) days in advance of the issuance date. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2087; Ord. No. 93-05, § 1, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 17-06 , Pt. I, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 18-07 , Pt. I, 11-13-18) 
Sec. 4-165. - Open area and patio sales. 
No consumption and/or sale of distilled spirits or beer or wine shall be allowed in open areas and patios of private clubs unless first permitted and approved by the finance department. The department shall prepare such appropriate regulations as to ensure the safe and orderly operation of these establishments, including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to maximum capacity, ingress and egress. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2088; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Secs. 4-166—4-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PACKAGE STORES 
Part A. - General Provisions 

Secs. 4-176—4-190. - Reserved. 
Part B. - Distilled Spirits[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate package sales of distilled spirits, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-49. 

Sec. 4-191. - Types of establishments where retail sale permitted. 
(a)  No distilled spirits by the package shall be sold at retail except in the following: 
(1)  Retail establishments devoted exclusively to the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(2)  Retail establishments in which space has been set aside devoted exclusively to the retail sales of distilled spirits by the package, with ingress and egress provided directly to and only to the exterior of the building in which the facility is located and not to any other enclosed part of the building in which the facility is located, except as provided in paragraph (3) of this subsection. 
(3)  In hotels, motels and high-rise office buildings where every public entrance to this use shall be from a lobby, hallway, or other interior portion of the primary use structure. 
(4)  In hotels and motels with a restaurant holding a consumption-on-the-premises license, as part of room service for guests of the hotel or motel. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the retail sale within these establishments of liquid commodities and mixes normally used in the preparation and serving of distilled spirits. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2141; Ord. No. 87-19, 8-25-87; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-192. - Coin-operated or amusement machines. 
No retail dealer in liquors shall permit on the premises any slot machine of any kind or character or any coin-operated machine or any machine operated for amusement purposes. However, cigarette vending machines may be permitted. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2142; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-193. - Hours of sale. 
Retailers shall not engage in the sale of spirituous liquors except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday. The hours within which this business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale thereof. No retail sales of distilled spirits shall be permitted on Sundays. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2143; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-194. - Employees. 
The following provisions apply to all establishments holding a license for package liquor: 
(1)  An employee shall meet the same character requirements as set forth in the general ordinances for the licensee, except for the residency requirements. 
(2)  No person shall be employed by an establishment holding a license hereunder until this person has been fingerprinted or cleared by the police department and has been issued a permit by the police department indicating that the person is eligible for employment. The permit issued to a person under this section shall be an alcoholic beverage permit, which shall be issued only to a person who must be eighteen (18) years of age or older and who sells alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the police department and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, date of birth, and prior arrest record of the applicant, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of arrest information, these applications shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The police department shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any police record of the person fingerprinted or cleared. If there is no record of a violation of this division, the police department shall issue a permit to the employee, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person fingerprinted or cleared is not eligible for employment, the police department shall not issue a permit to the employee. 
(5)  All permits issued through administrative error or through an error in completion of a background investigation can be terminated by the police department or the finance department. 
(6)  No licensee shall allow any employee required to hold a permit to work or train on the licensed premises unless the licensee has on file, on the premises, the current, valid permit of each such employee. 
(7)  If any permitholder leaves the employ of a licensed establishment, the licensee shall immediately surrender the permit to the police department. 
(8)  All permits issued hereunder remain the property of the county, and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2144; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 4-195. - Location of retail liquor package stores. 
No new retail establishment selling distilled spirits by the package shall be located within one thousand (1,000) yards of an existing retail establishment selling distilled spirits by the package. This prohibition shall not apply to a hotel or a motel with a restaurant holding a consumption on the premises license which sells package liquor to its guests as part of room service. 
(Ord. No. 89-09, § 1, 3-14-89; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-09, adopted Mar. 14, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 4-195 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 4-196—4-210. - Reserved. 
Part C. - Beer and Wine 

Sec. 4-211. - Types of retail establishments. 
(a)  No beer and/or wine shall be sold at retail except in establishments maintaining eighty (80) percent of the floor space and storage area in a manner which is devoted principally to the retail sale of other products and located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use or in a facility duly licensed by the county to sell liquor by the package. 
(b)  In cases where, under section 4-191, paragraph (a)(4), a hotel or motel is allowed to sell liquor by the package for purposes of room service, beer and wine sales by the package shall also be permitted for purposes of room service to guests of the hotel or motel. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2161; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-212. - Hours of sale; Sunday sales. 
Retail package licensees shall not engage in the sale of beer and/or wine except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. The hours within which business may be carried on shall be determined by the standard time in force at the time of the sale thereof. No package beer and/or wine may be sold on Sunday. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2162; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-213. - Use of tags or labels to indicate prices. 
Retailers shall indicate plainly, by tags or labels on the bottles or containers or on the shelf immediately below where the containers are placed, the prices of all beer and wine exposed or offered for sale. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2163; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-214. - Wine tastings. 
Upon filing an application and payment of a filing fee and a permit fee and after investigation by the police department and review by the finance department, the finance department may issue a permit to a licensed retail package wine dealer or licensed wine wholesaler to hold a wine tasting. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption at a location which meets legal requirements for on-premises consumption, under the following conditions: 
(1)  The applicant for a wine tasting must hold a valid current wine license in the state. 
(Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Secs. 4-215—4-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WHOLESALERS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license and regulate wholesale sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-3-2, 3-4-49, 3-4-50, 3-5-41 et seq., 3-6-40. 

Sec. 4-231. - Generally. 
(a)  Any person desiring to sell, at wholesale, any alcoholic beverage in unincorporated areas of the county shall make application to the finance department and obtain a license to do so, which application shall be in writing on the prescribed forms, and pay a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits shall be allowed to have any interest or ownership in any wholesale distilled spirit license. 
(c)  No retailer shall purchase any alcoholic beverage from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this article. No wholesaler shall sell any distilled spirits to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the county except by a duly licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2181; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-232. - Excise tax imposed; bond required. 
(a)  There is imposed an excise tax upon all alcoholic beverages purchased by persons holding a retail package license and/or a consumption-on-the-premises license at a rate established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The excise tax shall be collected by all wholesale dealers selling alcoholic beverages to persons holding retail licenses and shall be paid by the wholesale dealers to the finance department by the tenth of each month, based upon the units of alcohol sold during the previous month. The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments. The monthly remittance shall be accompanied by a sworn statement showing, but not limited to, the type and volume sold to each retail licensee on a form or in a format as approved by the finance department. 
(c)  Each wholesale dealer, prior to commencement of business operation in the county, shall post a performance bond with the finance department equal to one and one-half (1½) times the estimated highest monthly payment made in a calendar year of the excise tax based on sales collected by the wholesale dealer from the retailers to secure the payments for the tax imposed herein. These bonds shall be secured by cash which shall bear no interest, or a surety bond executed by a surety company licensed to do business in this state and approved by the finance department. 
(d)  A wholesaler may be excused from posting the performance bond after demonstrating full and satisfactory compliance with the provisions required hereunder for a period of twelve (12) months subsequent to the commencement of business operations within the county. Continued exemption from the requirement of posting the performance bond shall be conditioned upon continued compliance with the terms of this article and the payment of all sums as required by the provisions of this section. 
(e)  Any person who fails to pay any tax to the county or any amount of tax required to be collected and paid to the county under this article within the time required shall pay a late payment penalty, in addition to the tax or amount of tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as specified by section 2-112. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2182; Ord. No. 92-03, § 1, 2-25-92; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
State Law reference— Local excise tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-4-80, 3-5-80 et seq., 3-6-60 et seq. 
Sec. 4-233. - Audit. 
The county shall have the right to audit each wholesale dealer licensed to do business in the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2183; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-234. - Hours of sale. 
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2184; Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Secs. 4-235—4-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOTTLE CLUBS 

Sec. 4-251. - Types of establishments. 
"Bring your own bottle" establishments or "brown bag" establishments are establishments regularly serving prepared foods, with a full service kitchen, prepared to serve food every hour they are open and which can seat two hundred (200) or more persons. Such clubs cannot hold a license to sell and may not sell or serve any alcoholic beverages. Such clubs must be in a zoning district that allows a restaurant as a conforming use. 
(Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Sec. 4-252. - Permits. 
It shall be unlawful to operate an establishment governed under the provisions of this article without first obtaining a license from the finance department and paying such fees and taxes as may be required by the ordinances, rules and regulations of the county. A bottle club shall be subject to all general licensing and regulations as well as the licensing and regulations for consumption on the premises establishments. 
(Ord. No. 98-04, Pt. 1, 4-30-98) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, adopted Dec. 15, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 5, §§ 5-1—5-28, and enacted a new Ch. 5 to read as set out herein. The former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, adopted Dec. 14, 2004; Ord. No. 05-01, Pt. I, adopted Jan. 25, 2005; Ord. No. 05-08, Pt. I, adopted July 12, 2005; and Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, adopted Jan. 22, 2013. 
Cross reference— Rabies control, § 13-126 et seq. 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words or terms are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2 or other applicable sections of this Code or state law, now and as they may be amended hereafter, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 
Abandonment means the intentional or complete forsaking of any animal by its owner, without making reasonable arrangements for the adequate care and custody of the animal to be assumed by another person or the failure to return and resume responsibility of an animal at the designated time as arranged with the care giver. Abandonment also means the act of placing an animal on public property or within a public building, unattended or uncared for, or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property. An animal shall also be considered abandoned when it has been unattended and without adequate and proper food and water for a period in excess of thirty-six (36) hours, regardless of where such animal may be found or kept. 
Adequate care means exhibiting attention to the needs of an animal, including but not limited to, the provision of food, water, shelter, sanitary, safe and healthy conditions, and adequate and timely veterinary medical attention necessary to maintain good health for the specific age, size, species, and breed of animal or to prevent suffering. 
Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian; which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
Adequate shelter means a protective covering for a domestic animal that provides adequate space and protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four (4) sides, a constructed floor, and a roof with a door opening. It should also be clean, dry and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit. In addition, the structure shall include a heavy plastic or rubber flap to cover the door and/or window openings during the months of December through March or when the ambient, outside temperature is below thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit. From April through November, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two (2) inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
Adequate water means clean, fresh, potable water sufficient to prevent dehydration and properly sustain health presented in a clean dish, free from contamination. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to, snow, ice and rancid/contaminated water. 
Animal means every living vertebrate except a human being. 
Animal at large means any animal moving without physical restraint and not on its owner's property. 
Animal enforcement officer means any person authorized by the governing authority or by law to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Animal service center means the facility designated by the governing authority for the detention of animals in the county and includes the animal control center facility identified and defined in chapter 13 of this Code. 
Classified animal means any animal that has been classified as either a dangerous or vicious animal pursuant to this chapter or comparably classified by the State of Georgia, or by any court, hearing officer, or authorized government agency of any other state, county or municipality. 
Classified animal pen means a padlocked pen, as that term is defined in this chapter, made entirely of industrial gauge fencing with a door or gate equipped with a working lock. The classified animal pen must contain adequate shelter, as that term is defined in this chapter, but must also contain a minimum one hundred (100) square foot area outside the adequate shelter. 
Community cat means an unowned, free-roaming cat that has been marked by surgical ear-tip pursuant to the community cat program. 
Community cat program means a comprehensive process whereby unowned free-roaming cats are captured humanely, transported to a veterinarian for evaluation, spay/neuter surgery, rabies vaccination and marking by surgical ear-tip, and returned to the area or location where the cat was captured. 
Cruelty means causing death or unjustifiable pain or suffering to any animal by an act, omission, or neglect. Cruelty also includes transporting an unrestrained animal in an open-air vehicle or in the trunk of any vehicle, or leaving an animal unattended in a closed vehicle without proper ventilation or temperature control where the outside air temperature is seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit or above. Cruelty also means allowing or causing any animal to train for or engage in an animal fight operated for sport, entertainment or gaming purposes. Routine medical procedures by a licensed veterinarian shall not be regarded as cruelty. 
Dangerous animal means any animal that, according to the records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury, provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify an animal as dangerous; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the animal poses an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by an animal shall not be sufficient to classify an animal as dangerous; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided that no animal shall be classified as dangerous when the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Electronic animal confinement system shall mean a commercially produced, functioning and professionally installed electronic fence which utilizes an invisible electrically generated perimeter, in which the animal within the perimeter wears an electronic collar that produces an electric shock when the animal approaches or exceeds the perimeter. 
Euthanasia means the legal act of putting an animal to death using humane methods, recommended by the American Veterinary Medical Association Panel on Euthanasia and approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, as defined by Georgia law in the Georgia Animal Protection Act, as may hereinafter be amended. 
Fence means any structure of wire, wood, stone or other material, which is of sufficient height and strength to act as a barrier against passage of the animal it is intended to enclose. A fence must be sufficient to prevent the animal from being able to jump, dig, or escape from confinement. 
Garbage means all refuse matter/effluent, either animal or vegetable by-product from a restaurant, kitchen, or meat/poultry processing establishment; spoiled/rancid food and refuse accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, that is normally discarded. 
Guard dog means a dog trained to attack persons or other animals independently or upon oral command; or a dog that, while not so trained, is reasonably expected to perform as a guardian of its owner and/or the property upon which the dog is located. 
Hazardous animal means an animal that may be harmful to humans or other animals by virtue of its ability to produce poison or, due to its size and feeding habits, could prey on humans as a food source. Hazardous animals include, but are not limited to, pit vipers (genus Crotalidae), coral snakes (genus Micrurus), poisonous spiders, frogs, large reptiles, Nile monitors, caiman, alligators, crocodiles, and large constricting snakes greater than ten (10) feet in length. 
Identification means any tag, tattoo, microchip, or other type of marking that can be used to locate an animal's owner. 
Kennel means any establishment, other than an animal shelter, where animals are maintained for boarding, holding, training, or other similar purposes for a fee or compensation. 
Law enforcement agency means any division of the DeKalb County Police Department or other governmental agency with law enforcement powers operating within DeKalb County. 
Neglect means endangering an animal's health by failing to provide or arrange to provide the animal with food or drink if the animal is dependent upon a person for the provision of food or drink, or the act of restraining an animal in a manner that endangers the animal's life or health. Other acts considered to be neglect include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Failing to provide adequate care or seek veterinary care for an injury or illness that seriously endangers the life or health of an animal; or 
(2)  Leaving an animal outside and exposed to excessive heat or cold without providing the animal with adequate shelter or protection from the heat or cold, or exposing an animal to unsanitary conditions. 
Official Certificate of Veterinarian Inspection Health Certificate ("OCVI Health Certificate") means a legible certificate issued by an accredited veterinarian either on an official form of the State of Georgia or an equivalent official form of the United States Department of Agriculture. 
Open-air vehicle means the cargo area of any pickup truck that is not covered by a permanent attached utility cover or any convertible vehicle with its top down. 
Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of an animal. In the case of an animal owned by a minor, the term "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. A cat may be deemed "unowned" if the cat is found on the property of a natural person or legal entity disclaiming ownership of the cat and no traceable form of identification is displayed on the cat. 
Pen means a pad locked, fenced area within a perimeter fenced area that has secure sides that are buried two (2) feet into the ground or sunken in concrete and a secure top. 
Police chief means the police chief of the DeKalb County Police Department or designee(s). 
Primary means first or highest in rank; principal. 
Proper enclosure means any structure or device used to restrict an animal to a limited amount of space such as a fenced area, electronic animal confinement system, building, house, pen, or other device or structure out of which an animal cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape. 
Qualified adoption facilitator, rescue group and animal shelter means an organization offering animals for adoption so long as the organization is licensed as a shelter by the State of Georgia; or if not incorporated in Georgia, is a non-profit organization under section 50l(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; and has the express mission/business function of facilitating the sterilization and adoption of homeless and unwanted animals. A copy of the state license or the Internal Revenue Service letter of non-profit designation shall be provided to the county upon request. 
Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; or records of any federal or state court. 
Secondary means of second rank; not primary. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Severe injury means a physical injury that results in broken bones, significant puncture wounds, disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or significant medical procedures or a physical injury that results in death. 
Spay/neuter certificate means documentation that certifies that the animal listed therein has been sterilized as of the date of surgery. 
Sterilized animal means an animal that has been surgically or chemically altered by a licensed veterinarian in order to render the animal incapable of reproduction. 
Stray animal means any animal at large, whether lost by its owner or otherwise, that may be in or on the common areas of apartments, condominiums, trailer parks or other multi-residential premises, any single-family residential property, or any other property or public area without being controlled by a leash, that does not have an identification tag or microchip, and otherwise has no identifiable owner. A community cat shall not be classified as a stray animal, but a cat which has not become a part of the community cat program is a stray animal. 
Tethered means an animal attached to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device commonly used for the size and type of animal involved. An animal is not considered tethered when the animal is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the animal. Any tethering device used to tether an animal must be at least ten (10) feet in length. 
Unsanitary conditions means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
Veterinary medical attention means care or supervision by a properly licensed practitioner of veterinary medicine as defined by Georgia law, sufficient to maintain an animal in a state of good health and prevent pain and suffering by an animal. 
Vicious animal means one (1) that inflicts serious injury on a person, or one (1) that causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape the animal's attack. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-2. - General responsibilities of owners. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to take all necessary steps and precautions to protect other people, property, and other animals from injury or damage resulting from such animal's behavior, including, but not limited to, chasing, biting, or otherwise jeopardizing the safety or welfare of the public, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness, or ferocity. 
(b)  If the owner of an animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure full compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to immediately remove excrement deposited by the animal on any street or right-of-way. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any animal aiding the handicapped (e.g., guide dog) or to an animal used for law enforcement related activities. 
(d)  Owners may not allow any domesticated or other animals within their control to make any vocalizations in violation of the county noise ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-3. - Keeping animal under restraint while on owner's property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is kept under restraint, and that precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is securely and humanely enclosed within a proper enclosure as a means of primary restraint. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended. When outside the proper enclosure but on the owner's property, it shall be the duty of every owner of an animal to ensure that the animal is humanely secured by a leash or lead and under the control of a responsible and competent person; or off leash but under the direct control of a responsible and competent person who is physically present with the animal, provided that such animal is obedient to that person's command. 
(c)  Any animal that is housed outside of its owner's house shall be housed in a proper enclosure that complies with the provisions of this Code. The owner shall also ensure that the proper enclosure contains at least one hundred (100) square feet of open space as that term is defined in chapter 27 of this Code. 
(d)  Tethering of an animal is prohibited. 
(e)  As a secondary means of restraint to a proper enclosure, an animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system providing that: 
(1)  A running cable line or trolley system is set inside a proper enclosure; 
(2)  Only one (1) animal may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system; 
(3)  No animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system for more than twelve (12) hours in a twenty-four-hour period; 
(4)  No animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.; 
(5)  Tethers and cables attaching the animal to the running cable line or trolley system must be made of a substance which cannot be chewed by the animal and shall not weigh more than five (5) percent of the body weight of the animal tethered; 
(6)  A running cable line or trolley system must have a swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary object that cannot be moved by the animal; 
(7)  The running cable line or trolley system must be at least ten (10) feet in length and mounted at least four (4) feet and no more than seven (7) feet above ground level; 
(8)  The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the animal's collar should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to food, water, and shelter; 
(9)  Be attached to a properly fitted harness or collar not used for the display of a current rabies tag and other identification; and with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two (2) fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering an animal to a running cable line or trolley system; and 
(10)  Be tethered at sufficient distance from any other objects to prohibit the tangling of the cable, from extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury of strangulation of the animal and be of sufficient distance from any fence so as to prohibit the animal access to the fence. 
(f)  If an electronic animal confinement system is used to confine an animal, it shall: 
(1)  Provide a properly fitted and working signal device that will be worn by the animal to be enclosed. 
(2)  Contain permanent and prominently displayed signs at twenty-five (25) feet intervals around the entire perimeter of the electronic animal confinement system. The signs shall be no smaller than six (6) inches square, and shall read: "Caution—Electronic Animal Confinement System." 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-4. - Duty to restrain while off owner's property. 
It shall be the duty of any person to keep an animal under restraint and control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner. Such areas shall not include county parks that are specifically designated as off leash areas. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-5. - Animals at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of an animal to allow it to run at large unattended on or about the streets, rights-of-way, and highways of unincorporated DeKalb County; in any DeKalb County park, except in county parks that are specifically designated as off leash areas; unattended on or about the common property of any apartment complex or condominium community; or on the property of another person without permission of the owner of that property. This section shall not apply to dogs being used for hunting in accordance with state law, rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-6. - Abandonment. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to knowingly abandon, or to aid in the abandonment of, any domesticated animal on any property located in unincorporated DeKalb County. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-7. - Neglect. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner to neglect an animal. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-8. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of cruelty towards any animal, except that a person may: 
(1)  Defend his person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
(2)  Kill any animal causing injury or damage to any livestock, poultry or pet animal. 
(b)  The method used for killing the animal shall be as humane as possible under the circumstances. A person who humanely kills an animal under the circumstances indicated in subsection (a) of this section shall incur no penalty for such death. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to limit in any way the authority or duty of any law enforcement officer, dog or rabies control officer, humane society or veterinarian. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-9. - Required permanent identification. 
It shall be the duty of every animal owner who has been convicted, in a court of competent jurisdiction, of abandonment, cruelty or neglect of an animal, or who owns a classified animal, to have the animal permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and the police chief. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-10. - Dangerous and vicious animals. 
(a)  Pursuant to 1979 Ga. Laws 516, if the police chief learns of the existence of a dangerous animal or vicious animal, the police chief shall then cause a summons to be issued within seventy-two (72) hours requiring the owner of the animal to appear before a judge of the DeKalb County recorder's court or magistrate court, as specified below, at a date and time certain no earlier than fifteen (15) days after service, to conduct a hearing as to the appropriate classification of the animal. The summons so issued shall be served on the owner personally. Prior to July 1, 2015, such actions shall be heard in DeKalb County recorder's court and after July 1, 2015, such actions shall be heard in DeKalb County magistrate court. The police chief shall also immediately impound the animal believed to be dangerous or vicious. 
(b)  The court shall determine after a hearing if the animal is to be classified as a dangerous animal or vicious animal. In making its findings in this regard, the court shall enter a written order notifying the animal's owner and the police chief of its decision. 
(c)  The appeal of any order of the court concerning the classification of an animal as vicious or dangerous shall be by petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County. 
(d)  If the court classifies the animal as dangerous or vicious, and no appeal is filed, the owner shall be required to obtain from the police chief an annual certificate of registration in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. No vicious or dangerous animal shall be released to its owners until such certificate is issued by the police chief. 
(e)  If the owner fails to obtain the certificate of registration within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the order classifying the animal as dangerous or vicious, the animal will be euthanized no earlier than thirty-five (35) days after the issuance of the order so classifying the animal. The animal shall not be euthanized if the owner appeals the court's classification order by petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County within thirty (30) days after the order of classification. During the pendency of the appeal and any further appeals, the animal shall not be euthanized, provided that in the event the classification order is upheld at the conclusion of all appeals, the animal shall be euthanized no earlier than thirty-five (35) days after the final order upholding the classification if the owner does not obtain the required certificate of registration within thirty (30) days after the date of the final order of court upholding the classification order. During the pendency of any such appeal by the owner, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In such event, the animal will be housed at a licensed veterinarian's office or a licensed kennel and the cost of such detention shall be borne by the owner of the animal. In the event the county appeals the court's order, the animal shall not be released to its owner until the appeal is concluded and the certificate of registration is issued to the owner, if applicable. In the event of an appeal by the county, the animal will be housed in the animal service center and the cost of such detention shall be borne by the county. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-11. - Exemptions from classification as a dangerous or vicious animal. 
An animal shall not be classified as a dangerous animal or vicious animal: 
(1)  When the animal bites, attacks or menaces anyone who assaults the animal's owner; 
(2)  When the animal bites, attacks or menaces anyone who willfully trespasses, or commits another tort, upon the property of the owner; 
(3)  When the animal bites, attacks or menaces anyone who is currently, or has in the past, tormented or abused the animal; 
(4)  Where the animal is acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; 
(5)  Where the animal is protecting or defending its young or another animal; 
(6)  Where the animal is being used by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out official duties; or 
(7)  When the animal bites, attacks or menaces anyone who is committing or attempting to commit an offense in violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-5-1 et seq. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-12. - Certificate of registration. 
(a)  The owner of a classified animal must be eighteen (18) years old or older; annually obtain a certificate of registration for the animal from the county; and, pay an annual registration fee to be determined by the governing authority. At the time of renewal, the county shall verify that the owner is continuing to comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The requirements of this section apply to any classified animal living in DeKalb County. 
(b)  Certificates of registration are nontransferable and no more than one (1) certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. The certificate of registration shall be issued to the owner upon receipt of all of the following: 
(1)  Written evidence that the animal is permanently identified by insertion of a microchip by a licensed veterinarian. Said chip must be registered with the chip parent company and the police chief within thirty (30) days of an order classifying the animal as dangerous or vicious or within such later time as specified by a court of competent jurisdiction or within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of any appeal of a court's order that upholds the classification of an animal as dangerous or vicious; 
(2)  A copy of a current policy of insurance in the minimum amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in the State of Georgia, insuring the owner of a dangerous animal, and seventy-five thousand dollars ($75,000.00) insuring the owner of a vicious animal, against liability for any personal injuries or property damage inflicted by the dangerous animal or vicious animal; or a copy of a current surety bond in the foregoing respective amounts issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in the State of Georgia, payable for property damage or personal injury caused by the dangerous or vicious animal; 
(3)  Written or photographic proof that the animal will be confined in a classified animal pen; and 
(4)  Written evidence that the animal has been sterilized by a licensed veterinarian. 
(c)  The owner of a classified animal shall notify the police chief within twenty-four (24) hours if the animal dies. If the animal dies, the body must be available for microchip scanning to provide positive identification of the dangerous animal or vicious animal. A vicious animal shall not be transferred, sold or donated to any other person unless it is relinquished to a governmental facility or a veterinarian to be euthanized. If a dangerous animal is sold or given to another person, the current owner listed on the most current certificate of registration must provide the police chief with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner within thirty (30) days of the sale or transfer of such animal. New owners of dangerous animals are subject to all requirements of this Code upon transfer of such animal and such new owner must register the animal in his or her name within thirty (30) days of the sale or transfer of the animal to such new owner. 
(d)  The owner of a classified animal must notify the police chief in writing within fifteen (15) days after changing his/her address. Such written notice shall provide the owner's new address and telephone number. The owner shall promptly obtain a new certificate of registration reflecting the new address if such address is located within the county. 
(e)  The owner of a classified animal shall notify the police chief in writing within seventy-two (72) hours after moving a classified animal into the county. Such written notice shall provide the address and telephone number of the owner and the owner shall obtain a certificate of registration for the animal within seventy-two (72) hours after moving into the county. 
(f)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two (2) or more violations of this chapter. No person shall be the owner of more than one (1) vicious animal. No certificate of registration for a vicious animal shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.l; 
(2)  The felony of dog fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from the time of conviction until two (2) years after completion of his or her sentence. The restrictions imposed by this subsection also apply to any person residing with such convicted person. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-13. - Confinement of dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  Classified animals shall be confined in a classified animal pen. 
(b)  The owner of a classified animal must post signs on all means of ingress and egress to the premises where the animal resides. Such signs shall read in letters at least three-quarters (¾) of an inch high: "Dangerous/Vicious Animal on Property." Such signs shall be no smaller than eight and five-tenths (8.5) by eleven (11) inches. 
(c)  Whenever outside its classified animal pen, but on the owner's property, a classified animal shall be attended by the owner, muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent the biting of persons or animals, and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed three (3) feet in length. 
(d)  No classified animal shall be permitted off the property of its owner unless accompanied by the owner, muzzled by any means sufficient to prevent the biting of persons or animals, and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. Such leash shall not exceed three (3) feet in length. In the alternative, the classified animal when off the owner's property may be contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
(e)  The owner of a classified animal shall make the animal and the area of confinement available for periodic, unannounced inspections by the police chief to ensure compliance with the confinement requirements of this chapter, provided that the owner consents to such entry and inspection. If consent is not obtained, the police chief shall obtain an inspection warrant prior to any inspection in accordance with the requirements of state law. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-14. - Transportation of animals in open air vehicles. 
If transporting an animal in an open-air vehicle, the owner is responsible for securing the animal so as to prevent the animal from escaping out of the vehicle, getting tangled, or extending over the edge of the vehicle such that injury or strangulation of the animal could result while the vehicle is in motion. For classified animals the requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements outlined in section 5-13. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-15. - Hazardous animals. 
No person shall own, keep, harbor, house, or permit to be kept, harbored or housed, a hazardous animal within unincorporated DeKalb County, unless granted prior written approval from the police chief. Written approval may be granted upon presentation of photographic proof that the animal will be kept adequately restrained or confined as is common for the species. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-16. - Guard dogs. 
It shall be the duty of the owner of a guard dog to display in a prominent place on their premises, and at each entrance or exit to the area where such dog is confined, a sign which reads, in letters at least three-quarters ( 3/4; ) of an inch high, "Guard Dog," and lists the name and contact number of the owner of the dog in same size type. Such signs shall be no smaller than eight and five-tenths (8.5) by eleven (11) inches. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-17. - Rabies tag; rabies vaccination and animal registration. 
(a)  The requirements of this section only apply to owners of dogs, cats or ferrets, provided the dog, cat or ferret is three (3) months old or older. 
(b)  The chief executive officer shall promulgate and administer the process for verification of rabies vaccinations and registration of dogs, cats or ferrets set forth in this section and may utilize county employees or third parties to handle any or all parts of this process. The chief executive officer shall determine what information is needed from veterinarians and owners in order to verify rabies vaccinations and complete the required registration process. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any owner of any dog, cat, or ferret to obtain a current rabies vaccination from a licensed veterinarian periodically as ordered by the veterinarian. 
(d)  After vaccination, it shall be the duty of any owner of any dog, cat or ferret to register each inoculated animal with the county or its designee and pay a registration fee in an amount to be established by the governing authority. 
(e)  Veterinarians shall verify that an animal has received a rabies vaccination and shall advise the county or its designee of said vaccination in a manner and form specified by the chief executive officer. 
(f)  Each veterinarian shall obtain registration information from the owner of each inoculated animal and shall forward such information and verification of the rabies vaccination to the county or its designee within thirty (30) days of inoculation of every dog, cat, or ferret. 
(g)  Upon receipt of verification of rabies vaccination and the required registration information, the county or its designee shall contact the owner of the inoculated dog, cat, or ferret and shall require the owner to register the animal with the county. Upon registration of the dog, cat or ferret and payment of the registration fee, the county or its designee shall forward the appropriate rabies inoculation tag for that animal to the owner. 
(h)  Registration also can be handled through a licensed veterinarian's office at the time of inoculation in the manner provided in this section. If a veterinarian agrees to handle registration, rabies inoculation tags shall be provided to licensed veterinarians. At the time of inoculation, veterinarians shall request that owners simultaneously pay the county's registration fee, which if collected shall be forwarded with the registration form and rabies certificate to the county or its designee by the veterinarian. For every registration fee collected by the veterinarian and remitted to the county or its designee, the veterinarian may keep an administrative processing fee in an amount to be established by the governing authority. 
(i)  If an owner refuses to pay the registration fee to the veterinarian, the veterinarian shall notify the county or its designee of such refusal when it forwards the rabies certificate and the competed registration form to the county or its designee. Thereafter, the owner shall pay the registration fee directly to the county or its designee. 
(j)  It shall be the duty of any owner of a dog, cat, or ferret to provide a collar or harness for such animal. The collar or harness, together with the rabies inoculation tag, shall be worn by the animal at all times. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-18. - Rabies vaccination required for reclaim of an animal. 
An owner reclaiming an animal three (3) months of age and older from the county shall present proof of a current rabies vaccination at time of reclaim. If proof is unavailable, and a county veterinarian is on duty and available, the vaccine will be administered by the veterinarian at the owner's expense. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-19. - Enforcement generally. 
(a)  As authorized by 1979 Ga. Laws 516, the police chief shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of chapter 13 of this Code. 
(b)  Upon information learned by, or complaint lodged with, the police chief that an animal owner is in violation of this chapter, the police chief shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner of the animal to appear before a judge of the DeKalb County magistrate court, at a date and time certain, to stand trial for the violation. If a violation has not been personally witnessed by the police chief or other law enforcement officer, a subpoena shall be issued to the person making the complaint, along with any witness(es), to appear on the date and time set for trial, to testify on behalf of the county. 
(c)  The police chief may respond to anonymous complaints of violations of this chapter. If the owner or custodian of an animal is unknown or not present, and such animal is upon the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, school grounds or other public places or premises, or is upon another person's property without permission or absent proper restraint, or is a classified animal as to which the registration, confinement or insurance requirements have not been met, the police shall immediately impound the animal in a facility designated for the detention of animals. Once impounded, the animal shall be kept for a period of time as set forth in section 5-22. Thereafter, if the animal is not claimed, the animal may be disposed of in a humane fashion in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1 et seq. 
(d)  Any stray cat without any traceable form of identification that is impounded or brought to the animal service center and deemed eligible may be transferred immediately to the community cat program. 
(e)  Any community cat or unowned, free-roaming cat that is not healthy in the opinion of qualified county employees or designees shall be impounded. No healthy community cat shall be impounded unless it: 
(1)  Damages the personal or private property of a person or legal entity that seeks its impoundment; or 
(2)  Creates unsanitary conditions, offensive or objectionable odors. 
If a healthy community cat is impounded pursuant to this subsection (e), upon impoundment, it shall be transferred to a qualified adoption facilitator or disposed of by the county or its designee. 
(f)  An animal may be euthanized when, in the judgment of the police chief, it is determined that: 
(1)  At the scene of an accident an animal is injured beyond medical help, and no traceable form of identification is displayed on the animal; 
(2)  An animal presented to the animal service center without traceable form of identification is injured beyond medical help, or exhibits obvious signs of infectious disease or parasite infestation that would impose a health risk to animals housed in the animal service center; and 
(3)  A veterinarian has determined from all the circumstances that it would be inhumane not to euthanize a particular animal. 
(g)  The judge of any superior court of competent jurisdiction within the state may order the euthanasia of an animal if the court finds, after notice and opportunity for hearing, that the animal has seriously injured a human or presents a danger to humans not suitable for control under this chapter and: 
(1)  The owner or custodian of the animal has been convicted of a violation of any state criminal law and the crime was related to such animal; or 
(2)  Any local governmental authority has filed with the court a civil action requesting the euthanasia of the animal. 
(h)  A judge of the magistrate court or the superior court shall order the euthanasia of any animal if the court finds, after notice and the opportunity for hearing, that the animal has caused a serious injury to a human on more than one (1) occasion; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012, shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-20. - Right of entry. 
The police chief may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle if the animal exhibits distress, including but not limited to, excessive panting or drooling, seizures, state of unconsciousness, or hyperactivity. If the vehicle is damaged during such removal, the police chief shall not be liable for any damage to the vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-21. - Fees and miscellaneous regulations. 
(a)  The fee schedule and refund policy with respect to all services performed in connection with enforcement of this chapter shall be set by official action of the governing authority. The fee schedule and refund policy shall be maintained by the clerk to the board of commissioners and a copy shall be available to the public at the police department. 
(b)  Veterinarians shall return spay/neutered certificates to the chief of police within thirty (30) days of the date of surgery. Vouchers for county requested sterilization submitted by veterinarians for payment more than one (1) year a tier the date of surgery will not be honored for payment. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-22. - Notice to owner of impounded animal. 
(a)  Upon impounding an animal with identification, the county shall make a prompt and reasonable effort to locate the animal's owner. Upon location thereof, the county shall send to such owner notification of impoundment. For the purpose of this chapter, sufficient notice shall be by phone, hand delivery, or United States mail to the animal's owner. 
(b)  If an animal is not claimed by the owner or custodian thereof within five (5) business days after notice of impoundment is mailed or otherwise provided as set forth above, the county may offer the animal for adoption or transfer the animal to a qualified adoption facilitator, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The animal appears to be in good health; 
(2)  The animal has not been classified as dangerous or vicious; 
(3)  The animal is not known to have bitten a human without provocation or to have bitten a human under circumstances that in the opinion of the chief of police make it likely that the animal will bite humans again. 
Alternatively, the county may dispose of the animal after five (5) business days. 
(c)  If the impounded animal is not wearing a rabies tag or a tag or microchip identifying the name, address, and telephone number of the animal's owner or custodian, the county may place the animal for adoption or transfer the animal to a qualified adoption facilitator after three (3) business days following impoundment. The county may dispose of the animal after five (5) business days following impoundment. 
(d)  In no event shall a lawful owner be allowed to reclaim an animal until all fees required by this Code are paid to the county including any medical fees incurred due to the health of the animal and its treatment. 
(e)  If the owner of the impounded animal cannot be located, then such owner shall be conclusively presumed to have given consent to the adoption of the impounded animal, or to have given consent to euthanize the animal in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1 and § 4-5-1 et seq. 
(f)  Reserved. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-23. - Limiting adoptions. 
(a)  The county reserves the right to refuse to allow any person to adopt an animal in the county's custody or control. Any individual wishing to adopt an animal from the county must provide proof of ownership of residence, or permission of the property owner for the animal to reside at a particular location. No person who surrenders ownership of an animal to the county may adopt an animal for a period of five (5) years after the surrender, without a written waiver from the police chief. 
(b)  Animals not placed for adoption through the county program may be made available to qualified adoption facilitators, rescue groups and animal shelters on a first come first served basis. Upon request, qualified adoption facilitators, rescue groups and animal shelters must provide proof of Georgia State licensing or proof of non-profit status under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code if incorporated outside the State of Georgia prior to receiving animal(s). Qualified adoption facilitators, rescue groups and animal shelters may be required to pay a qualified adoption facilitator/rescue fee and reimburse the county for any medical care/testing done on the animal by the county or its agents. 
(c)  Any person convicted of cruelty, neglect or abandonment of an animal will not be allowed to adopt an animal from the animal service center for five (5) years after the date of conviction, without written waiver from the police chief. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-24. - Ownership. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, sell, trade, swap or give away animals within the real property limits of buildings or surrounding grounds belonging to the DeKalb County Government. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to give away or sell any animal on any public roadway in unincorporated DeKalb County. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-25. - Sterilization. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of a dog or cat declared to be a classified animal by a court of competent jurisdiction to have the animal sterilized. Such sterilization must be performed by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days of a final order of a court of competent jurisdiction finding that the dog or cat is a classified animal. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner and/or qualified adoption facilitator, rescue group or animal shelter to have a dog or cat adopted from the county sterilized. Puppies and kittens must be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian within six (6) months of the date of adoption. Adult dogs and cats must be sterilized by a licensed veterinarian within thirty (30) days of the date of adoption. 
(c)  Owners of ferrets must comply with any state law applicable to ferrets. 
(d)  Unowned, free-roaming cats shall be vaccinated, sterilized and ear tipped as part of the community cat program. Cats brought into the community cat program are exempt from registration, licensing, and stray animal provisions of this chapter, shall not be deemed abandoned when returned to the location where captured, and as necessary and appropriate, may be exempt from other provisions of this Code applicable to owned animals. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-26. - Transient animals. 
A dog, cat, or ferret shipped or transported through the county or entering the county for less than fifteen (15) days shall be exempt from licensing fees and collar and tag sections of this chapter. However, all other provisions of this chapter are applicable to such transient animals. In addition, proof of a current rabies vaccination or health certificate for such animal must be available for inspection by the police chief at any time the animal is within the boundaries of the county. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-27. - Limitation on ownership. 
(a)  Any person who has been convicted of cruelty, neglect or abandonment of an animal as provided in this Code or state law, and has relinquished ownership of said animal, shall not be allowed to own a pet in their household in unincorporated DeKalb County for five (5) years measured from the date of conviction. 
(b)  Any person who has been convicted of failure to keep an animal under restraint while on owner's property as provided in this Code, or has been ordered by a court to meet additional confinement requirements and has not complied with the court's order, shall not be allowed to own a pet in their household in unincorporated DeKalb County for five (5) years measured from the date of conviction or court order. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-28. - Violations and enhanced penalties. 
(a)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this chapter, upon citation by the police chief and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction may be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10 of this Code. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  A classified animal shall be immediately impounded by any county police officer, code enforcement officer or animal enforcement officer if such animal or its owner has violated any of the requirements of this chapter. Any animal, whether classified or not, may be impounded if such officer believes the animal poses a threat to the public. 
(c)  The owner of a classified animal shall notify the police chief as soon as the owner discovers that the animal is on the loose, unconfined, or has attacked a human or another animal, and failure to so notify the police chief shall be a violation of this chapter by the owner of the animal. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to possess within the county a classified animal without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(e)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction of any violation of this chapter by the owner of a classified animal, the court may impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(f)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of this chapter by the owner of a vicious animal, the court may order the animal to be euthanized. 
(g)  Upon a third or subsequent conviction for a violation of section 5-2(c), the court may impose a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(h)  Upon a third or subsequent conviction of a violation of section 5-3, the court shall require the owner to confine the animal in a classified animal pen, irrespective of whether the animal is classified as vicious or dangerous. 
(i)  Upon a third or subsequent conviction for a violation of section 5-4, the court may impose a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(j)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of section 5-7, the court may impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(k)  Upon any conviction for a violation of section 5-8, the court may impose a fine of not less than eight hundred dollars ($800.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(l)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction of a violation of section 5-16, the court may impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(m)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction for a violation of section 5-17, the court may impose a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(n)  Upon conviction for a violation of section 5-7 where the factual basis for the conviction is a failure to install, use or remove a heavy rubber or plastic flap from an outdoor structure used to house an animal, the maximum sentence may be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) fine and the court, in its sole discretion, is allowed not to impose a fine. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-29. - OCVI health certificate required. 
(a)  The owner of any cat or dog, sterilized or unsterilized, that is sold, or exchanged for valuable consideration is required to give the new owner a current, valid OCVI health certificate at the time of exchange or sale. The OCVI health certificate must be available for review by potential new owners at the time any dog or cat is offered for sale or exchange, for valuable consideration. A current OCVI health certificate must be presented to any animal control officer upon request for review. 
(b)  Qualified adoption facilitators, rescue groups, and animal shelters are exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Each animal found to be without an OCVI health certificate shall be considered a separate violation of this section by the owner of the animal. Animals shall not be subject to impoundment for violations of this section. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-30. - Classifications of animals in previous ordinances/compliance. 
Any animal classified prior to February 13, 2016, as a potentially dangerous animal shall on and after that date be classified as a dangerous animal under this chapter. Any animal classified prior to February 13, 2016, as a dangerous animal shall on and after that date be classified as a vicious animal under this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-31. - Limitation of liability and classification. 
Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this chapter so long as the owner of the animal received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue correction of the irregularity. Under no circumstances shall the county or any of its elected officials, employees, or officers be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by an animal as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 15-09 , Pt. I, 12-15-15) 
Sec. 5-32. - Animal services advisory board. 
(a)  Creation; members; term. 
(1)  The governing authority of DeKalb County shall create and appoint the animal services advisory board, to be composed of thirteen (13) citizens of DeKalb County. 
(2)  The chief executive officer shall appoint six (6) members, and each commissioner shall appoint one (1) member. All members shall be either an active community leader with a demonstrated concern for animals or represent an animal welfare organization. 
(3)  Each of the members of the animal services advisory board shall be designated as follows: Post 1 (first appointment of chief executive officer); Post 2 (second appointment of chief executive officer); Post 3 (third appointment of chief executive officer); Post 4 (fourth appointment of chief executive officer); Post 5 (fifth appointment of chief executive officer); Post 6 (sixth appointment of chief executive officer); Post 7 (appointment of commissioner district 1); Post 8 (appointment of commissioner district 2); Post 9 (appointment of commissioner of district 3); Post 10 (appointment of commissioner district 4); Post 11 (appointment of commissioner district 5); Post 12 (appointment of commissioner super district 6); Post 13 (appointment of commissioner super district 7). 
(4)  Appointments under this section shall be made within thirty (30) days after vacancy occurs. Terms for initial appointments under this section shall be [as] follows: the initial term for Posts 1, 4, 6, and 9 shall expire on December 31, 2016; the initial term for Posts 2, 7, 10, and 12 shall expire on December 31, 2017; and the initial term for Posts 3, 5, 8, 11, and 13 shall expire on December 31, 2018. After initial appointments have been served, members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years each and until their successors are appointed and qualified. Except for initial appointments, terms shall expire on December 31 of the final year of the term, and terms shall begin on January 1 of the first year of the term. 
a.  Current members of the animal services task force shall be allowed to serve as members of the animal services advisory board until expiration of their term or removal as allowed by this section. 
b.  Each member appointed pursuant to this section shall serve at the pleasure of the elected official making the appointment or until his/her successor is appointed, unless such term ends sooner in the manner set forth herein. If the member appointed by an individual elected official is still serving at the time the appointing elected official vacates his/her office, the member shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed by the incoming elected official. Members may be reappointed to successive terms, without limitation. Any vacancy in members shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. If a member moves outside the county, that action shall constitute a resignation from the animal services advisory board, effective immediately. The office of a member shall be considered automatically vacant if the member is unable to exercise the duties of membership or if the member is absent from three (3) or more consecutive meetings of the animal services advisory board. 
(b)  Duties and functions. The DeKalb County Animal Advisory Board shall have the following duties and functions: 
(1)  To encourage, promote, and develop the humane and healthy treatment of animals in DeKalb County; 
(2)  To advise DeKalb County Animal Services and Enforcement and the governing authority on issues pertaining to the welfare and treatment of animals in DeKalb County; 
(3)  To assist DeKalb County Animal Services and Enforcement with the implementation of a long-term plan that improves practices, service delivery, efficiency, and facilities pertaining to animal services in DeKalb County; 
(4)  To identify additional strategies that may improve the lives of animals in DeKalb County; 
(5)  To assist DeKalb County Animal Services and Enforcement in investigating and securing grants and funding for animal services in DeKalb County; and 
(6)  To cooperate with and improve communications between animal advocacy groups, animal professionals, and local governments for the purpose of creating a comprehensive safety net of services, lifesaving measures, and animal population management activities. 
(c)  Meetings; officers; quorum. 
(1)  The animal services advisory board shall meet at least once a month and at such other times as it may deem necessary. The first meeting of the animal services advisory board shall be held within thirty (30) days of the date the last appointment to the animal services advisory board has been made. 
(2)  At its first meeting, the animal services advisory board shall elect one (1) of its members as a chairman and one (1) of its members as vice-chairman. The terms of the first chairman and vice-chairman shall expire on December 31, 2016. Subsequent chairmen and vice-chairmen shall be elected for two-year terms at the last meeting of the calendar year in which the term of the then-presiding chairman and vice-chairman expire. The terms of the newly elected chairman and vice-chairman shall begin on January 1 that immediately follows and expire on December 31 of the next calendar year. 
(3)  The chairman shall preside over meetings of the animal services advisory board, appoint committees as necessary, and perform other duties generally pertaining to the office of chairman. The vice-chairman shall perform the chairman's duties in the absence of the chairman. The chairman and vice-chairman take part in all deliberations and vote on all issues. The chairman and vice-chairman each may be selected to successive terms without limitation. 
(4)  A quorum of the animal services advisory board shall consist of at least seven (7) members. A majority of the present and voting members of the animal services advisory board is necessary to elect the chairman and vice-chairman and to exercise the rights and perform the duties identified in this section. 
(5)  The chief executive officer shall designate an employee to attend the meetings of the animal services advisory board. The director of DeKalb County Animal Services Enforcement or his or her designee and the director or designee of any third-party contractor who provides such services to DeKalb County also shall attend the meetings of the animal services advisory board. 
(6)  Meetings of the animal services advisory board shall be open to the public. Notice of a meeting of the animal services advisory board shall be provided on the department website of DeKalb County Animal Services and Enforcement for at least the seven (7) days prior to the meeting. 
(d)  Bylaws. The animal services advisory board may adopt bylaws consistent with the requirements set forth in this section. 
( Ord. No. 16-04 , Pt. 1, 5-10-16) 
Chapter 6 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; aviation, O.C.G.A. § 6-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1—6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 6-16. - Created. 
There is created the DeKalb County Airport Advisory Board. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4201) 
Sec. 6-17. - Determination of need. 
It is determined and declared that the present and projected rapid growth in commercial and private air traffic in the county area; the need for adequate airports to safely and efficiently serve the air transportation needs of the state and the county through its metropolitan areas; the need to eliminate airport hazards; the need to raise large amounts of capital for the establishment, operation and maintenance of present and future airports; the need to coordinate the operation of various airports within certain metropolitan areas of the state; the need to ensure the welfare, safety and convenience of citizens of the county and the entire state and to ensure the proper economic development of the entire state; make desirable and proper the creation of an airport advisory board composed of persons expert and knowledgeable in such matters to advise, recommend and consult with the chief executive officer and the board of commissioners in the management and operation of the DeKalb-Peachtree Airport, and the establishment of public policy therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4202) 
Sec. 6-18. - Members. 
(a)  The airport advisory board shall be composed of nine (9) members, each of whom shall be a resident of the county. 
(b)  For the purpose of appointing members of the advisory board, there shall be nine (9) posts for membership with appointments made as follows: 
(1)  Post 1, the member of the board of commissioners from commissioner district 1 shall make the appointment. 
(2)  Post 2, the member of the board of commissioners from commissioner district 2 shall make the appointment. 
(3)  Post 3, the member of the board of commissioners from commissioner district 3 shall make the appointment. 
(4)  Post 4, the member of the board of commissioners from commissioner district 4 shall make the appointment. 
(5)  Post 5, the member of the board of commissioners from commissioner district 5 shall make the appointment. 
(6)  Post 6, one (1) of the at-large members of the board of commissioners shall make the appointment. 
(7)  Post 7, the other at-large member shall make the appointment. 
(8)  Post 8, the chief executive officer shall make the appointment. 
(9)  Post 9, the board of commissioners shall make the appointment by majority vote with the concurrence of the chief executive officer. 
(c)  Each member of the advisory board shall serve for a term of office concurrent with the term of office of the person who appointed the member except that the member appointed to Post 9 shall serve a four-year term and except any such member shall hold over until a successor is appointed. 
(d)  The initial appointments to membership on the advisory board shall be made within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Thereafter, the chief executive officer and each member of the board of commissioners shall make their respective appointments to membership on the advisory board within fifteen (15) days after taking the oath of office for a full term of office as chief executive officer or a member of the board of commissioners. The appointment of the member for Post 9 shall be made within fifteen (15) days after the chief executive officer takes the oath of office for a full term of office. 
(e)  The members shall receive no compensation but shall be reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in pursuing the business of the advisory board, pursuant to rules and regulations established by the chief executive officer for reimbursement of county officers, agents and employees in the performance of official business. 
(f)  Should a vacancy occur in the membership of the advisory board either by resignation, death, change of residence, removal or for any other reason, the entity entitled to make the original appointment shall, within not more than thirty (30) days after the date of the vacancy, appoint a person to serve as a member of the advisory board for the unexpired term of the member whose post is vacant. Until a vacancy is filled, the total number of members of the advisory board, for the purposes of determining a quorum, shall not include the vacant post. 
(g)  Any member may be removed from office for good cause affecting the ability to perform duties as a member, for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office, or for violating the conflict of interest provisions of this section, by majority vote of the board of commissioners upon the motion of the person by whom the member was appointed or, in the case of the member holding Post 9, upon motion of any member of the board of commissioners, but only after a public hearing at which such member is given the right to present evidence in the member's own behalf and only upon a finding by two-thirds of the other members that good cause for removal affecting the member's ability to perform duties as a member exists, or that the member was guilty of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office, or that the member violated the provisions of subsection (h) of this section. 
(h)  Chapter 2, article II, division 2 shall apply to the members of the advisory board and they and each of them shall be deemed to be an "appointed official" with respect to their duties as members of the advisory board. Any violation of such division by a member of the advisory board shall be grounds for removal. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4003, 6-4004, 6-4006—6-4009) 
Sec. 6-19. - Officers and meetings. 
After the initial appointment of all members, the full membership of the airport advisory board shall meet as soon as practicable and shall elect one (1) of its members as chair and one (1) as vice-chair, each of whom shall continue as voting members in such positions for the succeeding year and until their successors are elected. Thereafter a chair and a vice-chair shall be elected in the same manner each year to serve for the succeeding year and until their successors are elected. The chair shall preside at meetings of the advisory board and the vice-chair shall preside in the chair's absence, and they shall have such other powers, duties and responsibilities as may be set out elsewhere in this article. The advisory board shall also designate a secretary to keep the minutes and records of the advisory board. A majority of the members of the advisory board shall constitute a quorum. A majority of the quorum may exercise any and all powers of the advisory board. The advisory board shall, as soon as practicable, adopt rules of procedure and rules of conduct of its business. The advisory board shall meet at least once a month and at such other times as it may deem necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4205) 
Sec. 6-20. - Duties. 
The airport advisory board shall act only in an advisory capacity and shall have no power of authority to bind the county or any officer, agent or employee thereof. However, the advisory board shall specifically have the duty to consider, evaluate and initiate recommendations to the governing authority: 
(1)  To acquire by purchase, lease, gift or otherwise, and to hold, lease, sell, use and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character or any interest therein. 
(2)  To exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire any private real property or any rights or interests therein, including any easements, as necessary or convenient for the accomplishments of the purposes of this article, including the elimination of airport hazards, in accordance with the provisions of any and all existing laws applicable to the exercise of such power. 
(3)  To plan, acquire, establish, develop, construct, enlarge, improve, maintain, equip, and lease all airport facilities owned and operated by the governing authority which it may acquire or plan to acquire. 
(4)  To regulate, protect and police such airports and all related activities and facilities. 
(5)  To enter into any contracts, leases or other agreements, promulgate any orders, set any tolls, fees or other charges for the use of airport facilities, property or services. 
(6)  To adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations for the orderly, safe, efficient and sanitary operation of airports and related facilities owned and operated by the county. 
(7)  To make application to any federal, state, county or municipal government or agency or to any other source, public or private, for loans, grants, guarantees or other financial assistance in aid of airports owned and operated by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4210) 
Secs. 6-21—6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DEKALB-PEACHTREE AIRPORT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire, construct, operate, etc., airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-36. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Aircraft means any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used primarily as safety equipment. 
Air operations area means any area of an airport used or intended to be used for landing, takeoff or surface maneuvering of aircraft, including but not limited to runways, taxiways, ramps and aprons. 
Airport means the DeKalb-Peachtree Airport. 
Control zone means that airspace of defined geographical dimensions defined by the F.A.A. 
Lease means a written agreement between the county and a person which gives rise to a new or renewed relationship of landlord and tenant or lessor and lessee for property, real or personal, located at PDK Airport, whether such written agreement creates a leasehold interest by an assignment, extension, modification, amendment or conversion for a different purpose of an existing lease. 
Rentals for commercial office and shop space, airplane tie-downs and Airport T-hangar space for aircraft parking shall not be considered as a "lease" for purposes of this chapter. 
Red demarcation line means the red line between the aircraft movement area (that area which is on the runway side of the red line that is normally used by aircraft) and the loading/parking areas (that area on the hangar side of the line normally used by motor vehicles and pedestrians.) 
(Code 1976, § 6-4002; Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-37. - Scope. 
This article applies to the airport. 
Sec. 6-38. - Violation of article or rules and regulations. 
(a)  Persons violating this article may be deprived of use of the airport. Any person operating or handling any aircraft, operating any vehicle, equipment or apparatus, or any person refusing to comply therewith, or is determined to be delinquent in payment for the use of airport facilities, or any person who knowingly or willfully violates this article or any rule or regulation in effect by the Federal Aviation Administration or the state may be promptly denied the use of the airport and its facilities, if it is determined that this denial is in the public interest, and for such length of time as may be determined by the county. Persons violating the rules and regulations shall be subject to the same penalties as for violation of a county ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall violate any rules and regulations promulgated by the airport director. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4033, 6-4080) 
Sec. 6-39. - Disclaimer of liability by county. 
The county assumes no responsibility for loss, injury or damage to persons or property by reason of fire, water, theft, vandalism, wind, flood, earthquake or collision damage, nor does it assume any liability for injury to persons while on the airport, while using the facilities or for property damage, nor does the county assume any responsibility or liability to persons, property or aircraft while taxiing, taking off or landing at or near the airport. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4029) 
Sec. 6-40. - Effect of emergency conditions. 
Emergency conditions existing on the airport will not mitigate or cancel any existing regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4004) 
Sec. 6-41. - Registration of aircraft. 
The owners of all aircraft based on the airport using county tie-down areas and county T-hangars will register their aircraft with the county prior to beginning operation. Any change in the ownership will require a change in registration. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4016) 
Sec. 6-42. - Certain areas restricted. 
No person shall enter upon the runways, taxiways or ramp areas, control tower, utility and service rooms or areas or other areas as may be designated "restricted," except: 
(1)  Persons assigned to duty therein. 
(2)  Persons authorized by the airport director. 
(3)  Passengers, under appropriate supervision, entering the apron for the purpose of embarkation and debarkation. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4003) 
Sec. 6-43. - Red demarcation line. 
No person or vehicle shall cross the red demarcation line without having two-way radio communication with the control tower and receiving prior approval by it. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4017) 
Sec. 6-44. - Minors. 
Minors who have not yet attained the age of eighteen (18) must be accompanied by at least one (1) parent or one (1) adult whenever in buildings or any air operations area. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4036) 
Sec. 6-45. - Report of hazardous conditions. 
Any person observing a condition or hazard that would jeopardize life, health, public safety or damage to property should report it to the airport director immediately. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4021) 
Sec. 6-46. - Accident reports. 
(a)  All persons involved in any accident, personal or automotive, occurring on the airport, shall make a full report thereof to the county as soon after the accident as possible. 
(b)  Persons involved in aircraft accidents occurring on the airport shall make a full written report thereof on available forms to the airport director as soon after an accident as possible, which report shall include their names and addresses. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4022, 6-4023) 
Sec. 6-47. - Damage to lights and fixtures. 
Any person damaging any light or fixture shall report this damage to the airport director immediately and shall be fully responsible for any costs required to repair or replace the damaged property. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4024) 
Sec. 6-48. - Responsibility for damage to leased premises. 
Tenants, lessees and grantees shall be fully responsible for all damages to buildings, equipment, real property and appurtenances in the ownership or custody of the county caused by negligence, abuse or carelessness on the part of their employees, agents, customers, visitors, suppliers or persons with whom they may do business. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4025) 
Sec. 6-49. - Structural and decorative changes to leased premises. 
No tenants, lessees or grantees will be permitted to effect structural or decorative changes or additions of any type without prior permission of the airport director. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4028) 
Sec. 6-50. - Signs. 
(a)  Except with the prior written approval of the county, a lessee shall not erect, maintain or display any signs or any advertising at or on the exterior parts of any building or structure, nor shall any freestanding signs of any nature be permitted on airport property without prior written approval. 
(b)  Upon the expiration or termination of the lease, the lessee shall remove, obliterate or paint out, as the county may direct, all signs and advertising on the premises, and shall restore the affected portion of the premises to the same condition as at the commencement of the lease. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4030) 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 21. 
Sec. 6-51. - Animals. 
All pets shall be on a leash and shall not be allowed on the operational areas of the airport. Any domestic animal found to be roaming free on airport property will be subject to impoundment by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4031) 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 6-52. - Smoking prohibited in certain areas. 
No person shall smoke on the airport ramp, in any hangar or shop, service station area, gasoline storage area or in any building, room or place on the airport where smoking is specifically prohibited, or within one hundred (100) feet of any fueling or defueling operation. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4026) 
Sec. 6-53. - Fire extinguishers. 
All tenants or lessees shall supply and maintain such adequate and readily accessible fire extinguishers as shall comply with the 1984 edition NFPA No. 10, Standard For Portable Fire Extinguishers, for the particular hazard involved. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4027) 
Sec. 6-54. - Firearms, explosives and inflammable materials. 
No person shall carry any firearm, explosive or inflammable material on the airport in any other manner than that provided by law except by written permission of the airport director. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4032) 
Sec. 6-55. - Interfering or tampering with aircraft. 
No person shall interfere or tamper with any aircraft, put in motion the engine of an aircraft or use any aircraft, aircraft parts, instruments or tools without permission of the owner or by specific direction of the airport director. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4034) 
Sec. 6-56. - Kite flying. 
Kite flying is prohibited within five thousand (5,000) feet of the nearest point of any runway. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4035) 
Secs. 6-57—6-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FLIGHT OPERATIONS 

Sec. 6-71. - Generally. 
(a)  All aeronautical activities at the airport and all flying of aircraft departing from or arriving in the airspace above the airport shall be conducted in conformity with the current pertinent provisions of the Federal Aviation Administration and orders issued by the county. 
(b)  The procedures set out in this division will apply in every case, except when instructed otherwise by the control tower. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4051, 6-4079) 
Sec. 6-72. - Operation under influence of liquor or drugs. 
No person under the influence of liquor or narcotic drugs shall operate an aircraft on the airport. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4011) 
Sec. 6-73. - Operation in reckless manner. 
No aircraft shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner or taxied except at a safe and reasonable speed. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4063) 
Sec. 6-74. - Aircraft certification required. 
No person shall operate from the airport any aircraft that is not fully certified by the Federal Aviation Administration and registered with the Federal Aviation Administration and carrying a current certificate of airworthiness. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4052) 
Sec. 6-75. - Radios required. 
All aircraft based on or operating into or out of the airport must be equipped with a two-way radio in operating condition. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4060) 
Sec. 6-76. - Landing, taxiing or taking off without radio contact. 
Pilots of aircraft shall not land, taxi or take off without a clearance from the control tower by radio or light signal during the hours of operation of the control tower. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4058) 
Sec. 6-77. - Transient aircraft without radios. 
Transient aircraft at the airport without a radio receiver will obtain, in person or by telephone, general instructions from the control tower prior to taxiing out for takeoff. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4061) 
Sec. 6-78. - Starting engines. 
No person shall start or run any engine in any aircraft unless a competent person is in the aircraft attending the engine controls. Blocks shall always be placed in front of the wheels before starting the engine unless the aircraft is provided with adequate parking brakes. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4053) 
Sec. 6-79. - Engine warm-ups or tests. 
Aircraft at the airport shall not perform warmup or engine test operations in any area that would result in a hazard to other aircraft, persons or property. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4054) 
Sec. 6-80. - Miscellaneous engine rules. 
No person shall run the engine of any aircraft at any location on the airport in such manner as to cause damage to other aircraft or property or in such manner as to blow paper, dirt or other materials across taxiways or runways so as to endanger the safety of operations on the airport. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4055) 
Sec. 6-81. - Aircraft equipment rules. 
No aircraft shall be operated on the airport unless it is equipped with tail or nose wheel and wheel brakes, except with the permission of the control tower operator. When any pilot of an aircraft that is not equipped with adequate brakes receives permission from the control tower operator to taxi the aircraft, the pilot shall not taxi the aircraft near buildings or parked aircraft unless an attendant is at the wing of the aircraft to assist the pilot; provided, that an aircraft with wings and tail higher than five (5) feet from the ground that does not have adequate brakes shall not be taxied on the airport, with or without the control tower operator's permission, but shall be towed if it is necessary to move the aircraft. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4058) 
Sec. 6-82. - Experimental flights and ground demonstrations. 
No experimental flight or ground demonstrations shall be conducted on the airport without the approval of the airport director. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4056) 
Sec. 6-83. - Taxiing. 
(a)  No person shall taxi an aircraft until ascertaining that there is no danger of collision with any person or object in the immediate area by visual inspection of the area. 
(b)  Pilots shall not taxi onto or across a runway until specifically cleared to do so by a radio or visual signal. 
(c)  Aircraft shall be taxied in accordance with the prescribed taxiing patterns when any particular runway is in use. 
(d)  Aircraft will request taxi instructions from the control tower prior to departing the parking area. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4062, 6-4064, 6-4065, 6-4078) 
Sec. 6-84. - Landings and takeoffs generally. 
(a)  Fixed-wing aircraft will land and take off on runways only as instructed by the control tower. All aircraft must have a two-way radio capable of communicating with the control tower. 
(b)  Procedures to be used when landing and taking off are as follows: 
(1)  Landing aircraft shall maintain traffic pattern altitude until turning onto base leg prior to commencing final approach. 
(2)  Departing aircraft shall climb out straight ahead using such techniques as are appropriate to reach an altitude of five hundred (500) feet before making a turn to depart the traffic pattern. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4066, 6-4069) 
Sec. 6-85. - Landings and takeoffs over populated areas. 
In all cases takeoffs and landings over populated areas shall be kept at a minimum in the interest of public safety and convenience. All aircraft shall climb out as quickly as possible within the safe operating limitations for the aircraft in order to minimize noise disturbance. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4074) 
Sec. 6-86. - Runway intersection departures. 
Departures from runway intersections for all twin engine aircraft are prohibited, except for certified S.T.O.L. aircraft. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4067) 
Sec. 6-87. - Flight patterns. 
(a)  All flight patterns for the airport shall be established by the airport director. The board of commissioners, as well as other interested parties, will be notified as changes are made in same. 
(b)  Roto-craft shall conform to the same traffic pattern as prescribed for single-engine aircraft in subsection (a) of this section unless otherwise instructed by the control tower. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4068, 6-4075) 
Sec. 6-88. - Calm wind runway. 
Whenever the wind velocity is less than five (5) knots per hour, aircraft shall ordinarily use the calm wind runway 20L, unless otherwise instructed by the control tower. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4070) 
Sec. 6-89. - Simulated forced landings. 
Simulated forced landings are prohibited within the airport control zone without prior approval from the control tower. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4071) 
Sec. 6-90. - Angle of entering traffic pattern. 
Unless otherwise instructed by the control tower, aircraft will enter the traffic pattern on downwind leg at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4072) 
Sec. 6-91. - Minimum altitude for flying over airport. 
No aircraft will fly directly over the airport, unless landing or taking off, at an altitude of less than three thousand (3,000) feet MSL. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4073) 
Sec. 6-92. - Area of operation of roto-craft. 
Roto-craft will not be operated within two hundred (200) feet of any area where light aircraft are parked or operating, which may cause damage to the aircraft or personal bodily injury. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4076) 
Sec. 6-93. - Dirigibles, blimps, gliders, etc. 
Prior authorization is required before airships, dirigibles, blimps, gliders, free balloons, motorless aircraft or aircraft with a total gross weight in excess of seventy-five thousand (75,000) pounds land or take off at the airport. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4077) 
Sec. 6-94. - Parking of aircraft. 
No person shall park aircraft in any area on the airport other than that prescribed by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4057) 
Secs. 6-95—6-103. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REPAIRING AND SERVICING AIRCRAFT 

Sec. 6-104. - Removal of disabled aircraft. 
(a)  All disabled aircraft and parts thereof on the airport shall be promptly removed from the air operations areas by the owners. Unairworthy aircraft, wrecks, "junkers" or parts thereof shall not be parked or stored anywhere on the airport or leased sites except in a hangar unless awaiting bona fide scheduled repairs or unless express authority is granted by the county. 
(b)  If any person refuses to move an aircraft as directed by the county, the aircraft may be towed away by the county at the owner's or operator's expense, and without liability for damage which may result in the course of or after this moving. This subsection shall apply to removal of a wrecked or damaged aircraft and its parts. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4101, 6-4102) 
Sec. 6-105. - Repair station certificate. 
Unless otherwise permitted by operating agreement, any person desiring to conduct maintenance service for the repair of aircraft engines, airframes, propellers, instruments, accessories or radios for hire, shall comply with the regulations established in Federal Aviation Regulation, part 145, and shall hold a suitable valid "repair station certificate" issued by the administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration authorizing the repair service. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4105) 
Sec. 6-106. - Compliance with department of fire and rescue services regulations. 
All regulations and recommendations of the department of fire and rescue services shall be adhered to with regard to all aspects of fueling and handling of inflammables. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4110; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 2, 11-27-01) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 6-107. - Where repairs to be effected. 
(a)  No person shall repair an aircraft, aircraft engine, propeller, or apparatus in any area of the airport other than that specifically designated for this purpose by the county, except that minor adjustments may be done while the aircraft is on a loading ramp preparatory to take off when this adjustment is necessary to prevent a delayed departure. 
(b)  No person shall clean or make any repairs to motor vehicles anywhere on the airport other than in designated shop areas, except those minor repairs necessary to remove a motor vehicle from the airport; nor shall any person move, interfere or tamper with any motor vehicle, or put in motion the engine, or take or use any motor vehicle part, instrument or tool thereof, without the permission of the owner or satisfactory evidence of the right to do so duly presented to the county. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4008, 6-4103) 
Sec. 6-108. - Discriminatory prices. 
No person shall engage in any aeronautical activity for furnishing services to the public at the airport unless fair, reasonable and not unjustly discriminatory prices are charged for each unit or service; provided that reasonable and nondiscriminatory discounts, rebates or other similar types of price reductions may be made to volume purchasers. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4104) 
Sec. 6-109. - Gasoline trucks generally. 
When backing gasoline trucks, a signal person shall be available to guide the driver. The driver shall remain in the vehicle cab and shall not stand on the running board or fender while backing. Gasoline trucks will at no time be blocked or so positioned as to prevent a rapid removal of the truck. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4106) 
Sec. 6-110. - Fueling operations. 
The following rules govern the fueling and defueling of aircraft: 
(1)  No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while the engine is running or being warmed by application of exterior heat, or while the aircraft is in a hangar or enclosed space. 
(2)  No person shall smoke within one hundred (100) feet of an aircraft being fueled or refueled. 
(3)  No person shall operate any radio transmitter or receiver, or switch electrical appliances off or on in an aircraft during fueling or defueling. 
(4)  During refueling the aircraft and the fuel dispensing apparatus shall both be grounded to a point or points of zero electrical potential. 
(5)  When filling a truck from storage, two (2) persons shall be in active attendance except that only one (1) person shall be required if a nonlocking valve is in use on the fill pipe and control for the valve must be continuously in the attendant's hand in order to maintain fuel flow. 
(6)  No person shall use any material during fueling or defueling of aircraft which is likely to cause a spark or be a source of ignition. 
(7)  Adequate fire extinguishers shall be within ready reach of all persons engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft. 
(8)  No person shall start the engine of any aircraft where there is any gasoline on the ground under the aircraft. 
(9)  Fueling hoses and equipment shall be maintained in a safe, sound and nonleaking condition and shall be approved by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(10)  All hoses, funnels and appurtenances used in fueling and defueling operations shall be equipped with a grounding device to prevent ignition of volatile liquids. 
(11)  All fueling and defueling of aircraft shall be conducted at least fifty (50) feet from any hangar or other building. 
(12)  No aircraft shall be fueled or defueled while passengers are on board the aircraft unless a passenger loading ramp is in place at the cabin door of the aircraft, the aircraft door is in open position and a cabin attendant is present at or near the cabin door. 
(13)  Persons engaged in the fueling and drainage of aircraft shall exercise care to prevent overflow of fuel. Persons responsible will take proper measures to remove volatile liquid when it is spilled during transfer. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4107) 
Sec. 6-111. - Storage of flammables. 
Gasoline, oil and solvent drums or receptacles shall not be stored on apron and ramp areas in excess of amounts actually needed as current stock. Any material of this type that is kept in subject areas will be kept enclosed and covered in housing of a design and type as meets the approval of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4108) 
Sec. 6-112. - Aircraft to be properly grounded in hangars. 
No person shall park an aircraft in a hangar unless the aircraft is properly grounded. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4109) 
Sec. 6-113. - Liquid disposal. 
No fuels, oils, dopes, paints, solvents or acids shall be disposed of or dumped in drains, basins or ditches on the airport. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4111) 
Sec. 6-114. - Open-flame operations. 
No person shall conduct any open-flame operations in any hangar or on the airport unless specifically authorized by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4112) 
Secs. 6-115—6-121. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - VEHICULAR TRAFFIC[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 17. 

Sec. 6-122. - State operator's license; motor vehicles to be registered. 
(a)  No person shall operate motorized equipment of any kind on the airport unless possessed of a valid state operator's license. 
(b)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle in the air operations area without having first registered it with the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4005) 
Sec. 6-123. - Off-road vehicles. 
Motorcycles, dune buggies or other types of motorized vehicles consisting of two (2) wheels or more are prohibited on the airport except on designated streets and parking lots. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4037) 
Cross reference— Off-road vehicles, § 17-241 et seq. 
Sec. 6-124. - Operating under the influence of liquor or drugs. 
No person under the influence of liquor or narcotic drugs shall operate a motor vehicle on the airport. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4011) 
State Law reference— Driving under influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 
Sec. 6-125. - Reckless driving prohibited; speed limits established. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle of any kind on the airport in a negligent manner or in excess of the speed limits prescribed by the county. Speed limits shall not exceed twenty-five (25) miles per hour in ramp, apron, aircraft parking and hangar areas. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4007) 
State Law reference— Reckless driving, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-390. 
Sec. 6-126. - Right-of-way of pedestrians and aircraft; passing taxiing aircraft. 
Pedestrians and aircraft shall at all times have a right-of-way over vehicular traffic. All vehicles shall pass to the rear of taxiing aircraft. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4009) 
Sec. 6-127. - Signals required; obedience to signs. 
No person operating a motor vehicle on the airport shall fail to give proper signals, or fail to observe the directions of posted traffic signs. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4010) 
Sec. 6-128. - Overloading motor vehicle prohibited; riding outside motor vehicle prohibited. 
No person shall operate any motor vehicle on the airport overloaded or carrying more passengers than that for which the vehicle was designed. No person shall ride on the running board, stand up in the body of a moving vehicle or ride on the outside of the body of a vehicle or with arms or legs protruding from the body of a motor vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4012) 
Sec. 6-129. - Unsafe vehicle prohibited. 
No vehicle shall be operated on the airport if it is so constructed, equipped or loaded as to endanger persons or property. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4013) 
Sec. 6-130. - Special flags, lights, etc. 
Vehicles operating in special and infrequent instances shall display an approved nine-square-foot flag, upon special permission of airport manager. Between the hours of sunset and sunrise these vehicles shall display an overhead red light which shall be visible from all directions and of sufficient brilliance to be seen under clear weather a distance of at least one (1) mile with the naked eye, plus normal operating headlights and taillights in addition to two (2) red reflectors on each side and on the rear. Nonmotor-propelled carts and trailers shall have two (2) amber reflectors on each side and two (2) front and two (2) rear. All reflectors shall be visible for at least five hundred (500) feet when opposed by normal vehicle headlights. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4014) 
Sec. 6-131. - Clearance by control tower to cross runways. 
No vehicles that have been permitted to operate on the airport shall proceed closer than two hundred (200) feet from the edge of the runways nor across any of the runways prior to being cleared by the control tower. It is the responsibility of all vehicle operators to be conversant with the standard airport light signal regardless of whether the vehicle is radio-equipped. 
(Code 1976, § 6-4015) 
Sec. 6-132. - Parking. 
(a)  The county may tow or otherwise move motor vehicles which are parked by their owners or operators on the airport in violation of the regulations of the airport, at the operator's expense and without liability for damage which may result in the course of moving. 
(b)  No person shall park a motor vehicle, for loading, unloading or any other purpose, on the airport other than in the areas specifically established for parking and in the manner prescribed by signs, lines or other means. No person shall abandon any motor vehicle on the airport by leaving the vehicle unattended for thirty (30) consecutive days. No person shall park in a manner so as to obstruct roadways, nor in aircraft parking areas, nor on grassed areas. 
(c)  When parking adjacent to a runway, all vehicles must park parallel to the runway and at least one hundred (100) feet to the outside of the runway lights. 
(Code 1976, §§ 6-4018, 6-4020) 
Cross reference— Stopping, standing and parking generally, § 17-131 et seq. 
DIVISION 5. - LEASES 

Sec. 6-133. - Authority to lease. 
The Governing Authority of DeKalb County, Georgia has the authority to enter into leases and the renewal of leases of premises located at the airport. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-134. - Consistency with long-range master plan. 
Airport property proposed to be leased shall be located in areas designated for the proposed uses according to the airport master. Airport property proposed to be leased shall be located in areas designated for the proposed uses according to the airport master and layout plans and the DeKalb County comprehensive land use plan (current edition) and shall not constrain the county's ability to achieve its long-range developmental plans. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-135. - Requirement for appraisal. 
Prior to extending any lease covered by this article or amending the length of the term of any lease covered by this article, the airport director shall obtain one (1) professional airport-aviation related appraisal of the available leasehold interest in order to determine the current and future fair market value (FMV) to be placed on such leasehold. One (1) review appraisal shall be obtained to ensure the overall validity and methodology used in the actual appraisal. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-136. - Requirements for renewal of leases. 
(a)  All requests for renewal of a lease by a lessee must be made at least three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days prior to the expiration of the lease term or such requests shall not be considered by the county. The written request to extend the term of any lease must contain the details of the lessee's proposal for the extension and must address all of the factors set forth in this section. The county shall exercise good efforts to conclude negotiations for renewal of the subject lease no later than six (6) months before the expiration of the existing lease. 
(b)  The written request may be hand delivered or mailed (U. S. first class, postage prepaid) to the airport director or designee. If a request for renewal or extension that complies with the requirements of this section is not received by the airport director in a reasonably timely manner, such as may result in the subject premises becoming vacant at the expiration of the existing lease term, the airport director shall then take any and all necessary action to seek competitive offers pursuant to a publicly advertised request for proposal process for rental of the subject premises at the expiration of the lease at issue. 
(c)  A request for renewal of any lease shall be for no more than the shortest reasonable duration taking into account: (1) the operational needs and capital investment in leasehold improvements of the tenant; and (2) the ability of the county to manage capacity and long-term airport development. In no case shall the term of any lease exceed twenty (20) years, unless it is determined by the governing authority that substantial benefit would inure to the public. 
(d)  A request for renewal shall, in part, include: 
(1)  The legal names of all persons requesting renewal of the lease; and 
(2)  The names of the members of the board of directors, chief executive officer, chief operating officer, the president, and executive vice-presidents, of any form of corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, or association requesting renewal of the lease; and 
(3)  A copy of the articles of incorporation, corporate charter, and partnership or joint venture agreement of any form of corporation, partnership, limited liability company, joint venture, or association requesting renewal of the lease. 
(e)  In the event a timely request for renewal is received by the airport director, the county, shall perform its due diligence in deciding whether to extend the current lease, and shall consider such factors as: 
(1)  The history of the relationship with the lessee, including whether the lessee has violated any airport or county polices, rules, or regulations or has violated any environmental laws, rules or regulations, including but not limited to unreported fuel spills, unapproved washing or de-icing of aircraft; 
(2)  Whether the lessee has in all material respects complied with the existing lease terms, including whether all lease payments have been made in a timely manner; 
(3)  Whether the proposed rental payment meets or exceeds the appraised fair market value of the premises; 
(4)  Whether the current lessee has agreed to accept lease provisions recommended by the airport director, including, but not limited to, a requirement to make capital improvements to the leasehold with such capital improvements reverting to the county at the expiration of the lease; escalating rental payments; payments for various fees; additional rental payments to the county in the form of a fixed percentage of gross revenue of tenant or gross rental revenue received by the tenant from approved sub-lessees; 
(5)  Whether the overall proposal improves or adds value to the airport premises, and is consistent with the long-term vision of the governing authority; 
(6)  Whether the overall proposal adds value or benefit to the communities surrounding the airport and DeKalb County; 
(7)  The written recommendation of the airport advisory board; 
(8)  The opinion and recommendation of the airport director; and 
(9)  The appraisal required by section 6-134. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-137. - Airport investment. 
Tenant investment actions in existing facilities, or in the construction of new facilities, will be shaped through this division and the long-range master plan or airport land use or any airport layout plans. Tenant investment shall be approved in advance by the governing authority; constructed in accordance with airport guidelines, applicable building codes and environmental standards and subject to ongoing oversight by the county. The county may condition its approval of tenant improvement requests in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
Unless otherwise stated in a lease, title to improvements financed by tenants or third parties shall revert to the county at the expiration or termination of the lease or earlier as provided for in the lease agreement. The county may, at its option, negotiate in the lease the right to require that tenant demolish and remove such improvements and return the premises to their original condition, ordinary wear and tear excepted. 
Except as provided in the lease agreement, tenants shall be responsible for maintaining the entire premises including existing structures, all facilities, and any improvements to the premises. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-138. - Encumbrances. 
A tenant shall not mortgage, pledge, assign as collateral, encumber, or in any manner transfer, convey, or dispose of leased premises or improvements thereon or any interest therein for any purpose or intent without the prior written consent of the governing authority, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. The encumbrance of land is expressly prohibited under any circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-139. - Prohibited activities. 
Airport land or improvements shall not be occupied or used for any activity that is contrary to the safe and efficient operation of the airport, including, but not limited to, any activity that jeopardizes the safety of the public, aircraft, or the property located at the airport, or any activity that is inconsistent with current Federal Aviation Administration grant certifications and assurances. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-140. - Compliance. 
The airport director shall monitor compliance with lease provisions. The premises of each lease shall be subject to periodic physical inspection and audits conducted by the county finance department. The premise inspections and lease compliance audits should be conducted as appropriate with reasonable advance notification. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-141. - Consideration of proposal by airport advisory board. 
All requests for extensions of leases shall be presented to the airport advisory board by the airport director for consideration and evaluation within a reasonable time of receipt. After due consideration of any proposal and request for extension of a lease and within a reasonable time of its first presentation to the airport advisory board, the airport advisory board shall provide the airport director with its written recommendation. The airport director shall then consider the airport advisory board's recommendation and shall forward his/her own written recommendation to the chief executive officer along with the recommendation of the airport advisory board within a reasonable time of receipt of the request to extend the term of the lease. If the airport director does not receive a timely written recommendation from the airport advisory board, the airport director shall nonetheless forward his/her own recommendation to the chief executive officer as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-142. - Final award. 
Once placed upon the agenda, the board of commissioners shall have the authority to award such leases in accordance with the factors in section 6-135, or such other factors as the board of commissioners shall deem necessary. After consideration of the agenda item, the board of commissioners also has the discretion to take any necessary action to seek competitive offers pursuant to a publicly advertised request for proposal process for rental of the subject premises at the expiration of the lease at issue. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Sec. 6-143. - Exemption from 365-day requirement. 
If at the time of the effective date of this division any affected person desires an extension of a lease covered by this article and cannot meet the 365-day requirement of section 6-135(a), then such person shall within sixty (60) business days of approval of this article by the chief executive officer, give written notice of intent of his request to comply with the provisions of this division to the airport director who is then authorized to consider such request in accordance with the remaining requirements set forth in sections 6-136(c), (d), and (e), (1)—(6) of this division. 
(Ord. No. 06-24, Pt. I, 11-28-06) 
Secs. 6-144—6-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AIRPORT AREA DEVELOPMENT RESTRICTIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; land development, Ch. 14; zoning, Ch. 27. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 6-201—6-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEKALB-PEACHTREE AIRPORT 

Sec. 6-216. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Airport means the DeKalb-Peachtree Airport. 
Airport hazard means any structure or tree or use of land that obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport or is otherwise hazardous to the landing or taking off of aircraft. 
Director means the public works director or the designee thereof. 
Landing area means the areas of the airport used for the landing, takeoff or taxiing of aircraft. 
Nonconforming use means any structure, tree or use of land that does not conform to this division or an amendment to this division, as of the effective date thereof. 
Structure means any object constructed or installed by humans, including, but without limitation, any building, tower, smokestack or overhead transmission line. 
Tree means any object of natural growth. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3001) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-217. - Compliance. 
It is unlawful to violate this division or any regulation, order or ruling promulgated under this division. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3014) 
Sec. 6-218. - Airport zoning maps. 
(a)  In order to outline definitely the horizontal and vertical limits beyond which the projection of any structure or tree will constitute an airport hazard, the Airport Zoning Map A and the Zoning Map B, dated July 14, 1960, of the airport is incorporated into this division and made a part hereof. 
(b)  The established elevation of the airport is one thousand one (1,001) feet above mean sea level. 
(c)  The airport reference point is established at a location described as follows: From the intersection of the centerlines of the NE/SW runway and the NW/SE runway go southwesterly along the centerline of the NE/SW runway a distance of two hundred twenty (220) feet to the airport reference point. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3002) 
Sec. 6-219. - Zones. 
In order to carry out the purposes of this division, airport approach surface zones, horizontal surface zones, conical surface zones and transitional surface zones are established as hereinafter defined and as shown on the airport zoning map. The surface of each of the zones constitutes a ceiling above which no structures or objects of natural growth are to be constructed or allowed to grow. 
(1)  Approach surface zone. The approach surface zone is an inclined plane located directly above the approach area. The dimensions of the approach area are measured horizontally. The approach areas for each particular runway are symmetrically located with respect to the extended runway centerlines and have lengths and widths as shown on the airport zoning map, which also show the slopes of the respective approach surface zones. 
(2)  Horizontal surface zone. The horizontal surface zone is a plane, circular in shape, with its height one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation and having a radius from the airport reference point as indicated on the airport zoning map. 
(3)  Conical surface zone. The conical surface zone extends upward and outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface zone with a slope of 20:1 measured in a vertical plane passing through the airport reference point. Measuring radially outward, from the periphery of the horizontal surface zone, the conical surface extends for a horizontal distance as shown on the airport zoning map. 
(4)  Transitional surface zones. The transitional surface zones are inclined planes with a slope of 7:1 measured upward and outward in a vertical plane at right angles to the centerline of the runway. The transitional surface zones, symmetrically located on either side of the runway, extend upward and outward from a line on either side of the runway, which is parallel to and level with the runway centerline. These parallel lines are at a horizontal distance from the runway centerline equal to one-half of the minimum width of each approach area as shown on the airport zoning map. 
The 7:1 transitional surface also extends from the edges of all approach surfaces upward and outward to the intersection with the horizontal surface, or the conical surface zones, for the entire ten-thousand-foot length of noninstrument approaches. The approach surfaces for instrument runways have a 7:1 transitional surface for their entire length of fifty thousand (50,000) feet. At the outer extremity of the approach, the transitional surface extends a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet, measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surfaces and at right angles to the runway centerline extended. This is shown on the airport zoning map. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3003) 
Sec. 6-220. - Height limits. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow or maintained in any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone to a height in excess of the height limit established for the zone. For purposes of this section, height limits shown on the airport zoning maps are established for each of the zones in question. If the height limits of two (2) zones covering the same area vary, the lower height limitation is controlling. Notwithstanding any other provisions, this division shall not establish for any particular parcel of land, at any particular point within this parcel, a height limit of less than thirty (30) feet above the surface elevation of the land at that point. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3004) 
Sec. 6-221. - Use restrictions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division, no use may be made of land within any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of the flyers using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise endanger the landing, taking off or maneuvering of aircraft. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3005) 
Sec. 6-222. - Nonconforming uses. 
Sections 6-220 and 6-221 do not require removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to such effective date and is diligently prosecuted and completed within two (2) years thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3006) 
Sec. 6-223. - Variances. 
Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of any structure or permit the growth of any tree or use of property, not in accordance with the provisions of this division, may apply for a variance therefrom. This variance shall be allowed where a literal application or enforcement would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest, but would do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3007) 
Sec. 6-224. - Permits. 
(a)  Future uses. No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to this division. If this determination is in the affirmative, the permit applied for shall be granted. 
(b)  Existing uses. Before any existing use, structure or tree may be replaced, substantially altered or repaired, rebuilt, allowed to grow higher or replanted, within any airport approach surface zone, horizontal surface zone, conical surface zone or transitional surface zone, a permit must be secured, authorizing this replacement, change or repair. No such permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure or tree to be made or become higher or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for permits for replacement, change or repair of existing uses, structures or trees shall be granted. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3008) 
Sec. 6-225. - Hazard marking and lighting. 
Any permit or variance granted under section 6-223 or 6-224 may, if this action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purposes of this division and reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question, at the owner's expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard, or to permit the airport, at its own expense, to install, operate and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard as specified by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3009) 
Sec. 6-226. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the director made in the administration of this division may appeal to the board of appeals. 
(b)  All appeals taken under this section must be taken within ten (10) days following the decision appealed from, by filing with the director and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The director shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the section appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the director certifies to the board, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in the director's opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In this case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by order of the board on notice to the county and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide it within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person and/or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board may, in conformity with the provisions of this division reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director. 
(f)  The board shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from these facts in reversing or affirming or modifying any order, requirement, decision or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this division. 
(g)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the director, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this division, or to effect any variation in this division. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3010) 
Cross reference— Board of appeals, § 27-66 et seq. 
Sec. 6-227. - Administrative officer. 
The director is designated the administrative officer charged with the duty of administering and enforcing the provisions of this division. The duties of the director include that of hearing and deciding all permits under section 6-224, but the director shall not have or exercise any of the powers or duties herein delegated to the board of appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3011) 
Sec. 6-228. - Board of appeals. 
(a)  There is hereby created a board of appeals to have and exercise the following powers: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the director in the enforcement of this division. 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this division and to any amendments hereto. 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances under section 6-223. 
(b)  The board of appeals shall be the board set up under the provisions established under chapter 27, article II, division 3 and shall be governed by these provisions. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3012) 
Sec. 6-229. - Review of decisions of board of appeals. 
Any person aggrieved, or taxpayer affected, by any decision of the board of appeals under this division may appeal to the board of commissioners, provided that the appeal is filed within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision of the board of appeals being appealed. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3013) 
Sec. 6-230. - Conflicting regulations. 
Where this division imposes a greater or more stringent restriction upon the use of land than is imposed or required by another ordinance, the provisions of this division shall govern. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3015) 
Chapter 7 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Historic preservation, Ch. 13.5; transporting building materials at night, § 16-6; mobile home taxation, etc., § 24-41 et seq.; airport development restrictions, § 6-201 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 12; land development, Ch. 14; signs, Ch. 21; moving of buildings and other oversized loads, § 23-46 et seq.; zoning, Ch. 27; local acts relating to buildings, App. B, § 201 et seq. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; constitutional grant of power to provide for regulation of construction, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); statutory authority to regulate construction, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-1 et seq. 
Note— It should be noted that Res. No. 96-02R, adopted June 11, 1996 prohibited the self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors in DeKalb County as specified in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). The user's attention is directed to Act No. 1046, § 3 which provides for the exemption from said self-inspection procedures. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Disclosure of type of unit upon sale, etc. 
(a)  When permitted no person shall transfer property for sale, lease or rent for residential occupancy purposes, other than single-family detached dwellings, without the declaration of the type of unit to be sold, leased or rented being provided in writing to the purchaser, lessee or renter by the owner. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section dwelling units are classified as follows: 
(1)  Type 1 occupancy. "Type 1 occupancy" means a dwelling unit which is served solely by independent and self-contained plumbing, electrical and mechanical systems. The services shall be either provided directly within the dwelling unit or shall be provided to the unit from an area immediately adjacent thereto and independent from any other unit. 
(2)  Type 2 occupancy. "Type 2 occupancy" means a dwelling unit where plumbing, electrical and mechanical services are, or may be, provided by common systems serving more than one (1) dwelling unit. 
(c)  In addition to written notice, the owner of any property to be sold, leased or rented, other than single-family detached dwellings, shall cause to be posted and conspicuously maintained throughout the original sale, lease or rental period, on the property affected, a sign of at least six (6) square feet indicating the type of dwelling unit with a brief listing of the pertinent provisions pertaining thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1021; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1021), 3-28-89) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2 and in the codes adopted pursuant to section 7-51, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 
Adopted state codes shall mean all codes and standards adopted pursuant to Division 3 of Article II of Chapter 7 of this Code. 
Board shall mean the technical board of appeals. 
Building official shall mean the director of the development department or designee. 
Director shall mean the director of the development department or designee. 
Emergency shall mean any situation resulting in imminent danger to the public health or safety or the loss of an essential governmental service. 
End user shall mean the ultimate consumer of a product, especially the one for whom a product has been designed. 
Governing authority of DeKalb County shall mean the county's board of commissioners and its chief executive officer. 
Independent shall mean not affiliated in any way with the applicant for the variance or any county official or employee. 
Justifiable cause shall mean a reason given by the applicant or permit holder that in the opinion of the director is valid and sufficient. Justifiable cause does not include delay that is created by the applicant or permit holder or delay that reasonably could have been avoided by the applicant or permit holder. 
Ordinary repairs shall mean nonstructural repairs to a building or structure or repairs to a mechanical system, gas system, plumbing system, electrical system, and energy conservation system for which the codes specify no minimum requirements or standards or do not address the repair. Ordinary repairs do not include additions, alterations, relocations, or replacements to buildings or structures, water supplies, sewers, drains, drain leaders, gas, soil waste, vent or other similar piping, electrical systems or wiring, mechanical systems or other work for which a permit is required by the code or the building official. 
Pre-qualified alternate registered engineer shall mean a registered design professional recommended by the technical board of appeals and approved by the board of commissioners for compliance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26 et seq., as amended. 
Protective shall mean a method or material that provides the same or greater protection of health, safety, life or property as provided by the construction requirements set forth in this Code. 
Registered design professional shall mean architects, civil, structural, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing engineers and others whose services require licensing by the state. 
Technical codes shall mean collectively the International Building Code, International Residential Code, International Plumbing Code, International Mechanical Code, International Fuel Gas Code, National Electrical Code, International Energy Conservation Code as adopted, amended, and mandated by the State of Georgia along with amendments and local supplemental codes as adopted by DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Secs. 7-3—7-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-11, adopted Mar. 28, 1989, amended the provisions of Arts. II—V in their entirety. Prior to amendment, the provisions pertained to technical codes, permits, etc., and derived from Code 1976, Part. 9, Chs. 1—4. Inclusion of the provision of Ord. No. 89-11 as a new Art. II, Divs. 1—6, was at the discretion of the editors. 
State Law reference— State minimum building standards, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.; adoption of technical codes by reference, O.C.G.A. § 36-13-3. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-16. - Technical board of appeals. 
(a)  Appointment. There is hereby established a technical board of appeals, which shall consist of nine (9) members. The chief executive officer shall appoint two (2) members and each member of the board of commissioners shall appoint one (1) member to the technical board of appeals. The director of the development department shall serve as a non-voting ex-officio member of the technical board of appeals. 
(b)  Qualifications of members. All members of the board shall be residents and homeowners in DeKalb County. All members of the board, except the citizen appointees from commission districts six and seven, shall have at least seven (7) years experience in the building industry. One (1) of the members of the board shall be a civil engineer having experience in drainage and structural issues and one (1) member shall be an architect licensed in Georgia with a minimum of seven (7) years experience in residential-home-design. Members of the board shall hold no other county office, appointed position within the county or any other county compensated position. 
(c)  Filling board vacancies generally. Any vacancy on the board shall be filled in accordance with the original appointing procedure for the vacant position. Any newly appointed member shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(d)  Initial terms of members. The nine (9) board members who are appointed by virtue hereof shall hold initial terms of office as follows: 
(1)  Commissioners representing districts two and three and seven shall each appoint one (1) board member who shall hold office through the last day of December, 2006; 
(2)  Commissioners representing districts one, four, five and six shall each appoint one (1) board member who shall hold office through the last day of December, 2008; and 
(3)  The chief executive officer of DeKalb County shall appoint two (2) board members. One (1) board member shall hold office through the last day of December 2006 and the other board member shall hold office through the last day of December 2008. 
(4)  Subject to section 7-16(e), the successors to each of the initial appointments shall hold office for a period of four (4) years from the end of the previous term. 
(e)  Terms of board members. Terms of each board member shall absolutely expire on the last day of the actual term in office of the appointing official or on the last day of December of the board member's four-year term, whichever comes first, regardless whether a successor has been appointed to the board member's position. 
(f)  Successive terms. Members of the board may be reappointed to successive terms, but in no event shall a member be permitted to serve more than eight (8) consecutive years. 
(g)  Organization, officers and rules. The board shall elect a chair, vice-chair and secretary. The persons so elected shall serve in these capacities for a term of one (1) year. No person may serve in any of these capacities for more than three (3) consecutive years. The vice-chair will preside at the meetings of the board in the chair's absence. The board shall determine its procedural rules and regulations, and otherwise take such action as is appropriate for the management of the affairs committed to its supervision. The board's rules and regulations shall be consistent with this chapter and necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  Quorum. Five (5) members of the board shall constitute a quorum at any meeting and a vote of five (5) voting members shall be required to enable the board to act. 
(i)  Meeting accommodations and staff support. The governing authority of the county shall provide the board with suitable office space, meeting accommodations and clerical support, as the governing authority shall deem appropriate and necessary. 
(j)  Compensation for board members. The governing authority of DeKalb County shall determine compensation for members of the board. 
(k)  Removal at will. The chief executive officer or the appointing member of the board of commissioners shall have authority to remove the member of the technical board of appeals appointed by such official, at will, with out without cause. 
(l)  Removal for cause. Any member of the board may be removed from the board at anytime for cause by the governing authority of DeKalb County, after written notice and an opportunity to be heard within fourteen (14) days after notice. A majority vote of the full membership of the board of commissioners shall be necessary in order to remove a member from the board for cause. Cause shall include but is not limited to misconduct, incompetence, failure to attend three (3) consecutive meetings of the board, failure to attend seventy-five (75) percent or more of the board's meetings within any calendar year, conviction of any felony, or conviction of a misdemeanor related to violence or moral turpitude. In the event of resignation or removal of a member, the newly appointed member shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term. 
(m)  Powers and duties. The board shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To hear appeals of decisions and interpretations of the director; 
(2)  To hear appeals of the director's decision related to the use of alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment and appliances pursuant to section 7-31(m); 
(3)  To hear appeals of the director's decision related to unsafe conditions as regulated in section 7-40; 
(4)  To hear and grant variances from the provisions of Division 3 of this chapter; 
(5)  To hear and grant applications for pre-qualification of alternate registered engineers as referenced in section 7-34(i) as well as remove pre-qualification status from alternate registered engineers as the board deems appropriate in its sole discretion; and 
(6)  To review proposed amendments to the land development and technical codes and provide recommendations on such amendments to the governing authority. 
(n)  Application forms; filing of applications; application fees. Applications for appeals, variances, and alternate registered engineers shall be filed on forms provided by the development department and shall not be considered authorized or accepted unless complete in all respects, including the payment of any application fees. Application fees shall be established by the board of commissioners. 
(o)  Appeals of the director's decisions. 
(1)  Notice of appeal of a decision by the director to the board shall be in writing and filed with the director within thirty (30) calendar days after the director's decision is rendered. Appeals shall be on a form provided by the development director. 
(2)  An appeal shall be sustained only upon an express written finding by the board that the director's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the director acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all applicable laws are met. The board may also remand any appeal for the receipt of additional information. 
(3)  In the case of a building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the director, constitutes an unsafe condition as that terms is used in section 7-40, the director may, in the decision or order, limit the time for the filing of such appeals to not less than two (2) days and the director may request expedited review by the board of the appeal. 
(4)  If the director's decision(s) results in a revocation or denial of the issuance of any permit or certificate authorized by this chapter, the affected applicant or permittee may request, and shall be allowed, to meet with the director within two (2) business days after the initial issuance of such order or decision. At such meeting the affected applicant or permittee shall be allowed to present any evidence or testimony to the director that the applicant deems appropriate. If such a meeting is not requested or the director does not alter the decision to revoke or deny the issuance of any permit or certificate, then the director's decision becomes final. During the pendency of any subsequent appeal to the board, the notice of appeal shall not stay enforcement of the director's decision and the applicant or permittee may not take any action, perform any act or occupy any structure that contradicts the director's revocation or denial decision in this regard. 
(p)  Variances. 
(1)  The owner of a building, structure or service system, or duly authorized representative, may file a request to the board to vary any provision of the technical codes in accordance with the provisions of this section on forms promulgated by the director. 
(2)  In granting a variance, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this Code. 
(3)  No variance may be granted unless such variance can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of this chapter. No variance shall be granted by the board to: 
(A)  Allow any variance which conflicts with or changes any requirement established as a condition by the board of commissioners or the zoning board of appeals; 
(B)  Reduce, waive or modify in any manner any minimum standards set forth in the adopted codes generally identified in section 7-51, as amended; and 
(C)  Reduce, waive or modify any environmental protection measures such as tree protection and/or soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(4)  The board shall grant variances from the provisions or requirements of this chapter only upon making written findings of the following: 
(A)  The strict application of the requirements of this chapter would deprive the building, structure or service system owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other building, structure or service system owners within the county; 
(B)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other building, structure or service system property owners within the county; 
(C)  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or any improvements; 
(D)  The liberal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of this chapter would cause undue and unnecessary hardship; 
(E)  The method or material requested is at least as protective as the method or materials required by this chapter; and 
(F)  The applicant has supplied the county with an independent study or analysis by a registered design professional that shows that the method or material meets or exceeds the methods or materials required by this Code. 
(q)  Procedures of the board. 
(1)  Hearings open to public. All hearings of the board shall be open to the public and the agenda shall be made available at least two (2) business days prior to the meeting of the board. Matters not placed on the agenda in compliance with this section shall not be heard by the board, except for appeals involving a structure or service system that, in the opinion of the director, is unsafe, unsanitary or uninhabitable. The board shall meet every thirty (30) days. 
(2)  Decisions. The board shall, in every case of an appeal of a decision or interpretation of the director or a variance request, reach a final decision within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the final hearing. Each decision of the board shall be in writing and shall include the basis for the decision. Every decision shall be promptly file-stamped in the office of the development department and shall be available for public inspection. A copy of the decision shall be delivered by mail at the address in the notice of appeal or application for variance to the person who filed the appeal or request for a variance. 
(r)  Appeals from decisions of the technical board of appeals. 
(1)  Method of appeal. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the board may seek review of such decision by petitioning the Superior Court of DeKalb County for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) calendar days after the final decision of the board is rendered. 
(2)  Notice to board. In any such petition, the board shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and DeKalb County, along with any other party required by law to be named, shall be named as the defendant(s) in certiorari. The secretary of the board shall be authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ for the board as respondent. Service upon the county as defendant shall be as otherwise provided by Georgia law. Within the time prescribed by Georgia law, the board shall cause to be filed with the clerk of DeKalb County Superior Court a duly certified record of the proceedings had before the board, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if any, and the decision of the board. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, adopted Aug. 10, 2004, deleted former § 7-16 of the Code in its entirety and adopted new provisions as § 7-16. Former § 7-16 pertained to the development advisory board and derived from Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1121), adopted March 28, 1989; and Ord. No. 95-15, § 1, adopted Nov. 28, 1995. 
Sec. 7-17. - Fire prevention system created. 
There is hereby created and established within the boundaries of the county the county fire prevention system. The boundaries of this system are hereby set up, defined and established as shown on the map of the county fire prevention system, dated November 12, 1963, prepared by the county planning department, a copy of which map is by reference made a part hereof. This map is hereby adopted as the official map of the county fire prevention system and the territory covered thereby. A copy of this map, together with any subsequent amendments thereto, shall be transmitted to the tax commissioner of the county for the collection of any and all taxes that may hereafter be levied for the establishment, maintenance and operation of the fire prevention system. 
(Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1041), 3-28-89) 
Editor's note— A copy of the map of the county fire prevention system is on file in the offices of the county. 
Sec. 7-18. - Georgia fire safety rules. 
(a)  Pursuant to Georgia Laws 1949, page 1057 as amended, the Georgia minimum fire safety standards adopted in the state safety fire commissioners rules and regulations for the prevention of loss of life and property from fire, panic from fear of fire, explosions or related hazards in buildings, structures, occupancies and facilities as specified in the 1949 Georgia Safety Fire Act, amended effective November 1, 1987, including all subsequent revisions thereof, are hereby adopted as and for this county as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  The department of public works-development shall administer and enforce those provisions of these rules as relate to plan review and inspection of proposed buildings and structures and issuance of permanent and temporary certificates. 
(Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1042), 3-28-89) 
Secs. 7-19—7-25. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODES ADMINISTRATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, adopted Aug. 10, 2004, deleted former Art. II, Div. 2 of this chapter in its entirety and adopted new provisions as Art. II, Div. 2. Former Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 7-26—7-40 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1061—9-1074), adopted March 28, 1989; Ord. No. 92-37, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 8. 1992; Ord. No. 00-81, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2000; Ord. No. 00-82, § 1, adopted Nov. 14, 2000; Ord. No. 00-83, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 14, 2000; Ord. No. 21-02, Pt. I, adopted May 14, 2002; and Ord. No. 29-02, Pt. 1, adopted June 25, 2002. 

Sec. 7-26. - General. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, erection, installation, alteration, demolition, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of buildings or structures, plumbing, mechanical, gas, and electrical systems within the county. Any and all requirements of this chapter shall expressly include any and all technical codes as amended by the county pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-27. - Applicability. 
(a)  General. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all matters affecting or related to buildings, structures, equipment or systems as set forth in section 7-26. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this chapter specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. 
(b)  Existing installations. Buildings, structures, plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems lawfully in existence at the time of the adoption of this ordinance shall be permitted to have their use and maintenance continued if the use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to life, health or property is created by such building, structure or system. 
(c)  Work to conform to codes. No building, structure, system, appliance or equipment, as hereinafter specified in this division, shall be constructed, erected, installed, altered or repaired, except in conformance with the provisions of this division and this Code. 
(d)  Public utility services. The provisions of this division shall not apply to the installation, alteration or repair of services up to and including the meters where such work is performed by or is an integral part of a system owned or operated by a public utility service corporation, water department, gas company, railroad company, pipeline company, or other public utility in the exercise of its normal functions or in rendering its duly authorized service as such. 
(e)  Other laws. The provisions of this division shall not be deemed to nullify any provisions of local, state or federal law. 
(f)  Referenced codes and standards. The adopted state codes adopted pursuant to Division 3 of Article II of this chapter shall be considered part of the requirements of this division to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(g)  Additions, alterations or repairs. Additions, alterations, or repairs to any building, structure or system shall conform to that required for a new building, structure or system without requiring the existing building, structure or system to comply with all requirements of this chapter. Additions, alterations or repairs shall not cause an existing building, structure or system to become unsafe, unsanitary or overloaded. 
(h)  Ordinary repairs. Ordinary repairs shall be permitted in the same manner and arrangement as in the existing system, provided that such repairs or replacements are not hazardous to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(i)  Change in occupant/occupancy. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the occupant or occupancy of any building or structure that does not meet the requirements of this chapter. Prior to the issuance of any business occupation tax certificate, the finance director shall advise the building official that an application for a business occupation tax certificate has been submitted to the county for review. Prior to the issuance of the business occupation tax certificate, the building official shall inspect the building to be occupied and certify that such building or structure meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building construction for the proposed new occupant or occupancy and that such change of occupant or occupancy does not result in any hazard to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(j)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure or system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this Code shall be determined by the director. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-28. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement. The development department is responsible for administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Deputies and authorized representatives. In accordance with prescribed procedures of DeKalb County, the building official shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building official, authorized representatives, technical officers, inspectors, plan examiners and other employees. Such employees shall have powers as authorized by law and delegated by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-29. - Duties and powers of the building official. 
(a)  General. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the adopted state codes. The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of this Code and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the application of their provisions. Such interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this chapter. Such policies and procedures shall not have the force and effect of law and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this Code or in the adopted state codes. 
(b)  Applications and permits. The building official shall receive applications, review construction documents and plans, issue permits for the erection, construction, alteration and demolition of buildings and structures and installation of mechanical, plumbing, gas and electrical systems, inspect the premises for which such permits have been issued and enforce compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(c)  Notices and orders. The building official shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(d)  Inspections. The building official shall make all of the required inspections, or the building official shall have the authority to accept reports of inspection by approved qualified agencies or individuals. Reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual. 
(e)  Identification. The building official, deputy or authorized representative shall carry proper identification when inspecting buildings, structures or premises in the performance of duties under this chapter. 
(f)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter, or where the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of this chapter which makes the building, structure or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this chapter, provided that if such building, structure or premises be occupied that credentials be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. 
(g)  Department records. The building official shall keep official records of applications received, permits and certificates issued, fees collected, reports of inspections, and notices and orders issued. Such records shall be retained for the period required by state law for retention of public records. 
(h)  Approved materials, equipment, appliances and devices. Materials, equipment, appliances and devices approved by the building official shall be constructed and installed in accordance with such approval. 
(i)  Areas prone to flooding. The building official shall not grant modifications to any provisions related to areas prone to flooding as established by the flood insurance rate map, as may hereinafter be amended, without the granting of a variance to such provisions by the board. 
(j)  Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment and appliances. The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the installation of any materials or to prohibit any designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided that any such alternatives have been approved by the building official in writing. Alternative materials, designs, methods of construction, equipment or appliances shall be approved in writing where the building official finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent and purpose of the provisions of this chapter, and the material, methods of work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this chapter in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. 
(k)  Required testing. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or evidence that a material or method does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, or in order to substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building official shall have the authority to require tests as evidence of compliance to be made at no expense to the county. Such tests shall be paid for by the person seeking to rely on such alternative materials or methods. 
(l)  Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this chapter or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the building official shall approve the testing procedures. 
(m)  Testing agency. All tests shall be performed by an agency approved by the building official. 
(n)  Test reports. The building official shall retain reports of tests for the period required for retention of public records. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-30. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, erection, alteration or repair to a building or structure, mechanical system, gas system, plumbing system, electrical system, and energy conservation system, other than ordinary repairs. Permits shall be obtained at least eight (8) hours before beginning work. Permits for emergency work shall be obtained within twenty-four (24) hours after work is commenced. 
(b)  Exception to permit required. Ordinary repairs to a single-family residential building or structure for which the wholesale cost does not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall not be required to obtain a permit. 
(c)  Work commencing before permit issuance. In addition to any other remedies provided by law, any person, contractor or company commencing any work on a building or structure, mechanical, gas, plumbing, or system electrical system before obtaining the required permit shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. 
(d)  Work exempt from permit. Exemptions from the permit requirements of this section shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other laws or ordinances of the county. Permits shall not be required for the following: 
(1)  Building: 
(A)  Fences not over eight (8) feet (2440 mm) high. 
(B)  Retaining walls which are not over four (4) feet (1219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids. 
(C)  Water tanks supported directly upon grade if the capacity does not exceed five thousand (5,000) gallons (18,927 L) and the ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed two (2) to one (1). 
(D)  Painting, papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, counter tops and similar finish work for which the wholesale cost does not exceed three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), where there has been no change in occupant or occupancy. 
(E)  Temporary motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery. 
(F)  Prefabricated swimming pools that are less than twenty-four (24) inches (610 mm) deep and are installed entirely above ground. 
(G)  Swings and other playground equipment accessory to one- and two-family dwellings. 
(H)  Window awnings supported by an exterior wall. 
(I)  Movable cases, counters and partitions not over five (5) feet nine (9) inches (1753 mm) in height. 
(2)  Electrical: 
(A)  Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs, including the replacement of lamps or the connection of approved portable electrical equipment to approved permanently installed receptacles. 
(B)  Radio and television transmitting stations. Electrical equipment used for radio and television transmissions, but permits are required for equipment and wiring for power supply, the installation of towers and antennas. 
(C)  Temporary testing systems. The installation of any temporary system required for the testing or servicing of electrical equipment or apparatus. 
(3)  Gas: 
(A)  Portable heating appliances. 
(B)  Replacement of any minor component of equipment that does not alter approval of equipment or make such equipment unsafe. 
(4)  Mechanical: 
(A)  Portable heating appliances. 
(B)  Portable ventilation equipment. 
(C)  Portable cooling unit. 
(D)  Steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this chapter. 
(E)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe. 
(F)  Portable evaporative cooler. 
(G)  Self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one (1) horsepower (746 W) or less. 
(5)  Plumbing: 
(A)  The shopping of leaks in drains, water, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that if any concealed trap, drainpipe, water, soil, waste or vent pipe becomes defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material, such work shall be considered new work and a permit shall be obtained and inspection made as provided in this chapter. 
(B)  The clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipe, valves or fixtures, and the removal and reinstallation of water closets, provided such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures. 
(e)  Application for permit. To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the development department for that purpose. Such application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 
(2)  Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by street address, legal description or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or structure or work. 
(3)  Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended. 
(4)  Be accompanied by construction plans and documents and any other information that the director may require to ascertain whether the proposed building meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(5)  State the valuation of the proposed work. 
(6)  Contain the full names, addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant/contractor and the property owner and shall be signed by the applicant/contractor and the property owner. 
(7)  The building official may require any additional information to be provided so that an understanding of all work to be performed can be ascertained from the permit application. 
(f)  Action on application. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined all applications for permits and amendments thereto within a reasonable time after filing but no later than sixty (60) calendar days after the filing of a complete application in conformity with this section. If the application or the construction plans or documents do not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the building official is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. 
(g)  Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing, unless a permit has been issued. The building official is authorized to grant up to three written extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding ninety (90) days each before such application is declared abandoned. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(h)  Validity of permit. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any provisions of this chapter, of any local, state or federal law or any provision of this Code. Permits presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of this Code shall not be valid and are void. The issuance of a permit based on construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. The building official is also authorized to prevent occupancy or use of a building or structure where there exists any violation of this chapter or of any other provisions of the code, or where there exists a hazard to the health, safety and welfare of the public or the occupants of the building or structure. 
(i)  Expiration of permit. Every permit issued shall become invalid and of no force and effect if the work on the site authorized by such permit is not commenced or if no county inspection has been performed within one (1) year after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit has been commenced and has been suspended or abandoned or no further county inspection has been performed for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. The building official is authorized to grant one (1) written extension of the permit for a period of not more than one hundred eighty (180) days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. 
(j)  Suspension or revocation. The building official is authorized to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter if the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect, inaccurate or incomplete information, or in violation of any applicable provision of this Code. 
(k)  Contractor change, reissuing of permit. 
(1)  No permit shall be reissued on any work or job site for which a permit already exists except after notification in writing from the owner of the change in contractor and that the new contractor is authorized by the owner to re-permit the work. Re-issuance of a permit shall make the new contractor responsible for the complete job or system and all work or code deficiencies, if any, as built, erected or installed by the previous or former contractor. 
(2)  The contractor who re-permits the work or job shall pay a re-permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(l)  Placement of building permit, inspections card, and construction plans. The building permit or copy, inspections card, and construction plans shall be kept on the site of the work until completion of the work. The inspections card shall be posted within thirty-six (36) to forty-eight (48) inches above grade facing the street or in a window of the structure under construction in a manner where it is visible from the street and if outside, in a weatherproof cover. The construction plans shall be kept on the construction site in a manner that they can be produced upon demand by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-31. - Construction plans and documents. 
(a)  Submittal of plans and documents. 
(1)  Construction plans and documents, special inspection and structural observation programs, and other data shall be submitted in one (1) or more sets with each application for a permit. The construction plans and documents shall be prepared by a registered design professional. When the building official is unable to make a determination as to the grant or denial of a permit based upon the plans submitted with a permit application, the building official is authorized to require additional construction plans and documents to be prepared by the applicant or a registered design professional. 
(2)  The building official is authorized to waive in writing the submission of construction plans and documents and other data required to be prepared by a registered design professional if it is found that the nature of the work applied for is such that reviewing of construction plans and documents is not necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter. In addition, construction plans and documents for single-family residential construction do not have to be prepared by a registered design professional unless required by the building official in writing. 
(b)  Information on construction plans and documents. Construction plans and documents shall be dimensioned and drawn upon suitable material. Electronic media construction plans and documents are permitted to be submitted when approved by the building official. Construction plans and documents shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the location, nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of this Code and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(c)  Fire protection system shop drawings. Shop drawings for the fire protection system(s) shall be submitted to indicate conformance with this chapter and the construction plans and documents and shall be approved by the building official prior to the start of system installation. 
(d)  Manufacturer's installation instructions for residential installation. Manufacturer's installation instructions, as required by the International Residential Code, shall be available on the residential job site at the time of inspection. 
(e)  Exterior wall envelope. Construction plans and documents for all buildings shall describe the exterior wall envelope in sufficient detail to determine compliance with this chapter. The construction plans and documents shall provide details of the exterior wall envelope as required, including flashing, intersections with dissimilar materials, corners, end details, control joints, intersections at roof, eaves, or parapets, means of drainage, water resistive membrane, and details around openings. 
(f)  Manufacturing installation instructions. The construction plans and documents shall include manufacturing installation instructions that provide supporting documentation that the proposed penetration and opening details described in the construction plans and documents maintain the weather resistance of the exterior wall envelope. The supporting documentation shall fully describe the exterior wall system that was tested, where applicable, as well as the test procedure used. 
(g)  Site plan. The construction plans and documents submitted with the application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a site plan approved by the development department showing to scale the size and location of new construction and existing structures on the site, distances from lot lines, the established street grades and the proposed finished grades. The site plan shall be drawn in accordance with an accurate boundary line survey. In the case of demolition, the site plan shall show the construction to be demolished and the location and size of existing structures and construction that are to remain on the site or lot. The building official is authorized to waive or modify in writing the requirement for a site plan. 
(h)  Examination of construction plans and documents. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined the accompanying construction plans and documents and shall ascertain by such examination whether the proposed construction indicated and described is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and other pertinent provisions of this Code. 
(i)  Approval of construction plans and documents. When the building official issues a permit, the construction plans and documents shall be approved, in writing or by stamp, as being in compliance with this chapter. However, the approval of construction plans and documents and other data shall not prevent the building official from requiring the correction of errors in the construction plans and documents and other data. One (1) set of construction plans and documents so reviewed shall be retained by the building official. The other set shall be returned to the applicant, shall be kept at the site of work and shall be open to inspection by the building official. 
(j)  Previous approvals. The enactment of this ordinance shall not require changes in the construction plans and documents, construction or designated occupancy of a structure for which a lawful permit has been issued prior to enactment of this ordinance and the construction of which has been pursued and not abandoned within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this ordinance. 
(k)  Phased approval. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for the construction of foundations or any other part of a building or structure before the construction plans and documents for the whole building or structure have been submitted, provided that construction plans and documents and adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with pertinent requirements of this chapter. The holder of such permit for the foundation or other parts of a building or structure shall proceed at the holder's own risk with the approved part of the building construction operation and without any assurance that a permit for the entire structure will be granted by the building official. 
(l)  Design professional in responsible charge. 
(1)  When it is required and requested by the building official that construction plans and documents be prepared by a registered design professional, the building official shall be authorized to require the owner to engage and designate on the building permit application a registered design professional who shall act as the registered design professional in responsible charge. If the circumstances require, the owner shall designate a substitute registered design professional in responsible charge who shall perform the duties required of the original registered design professional in responsible charge. The owner shall notify the building official in writing if the registered design professional in responsible charge is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties required by this Code. 
(2)  The registered design professional in responsible charge shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating submittal plans and documents prepared by others, including phased and deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building. 
(m)  Deferred submittals. For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design that are not submitted at the time of the application and that are to be submitted to the building official within a specified period. 
(1)  Deferral of any submittal items shall require prior approval by the building official. The registered design professional in responsible charge shall list the deferred submittals on the construction plans and documents for review by the building official. 
(2)  Submittal construction plans and documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the registered design professional in responsible charge who shall review them and forward them to the building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until their design and submittal plans and documents have been approved by the building official in writing. 
(n)  Amended construction plans and documents. Work shall be installed in accordance with the reviewed construction plans and documents, and any changes made during construction that are not in compliance with the approved construction plans and documents shall be resubmitted by the holder of the building permit for approval as an amended set of construction plans and documents. 
(o)  Retention of construction plans and documents. One (1) set of approved construction plans and documents shall be retained by the building official for a period of not less than one hundred eighty (180) days from date of completion of the permitted work or as required by state or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-31.1. - Requirements for construction. 
(a)  A permit application for a building permit shall include a site plan. The site plan shall delineate the proposed grading for the entire site, the storm water control measures proposed to protect adjacent properties, erosion control, water quality measures, and include a tree survey and a tree protection plan. 
(b)  An applicant shall also indicate on the site plan the location of the following construction-related items: 
(1)  Dumpsters or other onsite disposal equipment; 
(2)  Portable toilets; 
(3)  Onsite parking for construction vehicles; 
(4)  Construction material staging and storage; and 
(5)  Borrow or stockpile areas. 
(c)  Construction activity and deliveries shall be limited to: 

 
There shall be no construction activity or deliveries on Sundays, New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Memorial Day, July 4th or Labor Day unless such activity arises from an emergency which puts the site or neighboring property owners and their property at risk of harm or loss. 
(d)  Dumpsters or any onsite waste disposal equipment may not be located on the street. If adequate traffic controls can be implemented, the planning department director or designee may approve the placement of dumpsters and onsite waste disposal equipment on a street so long as the street has a paved width greater than twenty-four (24) feet. 
(e)  Portable toilets shall be located off of the right-of-way and at least fifteen (15) feet from any side property line. 
(f)  Wherever possible, temporary parking shall be provided onsite and not on the street. 
(g)  The distance between a retaining wall and the side property line on all single-family detached residential lots shall be equal to at least half of the distance between the side property line and the required setback line. Unless a variance is obtained pursuant to the provisions of subsection 27-787(b), newly constructed retaining walls shall not be higher than four (4) feet. However, existing retaining walls may be repaired and replaced so long as the height of the repaired or replaced wall does not increase in height over the original height of the wall. 
(h)  In addition to the requirements set forth in section 14-39 of the Code of DeKalb County, the trees of six (6) inches DBH or greater located in the front yard and the rear half of the rear yard of an infill lot, as that term is defined in section 27-31, shall be preserved unless it can be demonstrated to the development director or designee in the demolition site plan that no reasonable alternatives to removal exist in order to accommodate permitted accessory structures, utilities, drainage measures, water quality improvements, and driveways. 
(i)  Existing drainage patterns located along property lines shall not be adversely affected by construction of a building or any associated site work. 
(j)  The applicant for construction on any lot shall be responsible for ensuring that all existing sewer services and taps from the building(s) to the street shall be inspected and verified to be in proper condition prior to connection. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, Pt. I, 12-15-05; Ord. No. 06-06, Pt. I, 4-27-06; Ord. No. 09-01, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 7-31.2. - Demolition permits. 
(a)  A demolition site plan shall be submitted as part of the permit application package. The demolition site plan shall depict the trees, structures, and impervious surfaces to be removed; location and size of all trees greater than six (6) inches DBH; construction exits; tree-save areas; and best management practices for erosion control. Additionally, no demolition permit for a single-family detached residence shall be issued in a residential zoning district unless the applicant includes the original threshold elevation (if any) measured and certified by a licensed surveyor or engineer. 
(b)  Only dead, diseased, or hazardous trees, as determined by a certified arborist, may be removed pursuant to a demolition permit. 
(c)  An excavation site plan shall be submitted as part of the demolition permit application package when the purpose of the excavation is to locate current sewer lines in conjunction with an application for a variance from the front-door threshold elevation pursuant to section 27-749. The excavation site plan shall depict the boundaries of areas to be excavated, locations of storage areas for excavated materials, the location of structures and impervious surfaces, the location and size of all trees greater than six (6) inches DBH in the footprint of the planned excavation, tree-save areas and best management practices for erosion control. 
(Ord. No. 05-20, Pt. I, 12-15-05; Ord. No. 06-06, Pt. I, 4-27-06; Ord. No. 09-01, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 7-32. - Temporary structures and uses. 
(a)  General. The building official is authorized to issue a permit for temporary structures and temporary uses. Such permits shall be limited as to time of service, but shall not be permitted for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. The building official is authorized to grant one (1) written extension of ninety (90) days. The request for extension shall be in writing and shall specify the justifiable cause. 
(b)  Conformance. Temporary structures and uses shall conform to the structural strength, fire safety, means of egress, accessibility, light, ventilation and sanitary requirements of this chapter as necessary to ensure the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(c)  Temporary power. The building official is authorized to give permission to temporarily supply and use power in part of an electric installation before such installation has been fully completed and the final certificate of completion or occupancy has been issued. The part covered by the temporary certificate shall comply with the requirements specified for temporary lighting, heat or power in the National Electrical Code, as adopted in Division 3 of Article II of this chapter. 
(d)  Termination of approval. The building official is authorized to terminate such permit for a temporary structure or use and to order the temporary structure or use to be discontinued for violation of the Code or applicable state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-33. - Permit fees; revocation. 
(a)  Payment of fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law and the governing authority have been paid. No amendment to a permit shall be released to the applicant until the additional permit fee, if any, has been paid. 
(b)  Schedule of permit fees. Permit fees for buildings, structures, mechanical, gas, plumbing and electrical systems shall be determined by the governing authority of DeKalb County. The schedule of fees approved by the governing authority of DeKalb County shall be maintained by the clerk to the board of commissioners and the director shall also retain a copy available for public inspection. 
(c)  Related fees. The payment of the fee for the construction, alteration, removal or demolition for work done in connection with or concurrently with the work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. 
(d)  Refunds. The governing authority is authorized to adopt a written refund policy that applies to the refund of permit fees authorized by this chapter. 
(e)  Revocation of certificates. A certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be suspended or revoked by the director, and considered void, if: 
(1)  The application for a certificate of occupancy contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  Changes or alterations in the type of permitted use or occupancy occur without approval required by this Code; 
(3)  Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate occur without approval required by this Code; 
(4)  Alterations, additions or improvements to the building, structure or systems occur without approval or without obtaining all necessary permits required by this Code; 
(5)  The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, state or federal law or codes; 
(6)  The establishment is a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare. 
(f)  No certificate of occupancy, certificate of completion and/or certificate of change of tenant shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter to any applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity if within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this chapter the same applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity requesting a certificate has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material facts in any application. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-34. - Inspections. 
(a)  General. Construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the building official and such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this chapter or of other applicable provisions of the Code. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter or of other provisions of the Code shall not be valid. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the building official nor the county shall be liable for any expense entailed in the removal of any material required to allow inspection. 
(b)  Preliminary inspection. Before issuing a permit, the building official is authorized to examine buildings, structures and sites for which an application has been filed. 
(c)  Required inspections. The building official, upon notification, shall make the inspections set forth as follows: 
(1)  Building. 
(A)  Foundation and slab inspection : To be made after trenches are excavated, forms are erected, and reinforcement is installed but before concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. 
(B)  Damproofing inspection: To be made prior to backfill of crawl space or basement foundation walls. 
(C)  Pre-cladding/frame inspection: To be made after the roof, wall bracing, windows, doors and moisture barrier are installed and prior to placement of exterior cladding. Rough inspections on trades need not be complete for pre-cladding inspection. 
(D)  Frame/insulation inspection: To be made after wiring, piping, chimneys, duct and vents to be concealed are in place and all rough inspections approved, fire blocking is in place and the insulation in walls and inaccessible ceilings is installed. Insulation values must meet documents submitted with permit application. 
(E)  Final inspection: To be made after the building or structure is completed in compliance with this Code prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Electrical. 
(A)  Underground and slab inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, conduit or cable are installed, and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. 
(B)  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking, bracing, and wiring are in place and prior to the installation of insulation and wall and ceiling membranes. 
(C)  Final inspection: To be made after the building or structure is complete, all required electrical outlets, switches and fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected, and the building or structure is ready for occupancy. 
(3)  Plumbing. 
(A)  Underground and slab inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, piping installed and before any backfill or concrete is put in place. The appropriate silt and erosion control measures must be in place and functional. 
(B)  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all water, soil, waste and vent piping is complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
(C)  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, and all plumbing fixtures and appliances are in place and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(D)  Testing: Plumbing work and systems shall be tested as required in Section 312 of the Standard Plumbing Code. Tests shall be made by the permit holder and observed by the building official. 
(4)  Mechanical. 
(A)  Underground and slab inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, forms are erected, underground duct and fuel piping is installed and before any backfill and concrete is put in place. 
(B)  Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all duct and fuel piping to be concealed are complete and prior to the installation of wall and ceiling membranes. 
(C)  Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system and appliances are in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Gas. 
(A)  Rough-in inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and before any such piping has been covered and concealed or any fixtures or appliances have been connected. 
(B)  Final piping inspection: To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed, after all portions which are to be covered or concealed by wall and ceiling membranes, plastering, stone or brickwork have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. Log lighters shall be permitted separately and inspected. 
(C)  Testing: This inspection shall include a gas pressure test. 
(D)  Final inspection: To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by the new work or any changes, to insure compliance with the requirements of this chapter and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. 
(d)  Residential floodplain inspections. For construction permitted in areas prone to flooding as established by Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Building Code, upon placement of the lowest floor, including basement, and prior to further vertical construction, the building official shall require submission of a certification of the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, prepared by a registered professional engineer or land surveyor, as required in Section R327 of the International Residential Building Code. 
(e)  Fire-resistant penetrations. Protection of joints and penetrations in fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall not be concealed from view until inspected and approved. 
(f)  Other inspections. In addition to any other inspections, the building official is authorized to make or require other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of the code that are enforced by the development department. 
(g)  Residential fire-resistance-rated construction inspections. Where fire-resistance-rated construction is required between dwelling units or due to the location on the property, the building official shall require an inspection of such construction after all lathing and/or wallboard is in place, but before any plaster is applied, or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished. 
(h)  Inspection agencies. The building official is authorized to request and accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements of this division. 
(i)  Pre-qualified alternate registered engineer inspections. 
(1)  When it is evident that the county cannot provide an inspection service of construction covered by this chapter within two (2) business days of receiving a valid written request for an inspection, then, in lieu of an inspection by inspections personnel employed by the county, any person, firm, or corporation engaged in a construction project which requires an inspection, shall have the option of retaining, at their own expense, a pre-qualified alternate registered professional engineer who holds a certificate of registration issued under Chapter 15 of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia, and who is not an employee or otherwise affiliated with or financially interested in such person, firm, or corporation, to provide the required inspection. Pre-qualified alternate registered professional engineers shall conduct inspections in accordance with all applicable provisions of this Code and state law, including, but not limited to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26, as amended. 
(2)  The county shall provide for the pre-qualification of alternate registered engineers who may perform inspections pursuant to this section. A pre-qualified alternate registered engineer inspector who personally makes the inspection, shall hold, in addition to the certificate registration required under Chapter 15 International Code Council/ICC of Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia, a certification that matches his or her area of expertise. Pre-qualified alternate registered engineers may provide inspections in their scope of expertise providing they hold the aforementioned certifications that match their expertise. In lieu of personally holding an International Code Council certification, a registered engineer may employ technicians who hold the required appropriate International Code Council certifications to actually make the inspections. These employees shall also be pre-qualified by the county. Inspection reports submitted to the county shall contain both the certified technician's signature and the signature and seal of the pre-qualified alternate registered engineer and their dates of certification. 
(3)  Pre-qualified alternate registered engineer inspections and reports shall be accepted only from persons or firms who have been pre-qualified by the board. The requirements, procedures, application forms and report forms shall be as adopted by the board. Applications for approval as a pre-qualified alternate registered engineer inspector may be obtained from the development department. 
(j)  Inspections requests. It shall be the duty of the holder of the permit or their duly authorized agent to notify the building official when work is ready for inspection. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide safe access to and a safe means for inspection of such work for any inspections that are required by this chapter. 
(k)  Approval required. Work shall not be done beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the approval of the building official. The building official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate the portion of the construction that is satisfactory as completed or shall notify the permit holder or an agent of the permit holder wherein the same fails to comply with this Code. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the building official. 
(l)  Re-inspection fee. Re-inspection fees shall be required in accordance with the fee schedule as adopted by the governing authority when work performed is required to be re-inspected due to the following reasons: 
(1)  The re-inspection is not approved due to a failure to correct a previously noted code violation on a prior inspection; 
(2)  The job is not ready for inspection when an inspection is requested and performed; 
(3)  The building or structure is not accessible and inspection cannot be performed; 
(4)  Work to be inspected has been covered or concealed and proper inspection cannot be performed; or 
(5)  Prior issuance of a stop work order requires re-inspection. 
(m)  Right-of-entry. Inspections required under the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the building official or designee. Upon presentation of proper credentials, the building official or designee may enter the premises between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to perform any duty imposed by this chapter provided that the building official or designee has consent to enter the premises or has obtained and presents an inspection warrant as described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-35. - Certificates of occupancy, tenancy. 
(a)  Required. No building or structure or portion thereof shall be occupied or a change made in the type of occupancy or the nature of the use of an existing building or part thereof until after an appropriate certificate as required by this section has been issued. 
(b)  Certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Issuance. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued by the building official until the building, structure and intended use complies with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance, all construction is complete and all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electric, fire, health, vegetation protection and site drainage inspections have been performed and approved. 
(2)  Scope. The certificate of occupancy certifies that all final inspections have been completed and the structure has been erected, to the best of the county's knowledge, in compliance with applicable Code requirements at the time of the issuance of the certificate. However, issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not excuse the builder, contractor, tenant, or property owner from liability for any violation of the Code or any other applicable laws. Occupancy shall be limited to the area or portion of a building or structure defined by the building permit for which the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(c)  Temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Scope. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for non-residential buildings or portions thereof for a specified period of time when it has been determined by the building official or designee that no outstanding Code violations or deficiencies exist and the building may be safely occupied for the use and time requested. A request for a temporary certificate of occupancy shall be made on such form as prescribed by the building official. 
(2)  Issuance. A temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued for stated purposes only when construction has not been fully completed and all final inspections have not been performed. 
(3)  Revocation. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be revoked at the option of the building official for any and/or all of the following reasons: 
(A)  Violation of any building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations. 
(B)  Failure to complete any stage of construction and/or site improvements required by the building official in a timely manner. 
(C)  Unauthorized occupancy or use of any part or portion of the building or structure other than the area or portion for which a temporary certificate of occupancy has been granted. 
(D)  Any other conditions that may affect the health, safety and welfare of persons or property. 
(d)  Certificate of completion. A certificate of completion shall be issued upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, and/or plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical system, when a certificate of occupancy is not required. The certificate of completion does not grant authority to occupy a building or structure or change the type of occupancy or nature of use prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(e)  Certificate of change of tenant. 
(1)  Scope. A certificate of change of tenant shall be required whenever there is a change of tenant occupancy in any non-residential building, structure or use and no construction, alterations, improvements or repairs to the building, structure, plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical systems have been or are to be made. The new tenant or building owner shall be required to submit current as-built floor and fixture plans for review and complete a repair/improvement declaration. Upon approval and payment of a change of tenant fee and satisfactory inspection to determine compliance with the submitted and approved floor and fixture plan, repair/improvement declaration, and applicable sections of this chapter, a certificate of change of tenant shall be issued. 
(2)  Permits required. If the change of tenant involves any construction, alterations, improvements or repairs to the building, plumbing, mechanical, gas or electrical systems, all necessary permits required by this chapter shall be obtained by licensed qualified contractors and all necessary inspections shall be performed by the building official before a change of tenant, or if required, a new certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(f)  Contents of certificates. Certificates shall contain the following: 
(1)  The building permit number (or in the case of a certificate of completion, the appropriate trade permit number). 
(2)  The address of the structure. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner. 
(4)  A description of that portion of the structure for which the certificate is issued. 
(5)  A statement that the described portion of the structure has been inspected for compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  The name of the building official. 
(7)  The edition of the code under which the permit was issued. 
(8)  If non-residential, the use and occupancy, in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 3 of the International Building Code. 
(9)  If non-residential, the type of construction as defined in Chapter 6 of the International Building Code. 
(10)  If non-residential, the design occupant load. 
(11)  If an automatic sprinkler is provided, whether the sprinkler system is required. 
(12)  Any special stipulations and conditions of the building permit. 
(g)  Revocation of certificates. The building official or designee may revoke certificates of occupancy, certificates of completion, and certificates of change of tenant issued under provisions of this chapter, where it is shown that there have been either one or more of the following: 
(1)  Changes or alterations in construction, type of permitted use or occupancy without written approval by the building official or designee. 
(2)  Changes or violations of the conditions of the certificate without written approval by the building official or designee. 
(3)  Alterations, additions, or improvements to the building, structure, or systems without permits and inspections required by this chapter. 
(4)  Violation of any zoning, building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire safety or site development codes or regulations. 
(5)  Any condition that may affect the building, structure or service system which, in the opinion of the director, renders the building, structure or service system unsafe, dangerous or uninhabitable. 
(6)  After a certificate has been revoked, a valid certificate shall not be issued until all violations, changes, alterations, additions or improvements meet all requirements of this chapter as determined by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-36. - Utility service connections. 
(a)  Connection of service utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system that is regulated by this chapter for which a permit is required, until approved by the building official. 
(b)  Permanent electrical service connection. Permanent electrical service connection and meter shall not be authorized until all required final building, plumbing, mechanical, gas, electrical, drainage, vegetation, fire and health inspections have been performed and approved by the appropriate county or state department or official. 
(c)  Permanent gas service connection. Permanent gas service connection and meter shall not be authorized until the gas supply house line has been tested, inspected and approved and all appliance and equipment connections have been inspected and approved. 
(d)  Temporary electrical and gas service connections. Temporary electrical and gas service and meter connections may be authorized for a specified period of time when the system has been inspected and found to be safe for the connections and use authorized. Such temporary service connections shall be authorized only for the following reasons: 
(1)  Testing of appliances and equipment. 
(2)  To provide heat during the winter months to prevent freeze damage to water systems and equipment and including, but not limited to, installation of wallpaper or painting. 
(3)  Temporary occupancy of the building or structure only for the training of employees or stocking of merchandise. 
(4)  Single-tenant occupancy buildings and multi-tenant occupancy buildings for which temporary service connections have been authorized shall not be allowed access by the general public for business activity other than those allowed in subsections (1), (2), and (3) above. 
(5)  Application for temporary service connections and meters shall be made on such forms as prescribed by the director. 
(e)  Authority to disconnect utility services. The building official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by this chapter in case of an emergency, where necessary, to eliminate an immediate danger to life or property. Where possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified of the decision to disconnect utility service prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(f)  Connection after order to disconnect. No person shall make connections from any energy, fuel, power supply or water distribution system or supply energy, fuel or water to any equipment regulated by this chapter that has been disconnected or ordered to be disconnected by the building official or the use of which has been ordered to be discontinued by the building official until the building official authorizes the reconnection and use of such equipment. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-37. - Violations, remedies and penalties. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, move, remove, demolish or occupy any building, structure, system or equipment regulated by this chapter, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Notice of violation. The building official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension, repair, moving, removing, demolition, or occupancy of a building or structure, system or equipment in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or in violation of a permit or certificate of occupancy under the provisions of this chapter. Such notice or order shall direct the discontinuance or correction of the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person failing to discontinue, correct or abate the violation of this chapter as ordered by the building official in the notice shall be subject to issuance of a court citation to appear in the recorder's court of DeKalb County to answer a charge(s) of violation(s) of this chapter and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance to section 1-10 of the Code. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-38. - Stop work order. 
(a)  Authority. Whenever the building official finds any work regulated by this chapter being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the building official is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(b)  Issuance. The stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property involved, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work will be permitted to resume. 
(c)  Unlawful continuance. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to correct a violation or an unsafe condition, shall be subject to issuance of a court citation to appear in the recorder's court of DeKalb County and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10 of the Code. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-39. - Inspection warrants. 
(a)  The building official, in addition to other procedures provided by law, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant shall authorize the building official to conduct a search or inspection of property without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
(b)  Inspection warrants may be issued by any judge of the recorder's court when the issuing judge is satisfied that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property, or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; 
(2)  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by this division and all other applicable law; 
(3)  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; 
(4)  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes a search or inspection; 
(5)  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the search or inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
(6)  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the provisions of the Code or state law sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-40. - Unsafe conditions. 
(a)  Conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe, uninhabitable, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. Structures that are deemed an unsafe condition shall be taken down and removed or made safe, as the building official deems necessary unless the notice of an unsafe condition is appealed to the board in accordance with the requirements set forth in section 7-16. 
(b)  Notice. If an unsafe condition is found, the building official shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the building, structure or system found to be unsafe, a written notice that describes the condition deemed unsafe and specifies the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition, or that requires the unsafe structure to be demolished within a stipulated time. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the building official written acceptance or rejection of the terms of the notice. 
(c)  Method of service. Such notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy thereof is (a) delivered to the owner personally; (b) sent by certified or registered mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address with the return receipt requested. If the certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter was not delivered, a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or about the building or structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person responsible for the building or structure shall constitute service of notice upon the owner. 
(d)  Restoration. The building, structure, system or equipment determined to be unsafe by the building official is permitted to be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs, alterations, or additions are made or a change of occupancy occurs during the restoration of the building, structure, system or equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions or change of occupancy shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Secs. 7-41—7-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CODE ADOPTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, adopted Aug. 10, 2004, deleted former Art. III, Div. 3 of this chapter in its entirety and adopted new provisions as Art. II, Div. 3. Former Art. II, Div. 3, §§ 7-51, 7-52, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 00-83, §§ 1, 3, adopted Nov. 14, 2000; Ord. No. 01-15, § 1, adopted July 24, 2001; Ord. No. 01-16, § 1, adopted July 24, 2001; Ord. No. 01-17, § 1,, adopted July 24, 2001; Ord. No. 01-18, § 1,, adopted July 24, 2001; Ord. No. 01-19, § 1,, adopted July 24, 2001; Ord. No. 01-02, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2001; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2001; Ord. No. 03-02, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2001; and Ord. No. 04-02, § 1, adopted Sept. 25, 2001; Ord. No. 21-02, Pt. I, adopted May 14, 2002; and Ord. No. 29-02, Pt. 1, adopted June 25, 2002. 

Sec. 7-51. - Adopted codes. 
(a)  Generally. As future new editions and/or amendments of the codes listed below are adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, they shall become a part of or replacement for the adopted codes, rules and regulations or standards and shall become enforceable as prescribed without separate adoption by the governing authority. All new construction, installations, repairs or alterations shall be in conformance with the current edition of the following codes and referenced appendixes with Georgia amendments as currently adopted by the Board of Community Affairs of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
(2)  International Residential Code and Appendix G. 
(3)  International Plumbing Code and Sections 703.6 of Appendix J in the Georgia Amendments. 
(4)  International Mechanical Code. 
(5)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(6)  National Electrical Code. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(8)  International Fire Code. 
(b)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the above-stated codes shall be considered an integral part of the code without separate adoption. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by a code test, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be govern. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(c)  Appendices. The appendices included in any code adopted pursuant to Division 3 of Article II of this chapter are not intended for enforcement unless specifically referenced in this chapter or specifically included in this Code. 
(d)  Referenced codes and standards. The adopted state codes adopted pursuant to this division shall be considered part of the requirements of this chapter to the prescribed extent of each such adoption. Where differences occur between the provisions of this chapter and referenced codes and standards, the provisions of this chapter shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-52. - Amendments to the International Building Code and International Residential Code. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Building Code adopted by reference in section 7-51 above is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
(A)  Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirely. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Residential Code adopted by reference in section 7-51 above is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)  International Residential Code. 
(A)  Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
(B)  Appendix G. of the International Residential Code is hereby adopted by the governing authority. 
(C)  Table 301.2(1) in Chapter 3 shall be completed by adding the following information to the blank spaces: 
(i)  Ground snow load (lbs. Per square foot) — 8. 
(ii)  Wind speed (fastest mile) — 90. 
(iii)  Seismic design category B. 
(iv)  Weathering — moderate. 
(v)  Frost line depth — Yes, 12" minimum. 
(vi)  Termite damage — Yes, very heavy. 
(vii)  Decay damage — Yes, moderate to severe. 
(viii)  Winter design temp. for heating facilities - 22°F. 
(ix)  Flood hazard May 7, 2001. 
(2)  Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state adopted International Residential Code. 
(A)  A set of plans that include building, plumbing, mechanical, and electrical plans and the site plan as required in section 7-52(b)(2)(B) of this Chapter shall be maintained on the construction site at all times. 
(B)  A site plan or staking survey prepared and sealed by a registered engineer or land surveyor shall be submitted at the time of the residential footing or slab inspection and prior to the pouring of same. Survey shall show the setbacks from all property lines. Setbacks shall comply with all minimum zoning ordinance requirements and/or legally acquired variances. 
(C)  Upon request by the director, written certification shall be provided by the permittee or property owner that all concrete reinforcing and support stirrups comply with CSRI specifications. 
(D)  Upon request, batch tickets shall be provided to the director for each concrete pour. No more than one (1) gallon of water shall be added to each cubic yard of concrete mix during the concrete pour. All soil under a concrete slab shall be properly compacted and shall be covered with a minimum of six (6) mil polyethylene film to prevent the leaching of water from the concrete pour into the soil. The director may request the permittee, at the permittee's expense, to have any concrete slab and/or footing tested by an independent third party approved by the director. The director may take any and all appropriate action including, but not limited to, requiring removal of the concrete at the permittee or property owner's expense by a date certain if the director determines that: 
(i)  The concrete was poured in a manner contrary to this section or other law; 
(ii)  That the concrete was poured contrary to ACI specifications; or 
(iii)  That the slab or footings are defective as verified by the third party testing. 
(E)  Wood foundation walls are prohibited. An air infiltration barrier shall be installed between the foundation and all exterior walls. Foundation walls and piers of hollow masonry units shall be capped with a minimum of twenty-eight (28) gauge galvanized or comparable metal. Fifteen (15) pound felt shall be installed between nail down wooden floors and underlayment/subflooring. 
(F)  The skirt of the concrete apron for any driveway shall rise to no less that eight (8) inches above the flowline in the curb and the gutter and shall be eight (8) feet from the face of the curb at the flowline. 
(G)  All residential driveways, stops, patios, and walkways shall bear on properly compacted soil, foundation ledges or be doweled at slab. Maximum residential driveways slopes shall not exceed twenty (20) percent grade. At the entrance of a garage, the garage floor shall be elevated two (2) inches above the driveway or a drainage system approved by the director shall be installed at the entrance to the garage. Residential garages and carports shall contain not less than nineteen (19) feet six (6) inches of actual automobile parking depth. Upon completion of construction of any driveway or garage, the engineer of record shall provide written certification to the director that such driveway and/or garage complies with the requirements of this Code, including the requirements of this section. 
(H)  All residential basements and crawl spaces shall be damp proofed and positively drained regardless of water table and/or soil conditions. 
(I)  All residential floors shall be level and true. Concrete floors in basements or floors designed for human habitation shall not have pits, depressions or areas of unevenness that would prevent their use as finished sub-floors. The allowable slope tolerance for all floors shall not exceed one-fourth (¼) inch in thirty-two (32) inches. 
(J)  All residential bathroom wet floor areas shall be covered and protected by non-absorbent floor coverings. Dressing areas may transition to carpet. All shower and tub walls and ceilings shall be hung with moisture resistant dry wall that shall extend to the ceiling. 
(K)  All roofing shingles shall be installed and maintained during the entire construction per manufacturer's recommendations. Roofing shall be installed and sloped according to the manufacturer specifications using flashing and waterproof caulking to prevent leakage and moisture accumulation. 
(L)  Roof framing shall be tied securely to wall framing, using hurricane type connections. All exterior wall sheathing shall be made of seven-sixteenth ( 7/16 ) plywood or oriented strand board or other approved materials. Metal or self-sealing flashing shall be installed at least twelve (12) inches on either side of roof valleys. Drip edges shall be installed at all roofing edges. 
(M)  Residential gutters shall be continuously sloped for proper drainage and shall not contain depressions or swags to collect standing water. Drainage from gutter outlets shall be directed to a designed or natural drainage system that does not adversely affect adjacent property or buildings. 
(N)  The exterior wall facing a street of all residences shall have brick, stone, or real (lath and portland) stucco installed with the following exceptions: 
(i)  California styled all wood contemporary houses. 
(ii)  Pre-approved contract houses where the end user or architect specifies other material. 
(iii)  English Georgia or American Colonial/Craftsman all wood residential houses. 
(iv)  Any residential house that has an upper story cantilevered over the lower story, only the lower floor must be masonry veneered. 
(v)  Log homes. 
(vi)  State approved industrialized residential structures. 
(vii)  Designs approved by the county historic preservation commission. 
(O)  Seven-sixteenth ( 7/16 ) inch structural wood sheathing or other approved material shall be installed as underlayment on all residential exterior walls where vinyl siding is to be installed. All vinyl siding shall be a minimum material thickness of .044 inch and shall be installed by hand nailing using galvanized roofing nails. 
(P)  A weather resistant barrier shall be required as an underlay between all exterior siding or veneer. All exterior wood surfaces and fastener holes shall be sealed, treated and painted according to the manufacturer's specifications. All exterior wood and cementitious siding surfaces shall be sealed and painted according to the manufacturer's specifications. All exterior fasteners shall be coated and shall meet or exceed manufacturer specifications and standards for the specific application. 
(Q)  All windows and doors shall be installed with flashing to create a drain plain. All flashing shall be cut into adjoining surfaces where applicable. Light colored roofing and solar orientation principles shall be encouraged for use in all buildings. Flashing and caulking shall be installed at all exterior surfaces, roofs or appurtenances that are connected to another surface and such flashing and caulking shall extend to abutting structures. 
(R)  Crickets shall be installed behind all chimneys and shall extend the full width of the chimney chase. 
(S)  A three and one-half (3½) inch weep screed shall be installed at the bottom edge of the lath on all exterior hard coat stucco. The weep screen shall be mounted four (4) inches above finished grade and two (2) inches above impervious surfaces (walkways, patios and driveways). Metallic pipes penetrating stucco must be wrapped with materials to prevent corrosion of the pipe. Expansion joints shall be installed between floors. 
(T)  All topsoil shall be saved, protected and shall only be reused as topsoil but not used for fill. All disturbed areas on residential lots shall be totally sodded or landscaped with approved landscaped materials. All building material that are rendered unusable by natural elements (i.e. water, sun or soil) in the opinion of the director shall be immediately removed upon discovery and replaced with satisfactory material at the permittee or property owner's expense. 
(U)  Outside water-using or producing appliances such as an air conditioning cooling coil condensate shall be piped six (6) inches away from the dwelling unit foundation. 
(V)  Verification of subterranean termite control shall be submitted prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-53. - Amendments to the International Plumbing Code and International Mechanical Code. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Plumbing Code adopted by reference in section 7-51 above is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)  International Plumbing Code. 
(A)  Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
(B)  Section 703.6 of Appendix J of the Georgia Amendments is hereby adopted by the governing authority. 
(2)  Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state adopted plumbing code. 
(A)  Three (3) exterior frost proof hose bibbs separated as far as practical and installed in interior walls that interest exterior walls shall be installed on all residences. At least one (1) shall be installed in close proximity to the driveway. 
(B)  All exterior sewer drain clean outs shall be cut back to finished grade level on all residences. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Mechanical Code adopted by reference in section 7-51 above is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)  International Mechanical Code. 
(A)  Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
(2)  Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the adopted state mechanical code. 
(A)  Two (2) heating and air conditioning systems or one (1) system with zone controls and zoning dampers shall be installed in all multiple story residences. 
(B)  Residential heating and air conditioning systems (if air conditioning is installed) shall be sized to address all finished and unfinished interior areas (except garages). 
(C)  Drain pans with positive drains to the outside or kill switches shall be installed under all units with cooling coils when installed above a finished area. 
(D)  Fiberglass duct board shall not be allowed in residential structures. Runs of flexible duct shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet with the following installation standards and SMACNA Guidelines: 
(i)  Flexible duct shall be installed fully extended (not compressed). 
(ii)  Flexible duct shall be installed to avoid sharp bends, the radius at the centerline shall not be less than one (1) duct diameter. 
(iii)  Supports shall be provided at no greater separation than five (5) feet for horizontal runs and six (6) feet for vertical runs. 
(iv)  Supports shall be a minimum of four (4) inches wide sheet metal straps, shaped to fit the outside diameter of the duct per SMACNA Guidelines. 
(v)  Supports shall occur before and after each bend greater than forty-five (45) degrees. 
(vi)  Sheet metal collars to which ducts are connected shall be a minimum of two (2) inches. 
(vii)  Sheet metal sleeves not less than four (4) inches long shall be used for joining two (2) runs of duct. 
(viii)  All connections, joints and splices must be taped, and mastics when used for field installation shall meet UL Standard 181B and manufacturer's specifications. 
(ix)  Risers shall not exceed two (2) stories in height. 
(x)  Flexible ducts shall not be used within or through fire rated assemblies. 
(E)  Attic ventilation utilizing continuous ridge and soffit vents, cap vents or turbine vents shall be required. Powered ventilation may be utilized if natural draft ventilation cannot be achieved. 
(F)  Factory seams on low pressure systems do not have to be sealed when the minimum air leakage requirements of the Georgia State Energy Code for buildings have been met for the entire duct system. 
(G)  Pull down stairs or other permanent steps shall be installed to provide access to residential attics when mechanical systems are located in the same attic space. 
(H)  Ventilation fans shall be sized at one (1) CFM per square foot for all residential toilet, shower and tub areas. Separated toilet areas shall require a separate fan sized accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Sec. 7-54. - Amendments to the International Fuel Gas Code, the state adopted electrical code and the International Energy Conservation Code. 
(a)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the International Fuel Gas Code adopted by reference in section 7-51 above is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)  International Fuel Gas Code Code. 
(A)  Chapter 1 is deleted in its entirety. 
(B)  Section 703.6 of Appendix J of the Georgia Amendments is hereby adopted by the governing authority. 
(2)  Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state adopted gas code. 
(A)  Gas lines shall be inspected and pressure tested at the rough-in inspection and final inspection. Gas lines shall not be connected to meter bars prior to the final inspection and final performance of the pressure test. Failure to comply is considered a dangerous and unsafe installation that may be subject the violator to penalties, enforcement actions, a citation for a violation of this chapter and any other remedy authorized by law. 
(b)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the state adopted electrical code adopted by reference in section 7-51 above is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)  Local supplemental ordinance requirements to the state adopted gas code. 
(A)  Electrical fences consisting of an electrically charged conductor or other electrically charged devices shall be permitted to be used only for the confinement of farm animals. Only fence chargers of the intermittent current type listed by a nationally recognized independent testing laboratory shall be permitted to be used. Electrical fences shall not be used except by special permission after written application to the director. 
(B)  Buildings having two-hour fire rated vertical walls will be accepted as building separation and two (2) or more services shall be permitted. Horizontal separation shall not be construed as building separation. 
(C)  Unfinished rooms in residences that are framed and have mechanical duct installed and connected to the environmental system shall be wired with receptacles and switches according to NEC requirements. 
(D)  When a residential service change is installed, all receptacle outlets that are required under the current state adopted electrical code to be GFI outlets shall be modified to provide such protection, including bathrooms, kitchen counters, and outdoor receptacles. 
(E)  A reinspection permit and reinspection shall be required before power is restored to any residence or building where power has been disconnected for six (6) months or more. 
(F)  At least two hundred-amp service with a minimum of thirty (30) circuits is required for each dwelling unit that is two thousand (2,000) square feet or larger. 
(G)  All bedrooms and one additional room shall be wired for telephones, televisions and computers. The additional room may be split into two rooms without the requirement that both of the split rooms be wired for telephones, television and computers (example, phone in kitchen and TV and computer in family room). 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the state adopted electrical code adopted by reference in section 7-51 above is adopted with the following additions, deletions, modifications, or amendments: 
(1)  Amendments. 
(A)  The provisions in Chapter 7, Division 2, Codes Administration, of the Code, shall supplement Chapter 1 of the International Energy Conservation Code. When provisions of Chapter 7, Division 2, of the Code are in conflict with provisions of Chapter 1 of the International Energy Conservation Code, then the provisions of the International Energy Conservation Code shall take precedence and govern. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, Pt. I, 8-10-04; Ord. No. 05-09, Pt. I, 7-26-05) 
Secs. 7-55—7-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, adopted Dec. 23, 2003, deleted former Art. III of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. III, §§ 7-351—7-358, 7-371—7-383, 7-401—7-407, 7-426—7-431, pertained to property maintenance and derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 9-5001—9-5003, 9-5005—9-5021, 9-5025, 9-5041, 9-5042, 9-5051; and Ord. No. 92-37, §§ 3, 4, adopted Dec. 8, 1992. 

Secs. 7-351—7-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BUILDING NUMBERING 

Sec. 7-500. - Assigning numbers; size; when to be erected; inspections not to be made unless numbers erected. 
Street numbers will be assigned for all buildings and structures. Numbers must be erected and displayed in front of the project on a board with permanent numbers not smaller than two (2) inches. Numbers must be in place at the beginning of the job before the footing inspection is made and be continuously displayed thereafter until the job is complete and all final inspections have been made. No inspection will be made where street numbers are not in place as required above. Contractors and others shall always refer to the street number when calling the public works-development department for an inspection request or information. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1003; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1001), 3-28-89) 
Sec. 7-501. - Designation of street numbers. 
Street numbers for dwelling units and places of business on all public streets and street numbers or building numbers for dwelling units and places of business within apartment projects and nonresidential developments located on private streets shall be assigned by the planning department in accordance with its administrative procedures. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1002; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1002), 3-28-89) 
Sec. 7-502. - Posting. 
(a)  Each one- and two-family dwelling unit constructed after July 1, 1986, shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of such dwelling unit in figures at least three (3) inches high on a contrasting background. 
(b)  Each one- and two-family dwelling unit constructed prior to July 1, 1986, shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of such dwelling unit in figures at least one (1) inch high on a contrasting background. 
(c)  Each multifamily (three (3) or more dwelling units) building shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the building, visible from the parking lot or street providing general public access, the address(es) or number(s) of the building in figures at least six (6) inches high on a contrasting background and each individual apartment/unit within the building shall be marked on or about its main entrance with the individual apartment/unit number and/or address in figures at least three (3) inches high on a contrasting background. In addition to the above, where a multifamily building has more than one (1) exterior entrance, each such entrance shall be marked, in figures at least (3) inches high on contrasting background, with the numbers and/or address of each and every individual apartment/unit to which access is provided through that common entrance. This shall be effective on all new and existing units July 1, 1986. 
(d)  Each place of business shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of the place of business in figures at least three (3) inches high on a contrasting background. This shall be effective on all new and existing places of business after July 1, 1986. 
(Code 1976, §§ 9-1001, § 9-1003; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1(9-1003), 3-28-89) 
ARTICLE V. - DEKALB DEVELOPMENT SERVICES FISCAL OVERSIGHT ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Sec. 7-503. - Creation and composition. 
(a)  The development services fiscal oversight advisory committee ("fiscal oversight committee") will be composed of stakeholders who are professionals in the development field and are familiar with DeKalb's permitting process. They will provide subject matter expertise to assist with recommending improvements. 
(b)  The fiscal oversight committee shall be composed of ten (10) members. 
(c)  Each of the following organizations shall submit one (1) recommended representative to the chief executive officer for appointment to the board of commissioners for approval. The chief executive officer may act on this recommendation or request an additional candidate for consideration. 
(1)  Greater Atlanta Homebuilders Association. 
(2)  DeKalb Chamber of Commerce. 
(3)  Atlanta Apartment Association. 
(4)  Georgia Chapter for the International Council of Shopping Centers. 
(5)  BOMA-Georgia. 
(6)  Atlanta Commercial Board of Realtors. 
(7)  American Council of Engineering Companies of Georgia. 
(8)  National Association of Industrial and Office Properties. 
(9)  Council for Quality Growth. 
(10)  Leadership DeKalb. 
Nominees should consist of members of the design community, such as architects and engineers, in addition to land use attorneys, developers, and other stakeholders. 
(d)  Each fiscal oversight committee member shall serve a two-year term and may be appointed to serve successive terms. 
( Ord. No. 15-01 , Pt. I, 1-13-15) 
Sec. 7-504. - Committee function. 
(a)  The fiscal oversight advisory committee is authorized to: 
(1)  Serve as an advisory committee to the administration and board of commissioners related to the fiscal management and policies of the DeKalb Development Services Division; 
(2)  Monitor development fund expenditures, revenues, and reserve levels, and provide input on fees and major purchases; 
(3)  Make recommendations regarding service levels, procedures, and staffing levels for development services; and 
(4)  Serve as ambassadors to DeKalb County in the Metropolitan Atlanta region. 
(b)  Meetings. The committee will elect a chair, vice-chair, and secretary to preside over the meetings and keep minutes. 
( Ord. No. 15-01 , Pt. I, 1-13-15) 
Sec. 7-505. - Staffing. 
The director of planning and sustainability shall provide necessary staffing to ensure effective operation of the fiscal oversight committee. 
( Ord. No. 15-01 , Pt. I, 1-13-15) 
Chapter 8 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Business licenses and occupational taxes, § 15-26 et seq.; licensing of broadcast subscription television systems, § 15-35(3); permit, etc., required to install poles, pipes, etc., on public roads or alleys, § 23-6. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; authority to regulate cable television systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Access channels means cable television channels available for use by citizens, government and educational institutions, including but not limited to the cablecast of meetings, hearings and programs of federal, state and local government and community organizations. 
Additional services means cable television service provided in addition to basic services on an optional basis, including, but not limited to, pay TV, home security, data transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading and home shopping. 
Applicant means any person submitting an application for a cable television franchise under this chapter and the terms and conditions set forth in any franchise ordinance entered into by the county and the applicant. 
Automated channels means cable television channels available for carrying time, weather, news, stock market quotations and community messages. 
Basic services means the cable television services available to all subscribers for a regular monthly service charge, excluding additional services for which a separate charge is made. 
Board of commissioners means the present governing authority of the county or any successor to the legislative powers of the present governing authority. 
Cable television system or CATV system means any nonbroadcast facility consisting of a set of transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment, under common ownership and control, that distributes or is designed to distribute to subscribers the signals of one (1) or more television broadcast stations, but such term shall not include any such facility that serves or will serve only subscribers in one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership, control or management. 
CATV means cable television. 
Channel means a frequency band capable of carrying audio or video signals to subscribers. 
Channel capacity means the number of activated channels to be offered to subscribers. 
Converter means an electronic tuning device which makes it possible for an ordinary television set to receive cable television service. 
County means the unincorporated areas of the county. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor agency having jurisdiction or regulatory power over cable television service. 
Franchise or CATV franchise means the privilege granted by the board of commissioners to a grantee under this chapter and a franchise ordinance to use the streets of the county to construct, equip and operate a CATV system in a designated area or areas in the county. 
Franchise area means the area of the county within which a CATV franchise is granted, whether such area is the entire county or a part of the county. 
Franchise ordinance means an ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners, consistent with this chapter, granting a CATV franchise to a particular grantee, and includes a confirming ordinance as defined in section 8-9. 
Grantee means the person to whom a CATV franchise is granted by the board of commissioners or any person to whom the interest of a grantee is assigned or transferred in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance. 
Gross revenue means all revenue derived directly or indirectly by a grantee from its CATV system within the county, including but not limited to charges for basic services and additional services, connection and reconnection, leased channels, converter rentals, studio rental, production equipment and personnel, and advertising revenues. Any taxes on cable television services imposed directly upon subscribers but collected by a grantee shall not be included in the gross revenue. 
Installation means the connection or reconnection of a CATV system feeder or trunk cable to a subscriber's terminal. 
Local origination means programs of local origin. 
Monitoring means observing a communications signal carried on a CATV system, or the absence of such a signal, by any person without regard to whether such observation is by visual or electronic means. Monitoring shall not include systemwide, nonindividually addressed sweeps of the CATV system for purposes of verifying the integrity of the system, controlling subscriber transmissions or billing for additional services. 
Pay TV means optional audio or video programs available to subscribers for a separate charge for each program or channel selected by the subscriber. 
Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Rates means all rates, fees or charges paid by residential or nonresidential subscribers for basic services, the installation of the CATV system to subscriber terminals, and additional services to the extent that county regulation thereof would be consistent with applicable state and federal law. 
Streets means the surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive, sidewalk or other easement or right-of-way now or hereafter held by the county. 
Subscriber means a recipient of CATV service. 
Two-way channels means CATV channels which allow subscribers to transmit audio, video or other signals. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6003) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-2. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide the citizens of the county with a cable television and communications system equal to the highest state of the art and to promote variety in television and communication services by assuring a sufficient number of channels for entertainment, information and education. 
The terms of this chapter shall not apply if such an application would create an inequitable regulatory environment such that one cable or video provider operating within DeKalb County is subject to the terms of this chapter while another cable or video provider operating within DeKalb County is not. In all cases, a cable or video provider operating within DeKalb County shall be subject to the terms of its franchise agreement as well as all federal and state regulations and local police powers. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6001; Ord. No. 13-12 , Pt. I, 6-11-13) 
Sec. 8-3. - Funding of administrative expenses. 
All expenses incurred by the county with respect to administering this chapter and any franchise ordinance shall be funded out of the franchise fees collected pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6136) 
Sec. 8-4. - Grantee has no recourse against county enforcement; franchise acceptance is acceptance of terms, conditions. 
(a)  No grantee shall have recourse whatsoever against the county for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the county. 
(b)  Each grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a CATV franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the county to grant the franchise. 
(c)  Each grantee, by acceptance of a CATV franchise, acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the county or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed in this chapter. 
(d)  Each grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the CATV franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions thereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of these terms and conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6137) 
Sec. 8-5. - Failure of county to enforce franchise does not excuse compliance. 
No grantee shall be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of this chapter or a franchise ordinance by any failure of the county to insist upon or to seek compliance with any terms or conditions. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6138) 
Sec. 8-6. - Failure to perform act within prescribed time period. 
Whenever this chapter or a franchise ordinance shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, this time shall be deemed of the essence and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the county to invoke the remedies available under the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6139) 
Sec. 8-7. - Grantee may not contest validity of franchise after acceptance. 
Each grantee agrees by the acceptance of a CATV franchise that it will not at any time set up against the county, in any claim or proceeding, any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the county had no power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entireties. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6140) 
Sec. 8-8. - Rights reserved by county. 
Without limitation upon the rights which the county might otherwise have, the county does hereby expressly reserve the following: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers to the full extent that these powers may be vested in or granted to the county. 
(2)  To determine through the board of commissioners any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6141) 
Sec. 8-9. - Existing CATV system. 
(a)  All the terms and conditions of this chapter shall apply to any CATV system now in operation in the county under a valid franchise, except as the board of commissioners may otherwise provide by resolution or ordinance, except that the existing CATV systems shall be given a reasonable time to bring their systems into compliance herewith. 
(b)  No existing CATV system may be expanded or extended into any part of the county beyond the limits of service lines existing and in operation on June 24, 1980, unless granted the privilege to do so by a franchise ordinance executed by the board of commissioners in accordance with all the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(c)  The board of commissioners may confirm the validity of the CATV franchise for any existing CATV system by enactment of an appropriate ordinance (confirming ordinance) setting forth the amount of the letter of credit required under section 8-71, its franchise area (based upon the existing CATV system's claims to its franchise areas under previous ordinances and such other factors as the board of commissioners deems appropriate), the remaining term of its franchise and its present status with respect to compliance to the terms hereof. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the repeal (the 1976 CATV ordinance) by enactment of this chapter, and except to the extent as otherwise provided in a confirming ordinance, the validity and geographical extent of the franchise of any existing CATV system shall be determined by reference to the 1976 CATV ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6142) 
Sec. 8-10. - Citizens' advisory board. 
(a)  There is hereby created a CATV citizens' advisory board which shall consist of nine (9) members as follows: 
(1)  One (1) member appointed by the county board of education for a term not to exceed four (4) years. 
(2)  Each commissioner on the board of commissioners and the chief executive shall appoint one (1) member and the term of appointment for such member shall correspond to the term of office of the appointing commissioner or the chief executive. 
(b)  A chairperson shall be elected by the members of the CATV citizens' advisory board, and such chairperson shall serve in that capacity for a term of one (1) year. 
(c)  Any member of the advisory board missing two (2) consecutive meetings without just cause shall be relieved of duties and a replacement named. 
(d)  All members of the CATV citizens' advisory board shall serve without compensation and no member or any direct relative of any member shall have any interest, as a shareholder or the holder of a debt instrument, in any grantee. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the CATV citizens' advisory board to advise the board of commissioners regarding utilization and coordination of the CATV system's facilities, equipment and access channels which are made available for use by citizens, government and educational institutions under the franchise ordinances granted hereunder. 
(f)  Meetings of the CATV citizens' advisory board shall be held as needed at the call of the chairperson, but not less than once a year, with such financial and staff support as may be fixed by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6143; Ord. No. 88-01a, § 1,7-12-88) 
Sec. 8-11. - Impossibility of performance. 
Without limiting or restricting the applicability of the law relating to and governing the impossibility of performance of contracts, each grantee shall be relieved of and from undertakings, duties and responsibilities imposed upon such grantee by virtue of the terms of this chapter or any franchise ordinance where the performance of same has been prevented, curtailed or delayed by virtue of circumstances beyond the party's control, including but not limited to strikes, war (whether declared or not), acts of God, or changes of law (whether the result of legislative, executive, administrative or judicial action). Under such circumstances, the affected grantee shall not be deemed to have committed a breach of or be in default under the pertinent term or terms of this chapter or the franchise ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6144) 
Sec. 8-12. - Regulating authority of county. 
(a)  Each grantee shall construct, operate and maintain its CATV system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the county which have jurisdiction in these matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and department rules and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the county. 
(c)  The chief executive may from time to time issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance, including, without limitation, rules and regulations for implementation of the complaint procedures set forth in section 8-169. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6081) 
Sec. 8-13. - Corrective action by county; recovery of costs. 
If a grantee should violate any of the terms of this chapter or the franchise ordinance, the chief executive shall give to the grantee written notice to correct such violation. If the grantee fails to correct such violation, make any repair, remove or relocate any part of its CATV system, or otherwise perform its obligations within thirty (30) days after the date of such written notice, or fails to justify the need for any further delay to the satisfaction of the chief executive, the county may cause the necessary work to be completed or services to be provided or other corrective action to be taken, and the grantee shall pay the county the costs thereof within ten (10) days of receipt of an itemized account of such costs. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6091) 
Sec. 8-14. - Assessment of liquidated damages. 
For the violation of any of the following provisions of this chapter, the board of commissioners may assess liquidated damages, as follows: 
(1)  For failure to provide CATV service in accordance with article III of this chapter, unless the board of commissioners specifically approves the delay by resolution, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond grantee's control, the grantee shall pay two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day or part thereof that the delay continues. 
(2)  For failure to provide data, documents, reports and information as required by this chapter, the grantee shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) per day that each violation occurs or continues. 
(3)  For failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system following a request pursuant to section 8-130, the grantee shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each day or part thereof that such noncompliance continues. 
(4)  For failure to comply with the technical and operational standards set forth in article IV of this chapter following the county's resolution directing the grantee to make improvements pursuant to section 8-127, the grantee shall forfeit two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day or part thereof that the violation continues. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6092) 
Sec. 8-15. - Notice of public hearings. 
(a)  Notice of any public hearing shall be by publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county, at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting, posting at the county courthouse and, if in connection with an existing CATV franchise, by all of the following methods: 
(1)  By announcement on at least two (2) primary channels of the grantee's CATV system between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., for five (5) consecutive days immediately prior to the meeting. 
(2)  By a statement included in any billings delivered to subscribers before the date set for the public hearing. 
(b)  In this section "primary channels" means those channels which have the largest viewing audience as determined from time to time by recognized industry surveys. "Primary channels" does not include any channels on which a grantee is prohibited by law, contract or usage of trade from making public announcements, by reservation of time or otherwise. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6133) 
Secs. 8-16—8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-31. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to construct, operate or service a CATV system in the unincorporated area within the boundaries of the county unless granted a privilege to do so by a franchise ordinance as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  No CATV franchise shall be granted except by the board of commissioners by adoption of a franchise ordinance pursuant to this chapter. Each franchise ordinance shall designate a particular grantee and the franchise area to be served by the grantee. No person shall construct, operate or service a CATV system in the unincorporated area within the boundaries of the county unless granted a privilege to do so by a franchise ordinance. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-6011, 7-6127) 
Sec. 8-32. - Term. 
Each CATV franchise shall be for a term of fifteen (15) years and may be renewed only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6012) 
Sec. 8-33. - Nonexclusiveness. 
Each CATV franchise shall be nonexclusive, and the county may grant more than one (1) CATV franchise for the same franchise area. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6013) 
Sec. 8-34. - Granting does not confer property rights. 
No grantee of a CATV franchise shall acquire any right of property in the streets or in other property owned by the county, and the county shall have no obligation to any grantee for maintenance of the streets or other property owned by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6014) 
Sec. 8-35. - Annual franchise fee. 
(a)  Each grantee shall initially pay to the county an annual franchise fee equal to three (3) percent of its annual gross revenue; provided, however, such annual franchise fee may be increased up to a maximum of five (5) percent of a grantee's annual gross revenue at any time by resolution of the board of commissioners. Any increase in the annual franchise fee shall apply equally to all grantees and shall take effect immediately upon adoption of the enacting resolution unless otherwise specified by the board of commissioners. If the existing FCC limitation on franchise fees is raised or removed, then the annual franchise fee shall be as set by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The annual franchise fee shall be paid to the county in monthly installments not later than fifteen (15) days after the end of each month on the basis of gross revenue received during the preceding month. At the end of its fiscal year and following the filing of the annual financial report required in section 8-168, each grantee shall remit any additional sums due as a result of such report. 
(c)  The annual franchise fee shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state or the county. 
(d)  The county shall have the right to inspect records of the grantee and the right to audit and to recompute any amounts determined to be due and payable by the grantee. Any such audit shall be performed within thirty-six (36) months following the close of each fiscal year of the grantee. Any additional amount due to the county as a result of the audit shall be paid within thirty (30) days following written notice to the grantee by the county, which notice shall include a copy of the audit report. 
(e)  If any franchise fee, cost or penalty is not paid on or before the due date to the county, a late charge and interest shall be assessed as specified in section 2-112. 
(f)  If a grantee serves areas outside the county and receives revenue for advertising both within and without the county, such advertising revenue shall be prorated to the county on a direct ratio between the number of subscribers within the county, and the total number of subscribers within and without the county, except as may be otherwise provided in a franchise ordinance. 
(g)  If a grantee is delinquent in any of its obligations under this section for a period of ninety (90) days, the grantee shall be considered in violation of this chapter and its CATV franchise may be terminated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter, unless an extension is granted by the board of commissioners. Any such extension shall be limited to a period of sixty (60) days, and late charges and interest shall not be waived. 
(h)  No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the county may have for further or additional sums due and payable by the grantee or for the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6041; Ord. No. 88-32, 6-14-88) 
Sec. 8-36. - Subject to police powers. 
(a)  By accepting a CATV franchise, the grantee: 
(1)  Acknowledges that its privileges are subject to the police power of the county to adopt and enforce measures necessary to the safety, health and welfare of the public. 
(2)  Agrees to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the county pursuant to such power. 
(b)  Any conflict between the provisions of a CATV franchise and any other present or future lawful exercise of the county's police powers shall be resolved in favor of the latter, except that any such exercise that is not of general application in the county or applies exclusively to the grantee or CATV systems which contain provisions inconsistent with the franchise shall prevail only if upon such exercise the county finds an emergency exists constituting a danger to health, safety, property or general welfare or such exercise is mandated by law. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6131) 
Sec. 8-37. - County use of grantee's facilities. 
The county shall have the right, during the term of a CATV franchise, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles, towers or other equipment of the grantee any wire and fixtures that do not interfere with the operations of the CATV system. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6132) 
Secs. 8-38—8-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ISSUANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 8-51. - Outline of stages. 
The board of commissioners shall follow a five-stage process in granting each CATV franchise other than those granted pursuant to the terms of section 8-9. During the first stage, the board of commissioners shall solicit and receive applications for a CATV franchise. During the second stage, the board of commissioners shall designate one (1) or more applicants for detailed review of the application and negotiation of such matters as the type and extent of services to be offered. During the third stage, the board of commissioners and each designated applicant shall negotiate and draft a proposed franchise ordinance. The fourth stage shall consist of the grant of a CATV franchise by the board of commissioners by adoption of a franchise ordinance designating the proposed grantee and the franchise area to be served by the proposed grantee. The fifth stage shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Written acceptance of the franchise ordinance by the proposed grantee. 
(2)  A written franchise certificate issued by the chief executive to a proposed grantee evidencing a franchise granted under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6021) 
Sec. 8-52. - Stage I, applications. 
(a)  The board of commissioners shall grant no CATV franchise without first soliciting applications by public notice in a form approved and adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners. Such public notice shall state the place and time during which application forms may be obtained, the place and deadline for filing of applications, a description of the proposed franchise area, and the amount of a nonrefundable application fee to be paid to the county concurrently with the filing of each application. The application forms shall be approved by the chief executive and shall require such information as the chief executive determines appropriate including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  If the applicant is not a corporation, its application shall contain the names and addresses of persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in its business operation and/or any proposed CATV franchise sought by the applicant. In this paragraph "equitable interest" includes all assignments for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the proposed CATV franchise, and also includes any benefit, payment or emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a CATV franchise. 
(2)  If the applicant is a corporation not publicly held, as defined by the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of its officers, directors and shareholders, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a corporation publicly held, as defined by the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which the applicant is incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of its officers and directors. 
(4)  The form of ownership of the facilities to be used in exercising the proposed CATV franchise. 
(5)  Any cable television system currently owned or operated by the applicant, its experience in operating and constructing such systems, any application pending for any other system, and the general financial resources of the applicant, as well as those specifically available for construction and operation of the proposed CATV system. 
(6)  Proposed services, including channel capacity, the number of channels and types of services to be included in basic services, the number of channels and types of services to be included in additional services, the number of two-way channels, the number of access channels and automated channels, facilities for local origination and a list of any additional service or facility to be made available to the county and other public, institutional and community organizations. 
(7)  A schedule of the subscriber rates for each of the proposed services. 
(8)  The equipment to be included in the CATV system, the general routes of the feeder or trunk cables, the number and location of signal amplifiers to be used in redistributing signals, the proposed franchise area and the service schedule for the proposed franchise area. 
(9)  The design and construction plans and standards to be used in constructing or renovating the CATV system and the proposed construction and service schedule. 
(b)  All applications shall be open to public inspection during reasonable business hours. 
(c)  Any material misrepresentation in an application or the omission of any material representation, which omission renders the included representations misleading, whether done negligently or intentionally, shall be grounds for rejection of the application or termination of any CATV franchise granted on the basis of such application. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6022) 
Sec. 8-53. - Stage II, selection of designated applicant. 
After the close of the filing period for applications for a CATV franchise, the board of commissioners shall hold an evening public hearing, review the applications submitted and, after considering the applicant's character, financial, technical and other qualifications and the adequacy and feasibility of its construction arrangements, by one (1) or more resolutions, designate one (1) or more applicants for participation in stage III of the selection process. Such designating resolution shall grant no rights, privileges or franchise of any kind, but shall be limited to designating one (1) or more applicants for stage III negotiations. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6023) 
Sec. 8-54. - Stage III, negotiation of proposed franchise ordinance. 
Upon designation pursuant to stage II of the procedures set out in this division, the board of commissioners and the designated applicant shall proceed to negotiate and draft the terms and conditions of a proposed franchise ordinance. At any time, the board of commissioners may do one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Terminate negotiations with the designated applicant and initiate or continue negotiations with any other designated applicant. 
(2)  By resolution designate another applicant from the original applicants for stage III negotiations. 
(3)  Return to stage I and reopen the time for the filing of new applications. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6024) 
Sec. 8-55. - Stage IV, grant of franchise. 
At any time after the date of the resolution designating a designated applicant pursuant to this division, the board of commissioners may grant a CATV franchise by adoption of a franchise ordinance naming a designated applicant as a proposed grantee. Such grant of a CATV franchise shall be conditioned upon the proposed grantee delivering the franchise acceptance documents described. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6025) 
Sec. 8-56. - Stage V, acceptance of franchise. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after the date of the adoption of the franchise ordinance pursuant to stage IV of the procedures set out in this division, the proposed grantee shall deliver the following documents (the franchise acceptance documents) to the chief executive: 
(1)  A written acceptance of the CATV franchise in such form as is acceptable to the chief executive. 
(2)  A written indemnification agreement or its equivalent satisfying the requirements of section 8-73. 
(3)  The letter of credit described in section8-71. 
(4)  The insurance policies or certificates therefor described in section 8-72. 
(5)  A certified check written to the order of the county in such amount as shall be set by the board of commissioners as compensation to the county for costs incurred by the county in preparing and awarding the CATV franchise. 
(6)  A certified check written to the order of the county in such amount as shall be set by the board of commissioners to be held by the county and applied as a credit toward payment of the annual franchise fees by the grantee. 
(b)  Upon receiving the franchise acceptance documents, the chief executive shall have five (5) days to review same and determine whether or not they are in proper order and have been validly executed. If the franchise acceptance documents are deficient in any respect, the chief executive shall notify the proposed grantee of such deficiencies and the proposed grantee shall thereafter have five (5) days to remedy such deficiencies. 
(c)  If the proposed grantee fails to execute and deliver all the franchise acceptance documents within the thirty-day period provided in subsection (a) of this section or fails to remedy any deficiency in the franchise acceptance documents within the five-day period set forth in subsection (b) of this section: 
(1)  The franchise ordinance relating to the proposed grantee shall be null and void and of no further force and effect and the proposed grantee shall acquire no rights, privileges or franchise thereunder. 
(2)  The board of commissioners, by resolution, may designate another applicant from the original applicants for stage III negotiations, or may return to stage I and reopen the time for filing of new applications. 
(d)  If the franchise acceptance documents have been properly executed and delivered in accordance with this section, the chief executive shall issue a franchise certificate to the grantee evidencing the grantee's CATV franchise as of the date of such certificate. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6026) 
Secs. 8-57—8-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - COLLATERAL DOCUMENTS 

Sec. 8-71. - Letter of credit. 
(a)  Concurrently with the delivery of the franchise acceptance documents, and as a part thereof, each grantee shall deliver to the county a letter or letters of credit in such amount as shall be set by the board of commissioners (the letter of credit). The letter of credit shall guarantee the faithful performance by the grantee of all provisions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance, including, without limitation, the grantee's obligations to construct, extend and improve its CATV system and the payment of civil penalties, claims, liens and taxes due the county. The letter of credit shall be issued in favor of the county by such financial institution and in such form and content as shall be required by the franchise ordinance and be approved by the chief executive. 
(b)  Each letter of credit shall be renewed or maintained continually during the entire term of the franchise ordinance or any renewal thereof at the dollar level set by the board of commissioners. 
(c)  The rights of the county under the letter of credit shall be in addition to all other rights of the county, whether granted by this chapter, the franchise ordinance or otherwise by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to the letter of credit shall affect any other right the county may have. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6031) 
Sec. 8-72. - Insurance policies. 
(a)  During the term of the CATV franchise, each grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the chief executive executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payment of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned, or alleged to have been occasioned, by the operations of a grantee, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for personal injury or death of any one (1) person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal injury or death of any two (2) or more persons in any one (1) occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned, or alleged to have been occasioned, by the operation of grantee or alleged to have been so caused or occurred with a minimum liability for property damage of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) to any one (1) person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage to two (2) or more persons in any one (1) occurrence. 
(3)  Builders' risk completed value form insuring the grantee's CATV system during construction thereof against fire, lightning and all other risks covered by the uniform standard extended covereage endorsement in its broadest form then in use in the state to the full insurable value of the CATV system, upon the repair or replacement basis. 
(4)  Hazard insurance insuring the grantee's CATV system during operation thereof against fire, lightning and all other risks covered by the uniform standard extending coverage endorsement in its broadest form then in use in the state to the full insurable value of the CATV system, upon the repair or replacement basis. 
(5)  Workers' compensation insurance at all times during the acquisition, renovation, construction or equipping of the grantee's CATV system. 
(b)  Such forms of insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of its CATV system as defined in its franchise ordinance. 
(c)  Each insurance policy shall: 
(1)  Be nonassessable and issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state which are acceptable to the chief executive. 
(2)  Require thirty (30) days' written notice of any cancellation to both the county and the grantee herein. 
(3)  Be in such form as shall be acceptable to the chief executive. 
(d)  The insurance policies required under this section or duplicate copies thereof and insurance certificates with respect thereto shall be filed with the chief executive. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6032) 
Sec. 8-73. - Indemnification agreement. 
(a)  Each grantee shall execute an indemnification agreement prior to obtaining a franchise providing that it shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages to persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of a grantee, its servants, agents or employees. 
(b)  These damages shall include but not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system, whether any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this chapter or the franchise ordinance. 
(c)  By acceptance of a CATV franchise or acceptance of the confirmation of an existing CATV franchise pursuant to section 8-9, each grantee expressly agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the county in defending itself with regard to all damages mentioned above. These expenses shall include, but not be limited to, all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorneys' fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(d)  No recovery by the county of any sum by reason of the letter of credit acquired in section 8-71 shall be any limitation upon the liability of the grantee to the county under the terms of this section, except that any sum so received by the county shall be deducted from any recovery which the county might have against the grantee under the terms of this section. 
(e)  By acceptance of a CATV franchise or acceptance of the confirmation of an existing franchise pursuant to section 8-9, each grantee expressly agrees that the county shall not be liable in excess of actual replacement costs for any damage occurring to the property of the grantee caused by employees of the county in the performance of their duties; nor shall the county be held liable for the interruption of services by the action of its employees in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6033) 
Secs. 8-74—8-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RENEWAL, TRANSFER, ETC. 

Sec. 8-86. - Renewal procedures. 
(a)  A CATV franchise may be renewed by the board of commissioners in accordance with applicable laws and the following procedures: 
(1)  Procedures for the renewal of any existing CATV franchise shall be governed by the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 (47 U.S.C. § 546). 
(2)  The board of commissioners shall hold at least one (1) public hearing on each application for renewal after giving public notice in the manner required by section 8-15. 
(3)  If the board of commissioners finds the grantee's performance satisfactory, an existing CATV franchise may be renewed for an additional period of ten (10) years by amendment of the franchise ordinance in accordance with this section on such terms and conditions as the board of commissioners determines to be appropriate. 
(b)  Renewal for additional periods of ten (10) years may be applied for by the grantee and granted by the county in accordance with procedures outlined in this section for the first renewal. 
(c)  If the board of commissioners fails to renew an existing CATV franchise before its expiration date, all rights, privileges and powers of the grantee in and to such CATV franchise shall terminate as of the expiration date, except as stated below: 
(1)  At all times from the expiration or revocation of a franchise and until a grantee transfers to the county or other succeeding operator of the CATV system all of its rights, title and interests to all assets, real and personal, related to its CATV system, the grantee shall have a duty to such successor as a trustee holding such assets for the benefit of such successor, and the grantee shall not sell any of the system assets nor shall the grantee make any physical, material or administrative operational changes that would tend to do any of the following: 
a.  Degrade the quality of service to the subscribers. 
b.  Decrease income. 
c.  Materially increase expenses without the expressed permission, in writing, of the county. 
The grantee shall at all times operate the CATV system in accordance with the terms of this chapter and the terms of the franchise as if the franchise had not expired or had not been revoked. 
(2)  In the event of expiration or revocation of a franchise, this section shall not be construed to give a grantee any vested or other franchise right, but the right of the grantee in such circumstances shall exist only on a day-to-day basis until the transfer is effected. 
(3)  For its management services during this interim period as a trustee, the grantee shall be entitled to receive as compensation the net profit generated during the period between the expiration or revocation of the franchise, as the case by be, and the transfer of the grantee's assets to the county or a successor, minus all operating expenses and franchise fees. 
(d)  This section does not limit the power of the county, upon expiration or revocation of a franchise, to require the grantee to cease all operations whatsoever and/or remove its facilities, or otherwise exercise any rights the county would otherwise have. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6111) 
Sec. 8-87. - Transfer of ownership or control. 
(a)  No CATV franchise and no rights or privileges thereunder shall be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet or mortgaged in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  No change, transfer or acquisition of control of a grantee shall occur without the prior written consent of the board of commissioners. A transfer of control will be deemed to occur upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or an affiliated group of persons of fifty (50) percent or more of the voting stock of the grantee or of a percentage of the voting stock of the grantee which is larger than any other block of voting stock that is held by any one (1) person or an affiliated group of persons; provided, however, the transfer of a deceased stockholder's shares upon death, the transfer of a stockholder's shares to members of the stockholder's immediate family or to a trust benefiting members of the stockholder's immediate family, or the acquisition or accumulation of shares in an employee pension fund or such other similar fund shall not be deemed a change, transfer or acquisition of control. 
(c)  Notwithstanding anything else contained in this section, no consent shall be required for any mortgage, transfer or assignment of part or all of a CATV system and the rights or privileges under a CATV franchise, or control of a grantee by trust deed, deed to secure debt, pledge or other hypothecation in favor of a bank, savings and loan association or other financial institution regularly engaged in the business of lending money, in order to secure an indebtedness incurred as part of a bona fide financing transaction entered into for the purpose of obtaining funds for the operation, acquisition, construction or improvement of a grantee's CATV system; provided, however, that any foreclosure upon such security shall be in accordance with section 8-88. 
(d)  Any consent or approval of the board of commissioners granted pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) of this section shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the county in and to the streets. All transfers approved by the board of commissioners pursuant to this section shall, by their terms, be expressly subordinate to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance. 
(e)  In determining whether to approve a transfer pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the board of commissioners may request that the proposed transferee supply such information, documents and proposals as it deems appropriate and may consider the entire purchase price or consideration to be paid by any proposed transferee, including the allocations of value which may affect subscriber rates, as well as the proposed transferee's character, experience and financial condition. The board of commissioners may condition its approval of any transfer so as to limit the portion of such purchase price which may be taken into consideration in setting subscriber rates. 
(f)  No transfer of ownership or control shall be valid without the successor in interest, if such successor in interest constitutes a separate legal entity, assuming in writing all the obligations and duties of the grantee under this chapter and the grantee's franchise ordinance and delivering to the chief executive the franchise acceptance documents within thirty (30) days after the date of such transfer in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 8-56. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6112) 
Sec. 8-88. - Foreclosure. 
Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a part of a CATV system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a part of a CATV system, the grantee shall notify the chief executive of such event. A foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a part of a CATV system, except a foreclosure or judicial sale to the holder of a mortgage, trust deed, deed to secure debt, pledge or other hypothecation acquired pursuant to subsection (c) of section 8-87, shall be treated as a change in control of the grantee, and the provisions of this chapter governing the consent of the county to such change in control shall apply. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6113) 
Sec. 8-89. - Termination due to substantial violation. 
(a)  The board of commissioners may terminate any CATV franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee thereunder in the event of a substantial violation of the terms and conditions of either this chapter or the franchise ordinance. A substantial violation shall include, but shall not be limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Willful failure, refusal or neglect to comply with the provisions of this chapter or a franchise ordinance or any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter or a franchise ordinance. 
(2)  Any fraud or deceit, or attempted fraud or deceit, by a grantee in its conduct or relations under its CATV franchise with the county, subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(3)  Failure to meet the service schedule required under Article III of this chapter. 
(4)  Failure to restore service after ninety-six (96) consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when approved before such interruption or after by the chief executive. 
(5)  Material misrepresentation of facts or the omission of material facts necessary to make the facts stated not misleading in the application for a CATV franchise negotiation of a franchise ordinance or the delivery and execution of franchise acceptance documents. 
(6)  Failure to pay within sixty (60) days after final assessment of any civil penalty or liquidated damages. 
(b)  None of the foregoing shall constitute a substantial violation if such violation was without fault of the grantee or as a result of circumstances beyond the control of the grantee. A grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship or by misfeasance or malfeasance of its directors, officers, employees or agents. 
(c)  If a substantial violation occurs, the chief executive may initiate termination proceedings by making a written demand that the grantee correct such violation. If such violation continues for a period of thirty (30) days following such written demand, without the grantee's providing justification satisfactory to the chief executive for the delay, the chief executive may place the issue of termination before the board of commissioners for determination at a public hearing. 
(d)  If the board of commissioners determines that a substantial violation has occurred, the board of commissioners may, by resolution, do any of the following: 
(1)  Declare the CATV franchise of the grantee terminated. 
(2)  Assess civil penalties against the grantee. 
(3)  Extend the time for correction of the violation. 
(4)  Take such other action as the board of commissioners considers necessary and appropriate. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6093) 
Sec. 8-90. - Termination for appointment of receiver or trustee. 
The board of commissioners may terminate a CATV franchise one hundred twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless within such time all of the following occur: 
(1)  Such receivership or trusteeship has been vacated. 
(2)  Such receiver or trustee has fully complied with all the provisions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance and remedied all defaults under either. 
(3)  Such receiver or trustee has executed and delivered a written agreement, approved by a court of proper jurisdiction, under which such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of this chapter and the franchise ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6094) 
Sec. 8-91. - County purchase of system upon termination for cause. 
(a)  Upon termination for cause of a CATV franchise, the county, at its option, may purchase the CATV system from the grantee at a price not to exceed the adjusted fair market value. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall affect the right of eminent domain, and the option of the county to purchase a CATV system under the provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other methods of acquisition of property interests available to the county. 
(c)  In this section "adjusted fair market value" means fair market value: 
(1)  Reduced by the costs and damages incurred by the county as a result of the breach of the grantee's obligations which resulted in the termination, if the purchase occurs upon a termination of a CATV franchise by the county; and 
(2)  With no value allocated to the grantee's franchise. 
(d)  Upon exercise of the option of the county to purchase the CATV system and the payment of the purchase price, the grantee shall: 
(1)  Transfer to the county possession and title to all facilities and property, real and personal, of the CATV system, free from any and all liens and encumbrances not agreed to be assumed by the county. 
(2)  Execute such warranty deeds or other instruments of conveyance to the county as shall be necessary for this purpose. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-6101—7-6103) 
Sec. 8-92. - Removal of CATV system upon expiration or termination of franchise. 
Upon the expiration or termination of a CATV franchise, the board of commissioners may require the grantee to immediately remove at the grantee's expense its CATV system from all streets and public property within the county. If the grantee fails to do so, the county may perform the work at the grantee's expense. Any property remaining in place in the streets or on public property one hundred twenty (120) days after expiration or termination shall be considered abandoned by the grantee, and ownership to such property shall, at the option of the board of commissioners, be considered transferred to the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6095) 
Secs. 8-93—8-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SERVICE SCHEDULE 

Sec. 8-106. - Initial service area. 
(a)  Each franchise ordinance shall designate the part of the franchise area (the initial service area) where CATV service shall be available to all subscribers within the times specified below after the date of the adoption of the franchise ordinance, as follows: 
(1)  Within one (1) year to at least twenty (20) percent of the dwelling units within the initial service area. 
(2)  Within two (2) years to at least fifty (50) percent of the dwelling units within the initial service area. 
(3)  Within three (3) years to all dwelling units within the initial service area. 
(b)  If the connection from a trunk or feeder cable to any dwelling unit would require more than a standard one-hundred-fifty-foot aerial drop line, or its underground equivalent, the grantee may charge the subscriber the actual cost of the connection for the distance exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6051) 
Sec. 8-107. - Extensions of service. 
(a)  Each grantee shall extend its CATV system and make CATV service available beyond the initial service area as follows: 
(1)  Within one (1) year after completion of construction within the initial service area, along streets or parts of streets reaching a minimum density of forty (40) dwelling units per street mile beginning at the boundary of the initial service area and any line extension beyond the initial service area; and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the franchise ordinance concerning extensions of service. 
(2)  If the connection from a trunk or feeder cable to any dwelling unit within the areas provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection would require more than a standard one-hundred-fifty-foot aerial drop line, or its underground equivalent, the grantee may charge the subscriber the actual cost of the connection for the distance exceeding one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(3)  Service shall be provided to any person or persons outside the initial service area or the areas provided for in paragraph (1) of this subsection, if requested, upon payment to the grantee by such person or persons of all costs of extension, including, without limitation, costs of materials, labor and easements. 
(b)  Units under construction or for which building permits have been issued shall be considered a dwelling unit. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6052) 
Sec. 8-108. - Requests for service. 
Each grantee shall fill all requests for CATV service which are consistent with the foregoing schedule for service within thirty (30) days after the date of each request. A record of all service requests shall be kept for at least three (3) years and shall be available for public inspection at the local office of the grantee during regular office hours. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6053) 
Sec. 8-109. - Delay in meeting service schedule. 
Any substantial delay by a grantee in meeting the schedule for CATV service, unless specifically approved by the board of commissioners, shall be a violation of this chapter, subject to remedies provided in sections 8-13, 8-14, 8-89, 8-90 and 8-92. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6054) 
Secs. 8-110—8-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STANDARDS FOR CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATION OF CATV SYSTEM 

Sec. 8-126. - Compliance with laws, regulations and ordinances. 
Each grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its CATV system in a manner consistent with this chapter, the franchise ordinance and all laws, ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements and FCC technical standards. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6061) 
Sec. 8-127. - Construction and technical standards. 
(a)  Each grantee shall comply with all county building and construction codes and such other construction and technical standards as shall be specified in the franchise ordinance. 
(b)  Each grantee shall maintain equipment capable of providing such signal quality and system reliability as shall be specified in the franchise ordinance. 
(c)  Each grantee shall incorporate into its CATV system a capacity to permit the county, in times of emergency, to override simultaneously the audio of all channels and shall designate a single channel for emergency broadcast of both audio and video signals. 
(d)  Each grantee shall construct and operate its CATV system so as not to interfere with emergency radio services and aeronautical navigation signals, and each grantee shall periodically check its CATV system for radio frequency (RF) leakage. 
(e)  Each grantee shall construct and operate its CATV system so as not to interfere with television reception of nonsubscribers or to interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving county residents. 
(f)  Except for subscriber installation, no grantee shall make any excavation or attachment, erect any pole, install any wire and no construction of any kind shall be commenced without a permit issued by the county. Such permit may be issued after approval of layout maps and construction standards of the CATV system authorized by a franchise ordinance showing all equipment and routing or any utility poles to be used by the grantee, the location of all trunk and distribution lines and line amplifiers and the manner or method in which any such installation or construction shall be accomplished. 
(g)  If the board of commissioners by resolution declares that a grantee has failed to maintain the technical standards and quality of service required by this chapter or its franchise ordinance, the grantee shall immediately make such improvements as may be necessary. Failure to make such improvements within ninety (90) days after the date of such resolution or, if such improvements cannot be completed within such period, failure to institute timely action to do so within such period and diligently proceed to completion, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6062) 
Sec. 8-128. - Use of streets. 
(a)  All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the county shall be so located so as not to interfere with the proper use of the streets or the rights and reasonable convenience of owners of adjacent property. 
(b)  Except when necessary to service a subscriber, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the county under such conditions as it shall prescribe, a grantee shall not erect any poles or facilities within the streets but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of utility companies under such an agreement as a grantee may negotiate with these companies. 
(c)  Whenever the county or the state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee on the rights-of-way of the county, it shall be the obligation of a grantee, upon notice of such requirement, to immediately remove, relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the county or state. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of a grantee. 
(d)  Whenever, in any place within the county, all the electric and telephone utilities are located underground, the grantee shall locate its property underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilites are located underground in any place within the county after a grantee has previously installed its property, the grantee shall, at the same time or immediately thereafter, also remove and relocate its property underground in such places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in any area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. 
(e)  Each grantee may trim trees overhanging the streets so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the county and at the expense of the grantee. 
(f)  Each grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the county, replace and restore any disturbed street in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done; provided, that where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk and length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(g)  Each grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one (1) year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents, provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by the grantee. 
(h)  Each grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the county, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person making the request, and each grantee may require such payment in advance. Each grantee shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. Any disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit shall be resolved by the county. 
(i)  If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the county it shall become necessary, in the judgment of the person having charge of the disaster or fire or such person's designated agent, to cut or move any of the wire cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done, and the repairs rendered necessary thereby shall be made by a grantee, at its own cost and expense, without charge against the county. 
(j)  The work of each grantee while in progress shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the rights-of-way involved, or adjacent property. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6063) 
Sec. 8-129. - Operational standards. 
(a)  Each grantee shall put, keep and maintain all parts of its CATV system in good condition and repair during the term of the CATV franchise. 
(b)  Each grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use. Failure of a grantee to operate all or part of its CATV system for fifteen (15) consecutive days or a total of thirty (30) days in any calendar year without prior approval of the board of commissioners shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6064) 
Sec. 8-130. - Technical performance tests. 
(a)  The county may require a grantee to test and report on the technical performance of its CATV system; provided, however, that the county reserves the right to conduct its own tests upon reasonable notice to the grantee, and if noncompliance is found, the expense thereof shall be borne by the grantee. The county will endeavor to arrange its request for such special test so as to minimize hardship or inconvenience to a grantee or to subscribers. 
(b)  Each grantee shall provide the county with a written report on the results of its annual proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to FCC standards and requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6065) 
Sec. 8-131. - Areawide interconnection of CATV systems. 
(a)  Each grantee, if ordered to do so by resolution of the board of commissioners, shall interconnect access channels of its CATV system with all other CATV systems in adjacent areas within or without the county. 
(b)  Upon receiving an order to interconnect, the grantee shall make a good faith effort to obtain agreement for the sharing of interconnection costs among all interconnecting companies. The board of commissioners may extend the time to interconnect or may rescind its order to interconnect upon finding that the grantee has made a good faith effort but has been unable to obtain a reasonable interconnection agreement or that the cost of the interconnection would cause an unreasonable increase in rates. 
(c)  Each grantee shall cooperate with any entity established for the purpose of regulating, financing or otherwise providing for the interconnection of CATV systems. 
(d)  The county may require a grantee to provide local origination equipment that is compatible with that used by other CATV systems. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6066) 
Sec. 8-132. - Regulation of basic service rates and charges of CATV systems. 
(a)  The county will follow the FCC Rate Regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of all cable television systems operating in the county, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise ordinance or existing franchise agreements to the contrary. 
(b)  In connection with such regulation, the county will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The board of commissioners, or its designated cable administrator, is authorized to execute on behalf of the county and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC Rate Regulations in order to enable the county to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Ord. No. 93-16, § 1, 11-23-93) 
Secs. 8-133—8-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-166. - Local office; resident manager. 
Each grantee shall maintain an office open to the public during reasonable business hours within the county and shall designate a resident manager to act for the grantee. The authority of the resident manager to act for the grantee with regard to operations of the CATV system shall be full and complete except as may be stated otherwise in the franchise ordinance. For matters in which the resident manager is not authorized to act for the grantee, a corporate officer having such authority shall be available to the county by phone. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6082) 
Sec. 8-167. - Rules and regulations of grantee. 
Each grantee may promulgate such rules and regulations governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the grantee to exercise its CATV franchise to perform its obligations to assure uninterrupted service to its customers. All such rules and regulations shall be subject to and consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the franchise ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6083) 
Sec. 8-168. - Records and reports. 
(a)  Each grantee shall file annually the following records and reports with the county not later than three (3) months after the end of its fiscal year: 
(1)  The report to its stockholders, if any. 
(2)  An annual financial report in a form approved by the chief executive containing balance sheet, statement of income, statement of changes in retained earnings, statement of changes in ownership equity, notes to financial statements and supplementary schedules reconciled to the foregoing identifying revenues, expenses and income applicable to the operation of its CATV system. Such statements shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis and shall be audited by an independent certified public accountant. 
(3)  A schedule of property used in its CATV system showing book value on the basis of original cost, less depreciation, with such supporting information as the chief executive may require. 
(4)  A facilities report setting forth the total physical miles of cable installed and the facilities currently in operation. 
(5)  A copy of proof of performance tests required under FCC regulations and standards. 
(6)  If a corporation is not publicly held, as defined by the rules and regulations of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission, a list of all current shareholders and bondholders both of record or beneficial. If a corporation is publicly held, as so defined, a list of all shareholders who individually or as a concerted group hold five (5) percent or more of the voting stock of the corporation. 
(7)  A current list of all its officers and directors, including addresses and telephone numbers. 
(8)  A list of all pertinent agreements or contracts, including pole use agreements, entered into by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of its business under a franchise granted hereunder; actual copies of contracts shall be supplied upon request. 
(9)  The names and both business and residential addresses and phone numbers of the franchisee's resident manager, engineer and/or consultant. 
(10)  Copies of all rules and regulations promulgated by the grantee during the fiscal year in the conduct of its business. 
(b)  The grantee shall file quarterly with the county, within forty-five (45) days of the end of each quarter, the following: 
(1)  Quarterly financial statements containing the same information required for annual financial statements under paragraph (a)(2) above which shall be prepared in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles applied on a consistent basis and shall be accompanied by a certificate of the grantee's chief financial officer attesting to their completeness and accuracy. 
(2)  A list of all complaints and CATV system down time received or experienced during the quarter. Such list shall also include complaint disposition and response time. For the purpose of this paragraph, certified copies of a complaint logbook reflecting all such incidents will suffice. The county shall have the right to review this complaint book at any time during the period. 
(c)  All such reports and records shall be available for inspection by the public at the county courthouse, and such other locations as the board of commissioners may designate. 
(d)  Each grantee shall simultaneously file with the chief executive a copy of each petition, application and communication transmitted by the grantee to, or received by the grantee from, any federal, state, local or other regulatory commissions or agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over any matters affecting cable television. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6084) 
Sec. 8-169. - Complaint procedure. 
(a)  Each grantee shall maintain a business office in the county for the purpose of receiving complaints regarding the lack of service (including that for which advance payments were made under section 8-128), the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters, which office shall be open during regular business hours. Each grantee shall provide reasonable means to accept complaint calls on a twenty-four-hour basis. All service complaints shall be investigated and acted upon promptly. A subscriber's account shall be adjusted for loss or lack of service on a per-day basis for loss or lack of service in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. Each grantee shall keep a complaint record indicating the nature of each complaint, the date received, the disposition of the complaint and the date. This record shall be made available for inspection by the county upon request. 
(b)  Each grantee shall furnish appropriate information to its subscribers concerning the procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the address and local telephone number of both the grantee's representative and the county official to whom such inquiries or complaints are to be directed. 
(c)  A complaint may be submitted to the chief executive containing the name and address of the complainant, the name of the grantee against which the complaint is made and a statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. The chief executive shall forward a copy to the grantee or may take the question up by correspondence with the grantee. Within such time as is prescribed by the chief executive, the grantee shall satisfy the complaint or advise the chief executive of its refusal or inability to do so. If the grantee satisfied the complaint, it shall so notify the chief executive. The chief executive will forward a copy of the notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the chief executive, and the chief executive will forward a copy of this notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(d)  If a grantee satisfied any complaint brought to its attention by the chief executive, a statement must be filed with the chief executive setting forth when and how the complainant has been satisfied. When a complaint has not been satisfied, the complainant may file a complaint with the board of commissioners within six (6) months from the date of the notice from the chief executive. The board of commissioners may take such action with regard to the complaint as it considers appropriate. If no complaint is filed with the board of commissioners within the six-month period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6085) 
Sec. 8-170. - Performance evaluation sessions. 
(a)  Cable communications is a new and rapidly changing field and many regulatory, technical, financial, marketing and legal changes are anticipated. To assure an advanced and modern system for the county, each grantee shall participate in performance evaluation sessions relating to service rate structures, free or discontinued service, application of new technologies, system performances, services provided, programming offered, customer complaints, subscriber privacy, two-way channels, proposed amendments to this chapter or the franchise ordinance, underground progress, and judicial and FCC rulings. Other subjects may be added by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The county and each grantee shall hold a performance evaluation session within thirty (30) days after the third, sixth, ninth and twelfth anniversary dates of the adoption of the franchise ordinance. 
(c)  Special performance evaluation sessions may be held at any time set by resolution of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  All performance evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and notice thereof shall be made in accordance with section 8-15. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6086) 
Sec. 8-171. - Employment program of grantee. 
A grantee shall not refuse to hire or employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment because of sex, race, creed, color, age, physical condition or national origin. Each grantee shall implement an affirmative action program of equal opportunity or employment for all qualified persons. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6121) 
Sec. 8-172. - Preferential or discriminatory rates. 
A grantee shall not as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or any other respect make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, installation and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of the grantee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, charges to commercial subscribers and bulk subscribers may be on a negotiated or other basis as established by grantee from time to time. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6122) 
Sec. 8-173. - Monitoring of subscribers. 
Monitoring of the viewing patterns, selections or return path transmissions of any subscriber shall be prohibited without the written permission of the subscriber. Such written permission shall be contained in a separate document. Such written permission may be revoked at any time by the subscriber. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the grantee may conduct systemwide or individually addressed sweeps for the purpose of verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmission or billing for pay services. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6123) 
Sec. 8-174. - Subscriber lists. 
A grantee shall not sell or otherwise make available to any person a list of the names or addresses of subscribers or a list which identifies the viewing habits or return-path transmissions of subscribers without the written permission of each subscriber whose name or address is listed; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prohibit a grantee from making the names, addresses and/or telephone numbers of individual subscribers available to collection agencies and/or others authorized by the grantee to collect delinquent payments owed to the grantee. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6124) 
Sec. 8-175. - Editorial control. 
No editorial control may be exercised by a grantee with regard to any access channel. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6125) 
Sec. 8-176. - Sale or repair of television receivers. 
Neither the grantee nor any of its officers, agents, employees and consultants shall directly or indirectly engage in the sale or leasing of television receivers, radio receivers or television or radio parts except such parts and accessories required for cable connection, such as converters and connection plugs and accessories, individually or with any person anywhere in the county, whether for charge or not and whether in the performance of duties of the grantee or otherwise. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6126) 
Chapter 10 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-41 et seq.; restriction on sale of alcoholic beverages on election day, § 4-105; restriction on merit system employees from being candidates for public office, § 20-17(c); political solicitation by merit system employees, § 20-18; political signs, § 21-142. 
State Law reference— Elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ga. L. 2002, p. 598, § 2-10, effective April 1, 2003, repealed the provisions of § 10-1, which pertained to the use of vote recorders, and derived from the 1976 Code, § 1-2021. 
Chapter 11 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 11-1. - Definition. 
In this chapter "emergency management" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or other state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection from radiological and chemical hazards, emergency transportation, plant protection, temporary restoration of public utility services and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2021) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3(1). 
Sec. 11-2. - Emergency management director. 
In agreement with the governing authority of this county, there is established the emergency management office within the department of fire and rescue services with the director of the department of fire and rescue services appointed as emergency management director. The emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the governing officials of the county and cities and/or towns therein on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To assist county and city officials in organizing county and city departments for emergency operations. 
(3)  To develop in conjunction with county departments and agencies the county emergency and disaster operations plan for the functions set forth in section 11-1. Such operations plan will be in consonance with the state emergency and disaster operations plan and shall be submitted to the governing authority of the county for approval. 
(4)  To maintain an emergency management office to carry out the day-to-day administration of the county emergency and disaster preparedness programs including the rendering of required reports to the state emergency management agency. 
(5)  To render reports such as financial, daily activity, etc., as required by governing officials in keeping with good business practices. 
(6)  To maintain with the authority of governing officials a facility to be used as the county emergency operation center. 
(7)  To coordinate the activities of the county emergency operating center staff during periods of a declared emergency, and under the supervision of the county governing authority. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2022; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, §§ 2, 5, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 11-3. - Emergency management organization. 
The county emergency management organization shall be established around existing county departments and the emergency functions listed in section 11-1 are assigned as follows: 

 
The heads of the departments listed above are responsible for developing a departmental plan for the execution of their assigned emergency function and an annex to the county emergency and disaster operations plan. Such annexes will be submitted through the emergency management director to the board of commissioners in conjunction with their approval of the operations plan. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2023) 
State Law reference— Local emergency management organizations, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-27. 
Sec. 11-4. - Emergency powers. 
In the event of manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the county, the chief executive officer of the county, jointly with the mayors of the cities of Avondale Estates, Chamblee, Clarkston, Decatur, Doraville, Lithonia, Pine Lake and Stone Mountain, or in their absence a legally appointed successor, may declare that a state of emergency exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such state of emergency exists or continues, the following emergency powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources. 
(2)  To seize, take for temporary use or condemn any property for the protection of the public. 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies. 
(4)  To establish, when necessary, local restrictions pertaining to curfew and the sale of liquor, gasoline and weapons. 
(5)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2024) 
State Law reference— Local emergency management rules, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-28. 
Sec. 11-5. - Volunteers. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the cities, towns and the county, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter, shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as county officers and employees. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2025) 
Sec. 11-6. - Violation of rules. 
No person shall violate any provision of any rule, order or regulation made pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 4-2026) 
Sec. 11-7. - Prohibited pricing practices during state of emergency. 
(a)  It shall be an unlawful, unfair, and deceptive trade practice for any person, firm, or corporation doing business in any area in which a state of emergency, as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3 or in Dekalb County Code § 11-4, has been declared, for as long as such state of emergency exists, to sell or offer for sale at retail any goods or services necessary to preserve, protect, or sustain the life, health, or safety of persons or their property at a price higher than the price at which such goods were sold or offered for sale immediately prior to the declaration of a state of emergency; provided, however, that such price may be increased only in an amount which accurately reflects an increase in cost of the goods or services to the person selling the goods or services or an increase in the cost of transporting the goods or services into the area. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section, a retailer or installer of lumber, plywood, and other lumber products may increase the price of such products as may be necessary to replenish his or her existing daily stock at current market rates, maintaining the same markup percentage he or she applied prior to the state of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 98-03, § 1, 4-14-98) 
Chapter 12 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, adopted April 12, 2005, deleted former Ch. 12 in its entirety and adopted new provisions as Ch. 12. Former Ch. 12, §§ 12-1, 12-26, 12-27, 12-29—12-39, 12-81—12-85, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 4-3001—4-3003, 4-3007—4-3015, 4-3019, 4-3071; Ord. No. 87-18, adopted Aug. 11, 1987; Ord. No. 89-18, § 1, adopted May 9, 1989; Ord. No. 90-19, § 1, adopted July 10, 1990; Ord. No. 91-22, adopted Sept. 24, 1991; Ord. No. 91-23, §§ 1—3, adopted Sept. 24, 1991; Ord. No. 93-12, adopted Aug. 24, 1993; Ord. No. 93-13, §§ 1—3, adopted Aug. 24, 1993; Ord. No. 95-01, adopted Jan. 24, 1995; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, §§ 2, 4—6, adopted Nov. 27, 2001. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; fire zones, § 17-150. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of power to provide for fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); fire safety rules, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; false fire alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Purpose. 
This chapter is an exercise of the police powers of DeKalb County, Georgia for the preservation and protection of the public health, peace, safety and welfare, and all the provisions of this chapter shall be liberally construed for that purpose. The governing authority determines that there is also a need, in its adoption of the state minimum standard codes, to adopt certain amendments thereto. Local public safety conditions in the areas to which this chapter applies require amendments to the state minimum standard codes which are not less stringent than the state minimum standard code for the protection of life and property. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them as directed above, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment building shall mean building(s) containing three (3) or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as an apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, or by any other name. 
Battery backup shall mean any emergency power supply for power-assisted gates operated by electrical power. 
Breakaway security gate shall mean any gate designed to fall away under pressure. 
Case hardened metal shall mean a steel alloy formed by diffusing carbon and/or nitrogen into the outer layer of the steel at high temperature such that the metal cannot be cut with a saw, and will not shatter. 
Combustible shall mean any material that is capable of supporting ignition or the process of burning under heat exposure. 
Delayed response shall mean any postponement of an emergency vehicle gaining access through security barriers. 
Disposal shall mean the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any hazardous substances or hazardous waste into or on any land or water so that such substances or waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any water, including groundwater. 
Dormitory shall mean building(s) or spaces in building(s) where group sleeping accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family group in one (1) room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories, fraternity houses, military barracks; with or without meals, but without individual cooking facilities. 
Emergency shutoff button shall mean a device used to release hydraulic pressure on power-assisted gates operated by hydraulic power. 
Fire apparatus means any vehicle or equipment used by fire and rescue services. 
Fire marshal shall mean the individual designated by the chief of fire and rescue services department to direct the fire prevention bureau division of the department of fire and rescue services. 
Gamewell lock box shall mean a box, sometimes called an elevator lock box, which must be opened with a special key carried on fire response vehicles. 
Gravity gate shall mean a gate with no power assistance and which operates freely under manual manipulation. 
Hazardous explosive chemicals shall mean all picric acids, nitro-based chemicals, ethers, peroxides, oxidizers, and such other chemicals as may be determined by the fire marshal to be hazardous explosives. 
Hazardous substance shall mean a substance that satisfies any one (1) of the following requirements: 
(a)  A substance which, because of the toxic or hazardous properties which it exhibits, is determined by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to represent a significant risk to the public health and safety as a result of foreseeable use, handling, accidental spill, exposure or contamination; or 
(b)  A substance that is known to present a significant risk of personal injury or illness as the foreseeable result of use, handling, accidental spills, exposure or contamination; or 
(c)  A substance or material that has been determined to pose an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property. 
Hazardous waste shall mean any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal regulation in force and effective February 1, 1986, codified as 40 C.F.R. Part 261 — Identification and Listing of Hazardous Waste, as amended. 
Hazardous waste generation shall mean the act or process of producing hazardous waste. 
High-rise residential occupancy building shall mean hotels, dormitories, apartments, lodging or rooming houses, or board and care facilities over seventy-five (75) feet or twenty-three (23) meters in height measured from the lowest level of access available to the department of fire and rescue services to the floor of the highest occupied story. 
Hotel/motel shall mean a building(s) in which separate sleeping rooms are rented that provide sleeping accommodations for fifteen (15) persons or more on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel, or by any other name. 
Improper storage shall mean storage of chemicals past the expiration date on the label or chemicals stored in any area or container not designed for storage of the particular chemical. If there is no date listed for the expiration date, the expiration date shall be twelve (12) months past the date that the chemical was received by the person or entity storing the chemical. 
Lodging or rooming house shall mean a building(s) in which separate sleeping rooms are rented which provides sleeping accommodations for fifteen (15) or fewer persons on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. 
Pad lock shall mean any lock that is not constructed of case hardened metal. 
Power assisted gate shall mean any gate that is operated through a power source, whether electrical, hydraulic or pneumatic. 
Residential property shall mean building(s) containing three (3) or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, or by any other name. 
Substance shall mean any element, entity, compound, combination, or any mixture thereof, whether organic or inorganic. 
Toggle switch shall mean a device used to operate a power-assisted gate and override the power supply to the gate. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-3. - Scope. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to both public and private property, and to all structures and their occupants, except as otherwise specified herein or by other applicable law. It shall be the duty of the employees of the department of fire and rescue services to enforce all applicable state laws regulations and all applicable provisions of the Code, in unincorporated DeKalb County, Georgia and in all municipalities with whom DeKalb County has a valid intergovernmental agreement for the provision of fire and rescue services. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 12-4. - Bureau of fire prevention established and duties of the fire marshal. 
(a)  The department of fire and rescue services shall administer and enforce those provisions of this chapter. Established within the department of fire and rescue services is a bureau of fire prevention and the bureau of fire prevention shall operate under the supervision of the fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall possess the education, training and experience required by state law and the county for such position, and shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the provisions set forth in Article III of this Chapter. The director of fire and rescue services may designate additional personnel as from time to time shall be necessary to serve under the direction of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-5. - Bureau of fire prevention; duties of the officers. 
(a)  The duties of the fire prevention bureau shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  The prevention of fires; 
(2)  Oversight of the storage and use of combustible, flammable or explosive material; 
(3)  The enforcement of laws requiring the installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment; 
(4)  The enforcement of laws governing the maintenance and regulation of fire escapes; 
(5)  The enforcement of laws governing the means and adequacy of exits from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theatres, amphitheaters and all other places in which persons work, live or congregate, from time to time for any purpose; and 
(6)  The creation and maintenance of fire cause and loss records. 
(b)  The bureau of fire prevention shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, as far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of an intentional act provided that such fire occurred in unincorporated DeKalb County, Georgia or within the boundaries of those municipalities with whom DeKalb County has a valid intergovernmental agreement for the provision of fire and rescue services. Such investigations shall begin upon notice of such a fire, and if an intentional act is suspected, the fire marshal shall take charge immediately of physical evidence and cause a complete investigation to be initiated to include referral of a completed investigation to the proper prosecuting authority for prosecution of the responsible parties. 
(c)  The bureau of fire prevention shall have such other powers and perform such other duties as are set forth in other applicable sections of this Code, and as may be conferred or imposed upon the bureau or the fire marshal from time to time by federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-6. - Construction plans approval. 
It shall be unlawful to construct, erect or alter any building, except one- and two-family dwellings, without construction documents approved by the fire marshal for fire department accessibility, fire hydrant requirements, fire code requirements, occupancy load, aboveground and underground flammable and combustible liquids tank installations and fire protection systems, including but not limited to sprinklers. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-7. - Records and annual reports. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall compile and keep a record of all fires. Said record shall include but is not limited to information regarding injuries, deaths, rescues of persons, and statistics as to the damage caused by such fires and whether and to what extent losses were covered by insurance. Said record shall be compiled from the reports made by inspectors and investigators of the department of fire and rescue services. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall compile an annual report of the activities of the bureau of fire prevention and shall transmit this report to the fire chief for the department of fire and rescue services. 
(c)  The DeKalb County fire and rescue services officer in whose jurisdiction any fire occurs shall report each fire in writing to the fire marshal within two (2) days after the occurrence. The report shall be in a form prescribed by the fire marshal and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin, and circumstances of such a fire; the extent of the damage thereof, and the insurance upon the property and such other information as may be required, including the occurrence of any injury, death or rescue of persons. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-8. - Permits. 
(a)  Before permits for blasting, fireworks, industrial process and any other permit issued may be issued as required by this chapter, the fire marshal shall inspect and approve the receptacles, processes, vehicles, buildings, or storage places to be used for any such purposes. 
(b)  The board of commissioners shall establish the fees for any initial inspection and follow-up inspection as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Secs. 12-9—12-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS AND ADOPTED CODES 

Sec. 12-20. - Adoption of state fire safety rules. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 25-2-1 et seq. and as may hereinafter be amended, there is hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein the state fire safety rules now and as may hereafter be promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner. In the event the fire marshal determines that the provisions of the state fire safety rules conflict with the provisions of the International Fire Code adopted in section 12-21, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire marshal shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-21. - Adoption of International Fire Code. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 8-2-20 and section 8-2-25 and as may hereinafter be amended, there is hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein the International Fire Code, including Chapter 1, Administration. As allowed in O.C.G.A. section 8-2-25, the provisions of the International Fire Code are modified and amended in sections 12-22 through section 12-26. In the event the fire marshal determines that the provisions of the International Fire Code conflict with the provisions of the state fire safety rules adopted in section 12-20, then the most restrictive provision as determined by the fire marshal shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-22. - Amendments to the International Fire Code. 
(a)  The International Fire Code is hereby amended by omitting section 108, Board of Appeals of Chapter 1, Administration and section 108 shall not be adopted by the County. 
(b)  The International Fire Code is hereby amended by adopting Appendix C-Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution and Appendix D-Fire Apparatus Access Roads. Section D107 of Appendix D-Fire Apparatus Access Roads shall not be adopted by the County. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-23. - Spread of fire. 
(a)  All combustible landscaping materials shall be placed at least thirty-six (36) inches away from the edge of any building having an external skin of either combustible sheathing or combustible siding. Aluminum siding, vinyl siding, non-treated wood siding and similar materials shall be considered combustible for the purpose of this section. This section shall not be interpreted to prohibit the planting of shrubs, trees and other live plant materials closer than thirty-six (36) inches away from the edge of any other building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ignite a fire of any type within four (4) feet of a combustible building, including ignition under combustible overhangs and balconies. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-24. - Automatic fire extinguisher system required. 
(a)  All new multifamily dwellings properties shall be fully sprinkled in accordance with the latest adopted edition of the National Fire Protection Association publications 13 ("NFPA-13") or 13R ("NFPA 13R"). 
(b)  All existing high-rise residential occupancy buildings shall have an approved sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA-13. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-25. - Security gate/barrier installation requirements other than one-and two-family dwellings. 
(a)  Installation requirements for all gates. 
(1)  All gates shall have a minimum width of fourteen (14) feet to allow for fire apparatus access. 
(2)  All gates shall have signage indicating gate direction of travel. 
(3)  All objects on a gate that may obstruct the path of emergency vehicles must be covered with reflective paint, tape or lights sufficient to guide vehicles around the obstruction. 
(4)  The owner of the property shall ensure that all hydraulic gates are disabled and left in the open position when the temperature is expected to drop below twenty-five (25) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(5)  If a gate is located on a turn, the turn must have a thirty (30) foot clear inside radius and a fifty (50) foot clear outside radius. 
(6)  Gate installers shall provide information on the operational features of the gate to the fire services bureau prior to the installation of any security gate. 
(7)  The fire marshal prior to installation of any security gate must approve its operational features. 
(8)  When gates are opened for emergency access, they shall remain open until reactivated. 
(9)  Construction plans or blueprints shall be submitted to the development department for approval by the fire marshal prior to an owner or applicant beginning work on the installation of a gate. 
(b)  Installation requirement for power-assisted gates. 
(1)  Gamewell: Property owners shall ensure that Gamewell lock boxes or any means of security approved by the fire marshal shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Power assisted gates shall contain a toggle switch to manually operate the gate and override the power. 
(3)  The property owner shall install in gates operated by electrical means a battery backup to keep the toggle switch operational. 
(4)  The property owner shall also ensure that the power-assisted gate is equipped to operate manually. 
(5)  Property owners shall ensure that hydraulic gates have an emergency button or knob to release pressure. The button or knob shall be located at the hydraulic arm, and one (1) shutoff is required for each arm. If the emergency shutoff is used, the gate must be capable of being secured to prevent it from swinging back to the closed position. 
(c)  Installation requirements for gravity gate locking devices. 
(1)  Pad locks may be used to secure a gate only if the pad lock is not constructed of case hardened metals. 
(2)  Gates shall be installed to allow fire apparatus to access the property and not impede the flow of traffic. This includes a sufficient distance to allow gates to open if swinging in the direction of the fire apparatus. 
(d)  Installation requirements for chain and pole security barriers. 
(1)  Property owners must seek approval from the fire marshal prior to the use of chain and pole barriers. 
(2)  Chains and pole barriers must not be constructed of case hardened metal. 
(e)  Installation requirements for break away security gates. 
(1)  When the security gate arm is raised, the property owner must ensure that the arm remains raised until reset for normal operation. 
(2)  The mechanism for overriding the gate shall be accessible to the employees of the fire services bureau. 
(3)  When in use, the gate arm should be open to an angle greater than ninety (90) degrees to the terrain of the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-26. - Requirements for disabling security gates and other barriers at residential properties other than one-or two-family dwellings. 
(a)  No fire apparatus shall proceed through any gate while on an emergency run without first disabling the gate. Disabling the gate shall also be required in the event the gate is already in the open position. Disabling a gate will be conducted in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Power assisted gates shall be disabled by opening the Gamewell lock box, and/or activating the push button or the toggle switch. 
(2)  On gates equipped with chains and padlocks, the fire and rescue services officers may cut the chain near the padlock or cut the padlocks, whichever procedure will provide the best access to the emergency. After opening the padlock or chain, the chain may be used to secure the gate(s) to prevent the gate from closing. 
(3)  No gate shall be restored to normal operation until the last fire apparatus or vehicle leaves the property. The last fire unit shall be responsible for seeing that the gate is taken out of emergency mode or configuration. 
(4)  DeKalb County, its officials and employees shall not be responsible for delayed response resulting from gaining access through security barriers. 
(5)  The owner of the property at issue shall be responsible for any damage to emergency apparatus caused by security gates or barriers. 
(6)  Employees of the department of fire and rescue services shall not be responsible for securing any gate after completing their fire fighting or fire prevention duties. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-27. - False fire alarm. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transmit or cause to be transmitted in any manner to fire and rescue services a false report of a fire, knowing at the time there is no factual basis for believing that such a fire exists. Such a violation shall be prosecuted under applicable state law as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED 

Secs. 12-28—12-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSPECTIONS, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 12-40. - Responsibility for violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-41. - Inspections. 
(a)  Employees of the bureau of fire prevention shall be authorized to conduct inspections on public and private property, from time to time for the purpose of enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If the owner or tenant of such property does not give consent for such inspection(s), the employees of the bureau of fire prevention shall obtain a warrant from the DeKalb County Recorder's Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction for such inspection in accordance with the warrant requirements of state law. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises, except one- and two-family dwellings, on a periodic basis, and shall issue such directives as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same and for safeguarding of life and property. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-42. - Removal of fire hazards, compliance. 
(a)  Whenever any employee of the department of fire and rescue services shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other place, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of waste paper, boxes, shaving, or any highly flammable materials, and which is so situated as to endanger property or persons; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, that interfere with the operations of the fire and rescue services or egress of persons in case of a fire or other hazardous condition, the fire marshal shall issue an order, that the same are to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings. 
(b)  The service of orders for the correction of violations of this chapter shall be made upon the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the conditions, either by delivering the same to or leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said premises. Whenever it is necessary to serve such an order upon the owner of said premises, such order shall be served either by delivering to and leaving with the person a copy of said order, or, if such owner is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by sending such copy by certified or registered mail to the owner's last known address as indicated in the records of the tax commissioner. 
(c)  Any person served with an order who shall fail to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of the said order shall be subject to the issuance of a citation as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-43. - Service of citation. 
The service of any citation under this Code may be made by personal service upon the occupant of the premises to whom it is directed. A copy of the citation shall be filed with the recorders court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Sec. 12-44. - Penalties for violation. 
(a)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter as hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement or specifications of plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, shall for each and every such violation or noncompliance, be guilty of an ordinance violation. Upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, the individual shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10 of this Code. 
(b)  The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor shall the violation be permitted to continue. Any person convicted of a violation under this chapter shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Secs. 12-45—12-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HAZARDOUS EXPLOSIVE CHEMICALS 

Sec. 12-60. - Improper storage prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or institution to keep hazardous explosive chemicals, which are used or stored for which the expiration date has passed. 
(Ord. No. 05-05, Pt. I, 4-12-05) 
Chapter 13 - HEALTH REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Although this chapter has been adopted by ordinance of the board of commissioners, it is derived from rules adopted by the board of health. Insofar as possible, the language has been kept identical to that adopted by the board of health. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5; nuisances, Ch. 18; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 5; local laws relating to health and human services, App. B, § 401 et seq. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; general authority of county board of health to adopt rules, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-4(a)(4), 31-3-6; adoption procedures for rules, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1. 
Note— It should be noted that Res. No. 96-02R, adopted June 11, 1996 prohibited the self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors in DeKalb County as specified in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). The user's attention is directed to Act No. 1046, § 3 which provides for the exemption from said self-inspection procedures. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Board means the DeKalb County Board of Health, State of Georgia. 
Department means the department of human resources, State of Georgia. 
Director means the chief executive officer of the board as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 31-3-11 and 31-3-12, or the designee of the director. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1001; Ord. No. 88-04a, 8-9-88) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-2. - Selection of members of board of health. 
The following procedure shall be used for selecting a member of the board of health whenever the legal situs of the largest municipality of the county lies within an adjoining county: 
(1)  The county governing authority shall select the chief executive officer, by whatever name designated, of the governing authority of any municipality lying wholly or partially within the county to fill the position on the board authorized by O.C.G.A. § 31-3-2(a)(7) or any other provisions. 
(2)  The chief executive officer so selected may designate another member of the respective municipal governing authority, whose term of office is the same as that of the chief executive officer, to serve in the place of the chief executive officer. 
(3)  The chief executive officer so selected or the chief executive officer's designee shall serve for a term of office as a member of the board concurrent with the term of office as a member of the municipal governing authority. 
(4)  A vacancy in the position on the board which is held by the chief executive officer or the chief executive officer's designee shall be filled for the unexpired term by the county governing authority. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1007; Ord. No. 88-04a, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 13-3. - Inspection warrants; investigations. 
(a)  The director may obtain an inspection warrant in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 5, art. 2 [§ 31-5-20 et seq.] when there is probable cause to believe that a condition or circumstance exists which legally justifies such an inspection to enforce the regulations of the board, the rules of the department, or a provision of law. 
(b)  The director shall promptly investigate every bona fide complaint coming within the jurisdiction of the board. The director may exercise discretion to refuse to investigate anonymous complaints. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1002; Ord. No. 88-04a, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 13-4. - Permits and approvals generally. 
All applications for permits or written approval required by any regulation of the board of health shall be made on forms prescribed and furnished by the director and shall be signed by the applicant, who shall be the person responsible for conformance to the conditions of the permits or approval applied for. Applications shall contain such information and be accompanied by such plans as the director shall deem necessary. A permit issued to a particular person or for a designated place or purpose shall not be valid for use by any other person or for any other place or purpose than that designated therein. These permits or written approvals may contain general and specific conditions and every person who has obtained a permit or written approval containing these conditions shall conform to the conditions prescribed in the permit or written approval and to the provisions of all applicable regulations. Every permit shall expire as stated on the permit and may be renewed, suspended for cause or revoked by the director after due notice and hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1003; Ord. No. 88-04a, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 13-5. - Approval of business licenses and building permits. 
(a)  Whenever any regulation of the board requires approval by the director of plans for any building or structure, no municipality or agency of the county shall issue or renew a building permit for this building or structure without first having obtained a written statement from the director that the plans therefor comply with all the applicable regulations of the board. 
(b)  Whenever any regulation of the board of health requires sanitary inspection and approval of any establishment by the director, no municipality or agency of the county shall issue or renew any business license for this establishment without first having obtained a written statement from the director that the establishment complies with all applicable regulations of the board. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict or abrogate the authority of any municipality or agency of the county to adopt and enforce additional regulations or ordinances or to enforce existing regulations or ordinances relative to the regulation, control, issuance, renewal or revocation of any business license or building permit, except as herein provided. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the director to keep the appropriate municipal and county officials informed as to the provisions of this section and the regulations of the board to which it applies. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1004; Ord. No. 88-04a, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 13-6. - Conflicting provisions. 
Whenever there is in effect any rule or provision of any regulation or ordinance of any governmental agency or municipality which is more strict than the corresponding provision of a regulation of the board, the director shall hold in abeyance the enforcement of this provision of the board regulation and cooperate with the agency or municipality in enforcing the stricter rule or provision of its regulations or ordinances. If the director elects to hold in abeyance the enforcement of this provision and, after a reasonable time, the agency or municipality shall have failed to enforce its rule or the provision of its regulations or ordinances, the director shall proceed with the enforcement of the corresponding provision of the board regulation. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1005; Ord. No. 88-04a, 8-9-88) 
Sec. 13-7. - Violations. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and subject to the provisions of section 1-10 and O.C.G.A. § 31-5-8. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1006; Ord. No. 88-04a, 8-9-88) 
Secs. 13-8—13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 13-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hearing means a right of the DeKalb County Board of Health, its officials and employees, and persons and parties affected by an action or an intended action of the director or the board to present testimony, documentary evidence and argument as to why such action should or should not be taken. A hearing may be conducted by either the director, the director's designee or the board. 
Notice of hearing means a written statement of the intended action to be taken and, where applicable, the substance of a specific charge alleging violation of any rule or statute to be considered at hearing. 
In the case of a specific charge to be considered, where a license, permit, certificate or similar right is proposed to be denied, suspended or revoked, notice shall be given in person or by registered or certified mail to all interested parties; provided, however, in proceedings where the number of interested parties is so numerous as to make individual notice impracticable, notice shall be given by publication or by such other means reasonably calculated to afford actual notice as may be prescribed by the person conducting such hearing. 
All notices shall state the time and place of hearing, the nature thereof and the matters of fact and law asserted and must be given at least five (5) days before the day set for hearing, unless the director or board determines that an imminent threat to the public health exists which requires shorter notice. 
The affected parties may waive in writing the required notice of hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1021) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-27. - Denial, revocation or suspension of license, permit, etc.; written notice required. 
No license, permit, certificate or similar right shall be denied, revoked, or suspended without first giving the affected party prior written notice of the intended action and affording the party an opportunity for hearing under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1022) 
State Law reference— Revocation or suspension of licenses, permits, etc., O.C.G.A. § 31-5-2. 
Sec. 13-28. - Effectiveness of rules and regulations. 
All rules and regulations of the board shall be adopted, amended, revised or repealed after notice and hearing according to law. No rule or regulation shall become effective as law until thirty (30) days after its adoption, except in cases of emergencies constituting an imminent threat to the public, in which event such rule or regulation shall become effective upon adoption; but, in all cases, the board shall, as a part thereof, state the conditions found by it to justify such immediate effectiveness. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1023) 
State Law reference— Adoption procedures for rules,O.C.G.A. § 31-51-1; distribution of copies of rules, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-6. 
Sec. 13-29. - Hearing—Procedure. 
(a)  Where a hearing is required or afforded, all interested parties at such hearing shall have, upon request, compulsory process and shall have the right to adduce evidence and conduct cross-examination of all adverse witnesses. Any member of the board, its authorized officials or agents, or any attorney-at-law may administer oaths to all witnesses. No witness shall be abused while under examination or required to incriminate himself or herself. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-2(c). 
(b)  The board is authorized and empowered to direct the director or the director's appointee to conduct hearings, issue compulsory process, administer oaths and submit findings and recommendations to the board. In such cases, the report of findings and recommendation shall be available to all interested parties, and such parties shall be entitled to file written exception thereto prior to final decision by the board. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-2(d). 
(c)  Unless precluded by law, informal disposition may be made by the director and the affected party by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default. 
(d)  The order of proof in the conduct of a hearing should be somewhat flexible. Generally, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  The representative of the board who has asserted the claim or makes the charge shall be heard first. 
(2)  After the conclusion of the board representative's presentation, the opposing party should then be heard. 
(3)  The giving of testimony by each respective party and the party's witnesses is subject to appropriate cross-examination. 
(4)  The person conducting the hearing may call or recall a witness where necessary to provide a full and fair hearing of the matter. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1024) 
Sec. 13-30. - Same—Record. 
A record of the hearing shall be kept and shall include, but not be limited to, all pleadings, motions and rulings; a summary of the oral testimony and all other evidence received or considered, except that a party shall have the right, at the party's own expense, to have the proceedings recorded and transcribed and may enter that transcript as part of the official hearing record; all staff data submitted to the director or board in connection with consideration of the case; all rulings, orders, reports and opinions entered by the director or board. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1025) 
Sec. 13-31. - Same—Confidential documents. 
(a)  Documents, reports, data and other information obtained by the director or the board from any person, firm, corporation, municipality, county or other public authority and/or political subdivision, where such matters relate to secret processes, formulae, or where such matters were obtained on a confidential basis, shall be classified as confidential and privileged documents. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any confidential and privileged document, the director or board shall label it "Confidential and Privileged—Not For Release." Such document shall be maintained in a secure file and shall be subject to disclosure only in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-5 and any other applicable statute. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1026) 
State Law reference— Confidentiality, etc., of documents, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-5. 
Sec. 13-32. - Same—Final decision. 
The board shall make a final decision in writing stating the underlying facts supporting the decision and shall send by certified mail a copy of such final decision to the parties affected thereby. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1027) 
Sec. 13-33. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any party adversely affected by a final decision of the board may have a review thereof by appeal to the department under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-3 within thirty (30) days after rendition of the final order. 
(b)  The petition of the aggrieved party shall state the reasons why and in what respect such party is aggrieved and the grounds to be relied upon as a basis for the relief demanded. 
(c)  The appealing party shall file the original petition with the department and furnish the board with a copy thereof. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the appeal by the board, the board shall forward a complete transcript of the hearing record to the department. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1028) 
Sec. 13-34. - Variances. 
(a)  The regulations of the board shall be administered by the director who shall have the authority to grant a variance from the requirements of a regulation of the board as follows: 
(1)  Where it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that strict compliance with a standard would result in practical difficulty to or undue hardship upon a property owner due to special conditions or causes; 
(2)  Where the public or private interest in the granting of the variance is found by the director to clearly outweigh the interest of the application of uniform rules; and 
(3)  Where such alternative measures are provided which, in the opinion of the director, will provide adequate public health and safety protection. 
(b)  In granting a variance, the director may attach thereto any conditions which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served and the public health, safety and welfare secured. 
(c)  Where a variance requested under the provisions of this section is denied, the property owner may be afforded a hearing as provided in section 13-27. 
(Ord. No. 89-10, § 1(12-1029), 3-28-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-10, adopted Mar. 28, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1(12-1029) as § 13-34 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 13-35—13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Nuisances generally, Ch. 18; property maintenance, § 7-351 et seq. 
State Law reference— Health nuisances prohibited, O.C.-G.A. § 41-1-6; abatement of health nuisances by injunctive relief, O.C.G.A. § 31-5-9 et seq. 

Sec. 13-51. - Enumerated. 
The following conditions are specifically declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Toilets, plumbing, sewers, septic-tank systems, garbage containers or any other sanitary facilities in bad repair. 
(2)  Conditions conducive to the breeding or attraction of rodents, flies, fleas, ticks, mosquitoes or any other disease-carrying insects. 
(3)  Manmade or mechanically induced noxious air contaminants. 
(4)  Trash, garbage, refuse or any foul, decaying or putrescent material kept, used, placed or disposed of in such a manner or place as to be or to become detrimental to human health or well-being. 
(5)  Sewage, kitchen wastes, laundry wastes or any other wastes deposited upon or allowed to remain upon the ground surface or any other place so as to be or to become detrimental to human health or well-being. 
(6)  The keeping of animals or fowl unless the housing, enclosures or other areas used by the animals or fowl are kept clean, well-drained and free from accumulation of excrement. 
(Code 1976, § 12-2001) 
Sec. 13-52. - Prohibited. 
No person shall create, maintain, support, aid or continue any condition declared to be a nuisance in section 13-51. 
(Code 1976, § 12-2002) 
Secs. 13-53—13-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TOURIST COURTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 1991, amended Art. IV to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. IV, §§ 13-71—13-80, pertained to tourist courts and trailer parks and derived from Code 1976, §§ 12-3341—12-3350 and Ord. No. 88-18, adopted April 12, 1988. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion of Ord. No. 91-01. 
State Law reference— Authority of county board of health to regulate tourist courts, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-5; tourist courts generally, O.C.G.A. § 31-28-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-71. - Rules and regulations for tourist courts—Adopted. 
All tourist courts shall be in compliance with the April 27, 1984 (revised) rules of the Department of Human Resources, Public Health, Chapter 290-5-18, Tourist Courts, which are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 13-72. - Same—Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein, the above rules are adopted with the following exceptions: 
(1)  290-5-18-.01 Definitions shall be amended by adding the following: 
(j)  "Approved" means acceptable to the health authority, based on its determination of conformance with this chapter and good public health practices. 
(k)  "Permit" means authorization granted by the health authority to the operator to manage the tourist court and signifies satisfactory compliance with these rules. 
(2)  290-5-18-.02 (1) Provisions shall be amended by adding 
(g)  A permit is the property of the health authority and shall be returned within seven days if the tourist court ceases to operate, is moved, changes location, or if the permit is revoked. 
(3)  290-5-18-.03 Procedures shall be amended by adding to section (2) this sentence: 
The operator shall post the most recent inspection report in public view. 
(4)  290-5-18-.04 Water Supply shall be amended by adding: 
(9)  Existing ice machines shall have tight-fitting doors which are kept closed between service. New or replacement ice machines shall be of the mechanically dispensing type unless ice is dispensed by an employee. 
(10)  Utensils, where furnished, shall be free of chips and cracks, smooth, nonabsorbent, nontoxic, corrosion resistant, and easily cleaned. 
(5)  290-5-18-.05 Toilet Facilities shall be amended by changing the first sentence of section (6) to read: 
Unused, individually wrapped soap or soap dispensed from an approved container shall be provided in guest rooms. 
290-5-18-.05 shall be further amended by striking the last sentence of section (7) and substituting therefor the following: 
An approved method of hand-drying shall be provided in public restrooms. 
(6)  290-5-18-.07 Sewage Disposal shall be amended by striking the entire section and substituting therefor: 
(1)  Tourist courts shall be connected to a public sewer. 
(7)  290-5-18-.09 Refuse Disposal shall be amended by adding to the last sentence of section (3) 
… and in compliance with local, state, and federal regulations. 
(8)  290-5-18-.11 Construction, Layout and Furnishings shall be amended by adding to section (2) the following: 
Where counter top cooking is permitted in guest rooms, an approved ventilation system shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 91-01, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Secs. 13-73—13-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REFUSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Solid waste, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 13-96. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial refuse means waste material from industrial processes, manufacturing canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar industries, and large quantities of condemned foods. "Commercial refuse" includes waste material from the construction, remodeling and repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures, such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, shavings and sawdust. 
Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Incinerator means all devices intended or used for the reduction or destruction of solid waste by burning. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Private contractor means any person, other than a municipality, who collects, removes, salvages or disposes of refuse from one (1) or more public or private premises, other than the person's own, whether or not under written contract, and whether or not for compensation. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible waste include, but are not limited to, kitchen waste, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing waste and garbage. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial refuse. 
Refuse receptacles means can, compartment, bin or other container used to keep, collect or store refuse pending its removal for disposal. 
Rubbish means wastepaper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, cans, glass, crockery, dunnage and/or similar materials. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste and/or hazardous waste on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 12-8001) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-97. - Storage. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse, pending collection and disposal, as follows: 
(1)  Garbage shall be placed in watertight paper or plastic bags and the tops secured and placed in a refuse receptacle. The receptacles will be watertight, rust-resistant, rodentproof containers with close-fitting tops; provided, that other types of receptacles approved by the director may be used in special circumstances. 
(2)  Large amounts of rubbish must be stored separately in refuse receptacles, plastic bags or commercial containers, except that tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit in cans or containers shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four (4) feet and stacked in a compact pile on the parkway in front of the residence adjoining the curb, but these piles shall not extend into the street. Logs, limbs and branches over four (4) inches in diameter or over four (4) feet long will not be collected at any time. 
(3)  All refuse receptacles, except single-use paper or plastic bags, single-use paper or cardboard boxes, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent nuisance. The capacity of the individual refuse receptacle shall not be less than twenty (20) gallons nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons; provided, that special receptacles of other capacities may be used with the written permission of the director. Receptacles adequate to hold the refuse normally accumulating between scheduled removals shall be provided on each premises. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. Bulk containers and compactors may be used where applicable. They shall be marked to identify the owner and shall adhere to all requirements of this article. Scavenging from any refuse container is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 12-8002) 
Sec. 13-98. - Collection. 
(a)  Proper collection and disposal of accumulated refuse is required. 
(b)  All equipment used for the collection and transportation of refuse shall be so designed as to prevent the escape of any refuse therefrom. This equipment shall be provided with a watertight body designed so as to prevent the escape of any liquid. All surfaces of collection and transportation equipment coming in contact with garbage or organic commercial waste shall be smooth, nonabsorbent and in good repair. Only equipment approved by the director may be used in the collection and transportation of refuse. 
(c)  All equipment used in the collection and transportation of refuse shall be thoroughly washed and treated with an approved insecticide as often as the director shall deem necessary to prevent fly breeding and/or nuisances. 
(d)  All refuse spilled during collection or transportation shall be promptly removed by the refuse collector. 
(e)  At each collection, all refuse in the refuse receptacle shall be removed and the receptacle left covered. 
(f)  Hazardous waste and dead animals shall be handled in a manner approved by the director. 
(Code 1976, § 12-8003) 
Sec. 13-99. - Disposal. 
(a)  No person shall hereafter deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse except in a proper receptacle or at an approved disposal site. 
(b)  All putrescible waste within the county shall be disposed of either by incineration or sanitary landfill. Refuse may be disposed of in landfills approved by the county. Dead animals other than dogs and house pets will not be collected, and dead dogs and house pets shall be collected only from animal hospitals, curbside and public rights-of-way. Large dead animals shall be disposed of by burying on the individual's property to whom the animal belongs. 
(c)  No person shall hereafter establish or operate any refuse disposal facility unless it is approved by DeKalb County and is in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, environmental protection division, solid waste management section and air quality control section, and in such a manner as the director shall deem necessary to prevent nuisance to the public health. 
(Code 1976, § 12-8004) 
Sec. 13-100. - Inspections and enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the director to inspect or cause to be inspected all storage, collection and disposal facilities to determine that this article is being complied with. The director shall have the authority to close or cause to be closed, abandon, improve, repair or revise any disposal facility or collection equipment which does not comply with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12-8005) 
Secs. 13-101—13-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RABIES CONTROL[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5. 
State Law reference— Rabies control, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any domesticated or undomesticated animal, and includes but is not limited to dogs and cats, wild carnivores, cattle and other livestock, bats, rodents and rabbits, and opossums. 
Animal control center means the facility established by the board of commissioners and used by the director for the detention of animals. 
Bite (bitten) means any injury caused by an animal which results in breakage of the skin. 
County rabies control officer means the person responsible for assuring compliance with the provisions of this article in accordance with section 13-145. 
Home quarantine means secure confinement and isolation of an animal from exposure to humans and other animals at the residence of the owner of the animal where access is provided to the animal control center for monitoring the condition of the animal. 
Quarantine means the secure confinement and isolation of an animal from exposure to other animals in the animal control center or a veterinary hospital or other approved boarding kennel. 
Vaccinated or inoculated means the injection of antirabies vaccine into the body of an animal by a veterinarian using a vaccine approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
Veterinarian means a person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 50 [§ 43-50-1 et seq.] 
(Code 1976, § 12-9001; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-127. - Notification when person bitten. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the person bitten by any animal to notify immediately the director, who in turn shall notify the animal control center. Parents or guardians are responsible for notification when a minor has been bitten. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the director to notify any person bitten by an animal which tests positive for rabies of such test results. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9002; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-128. - Notification by owner of biting animal or animal exhibiting signs of rabies. 
It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian or person having possession of, or knowledge of, any animal which has bitten any person or animal, or any animal which exhibits any signs of rabies, to notify the animal control center, which in turn shall notify the director. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9003; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-129. - Quarantine of biting dogs and cats. 
(a)  Any dog or cat known or suspected to have bitten any person or persons shall be ordered by the animal control center to be quarantined and observed for a period of not less than ten (10) days from the date of the biting. Under no circumstances shall the dog or cat be destroyed during this time. If the dog or cat is normal after ten (10) days, the animal control center may order its release or otherwise dispose of it as the occasion may demand. If at any time during the ten (10) days of quarantine, the dog or cat becomes rabid or exhibits symptoms of rabies, the animal control center shall humanely and safely destroy the dog or cat and submit its head for examination as required in section 13-132. 
(b)  In the event no owner or harborer of a biting dog or cat can be found, the animal control center shall capture and quarantine the biting dog or cat for a period of not less than ten (10) days. After ten (10) days, the animal control center may release the dog or cat from quarantine, if normal. If at any time during the ten (10) days of quarantine the dog or cat becomes rabid or exhibits symptoms or rabies, the animal control center shall humanely and safely destroy the dog or cat and submit its head for examination as required in section 13-132. 
(c)  The animal control center shall maintain records of the impounding or disposition of any dog or cat quarantined under subsection (a) or (b) of this section and shall provide such records to the director upon request. 
(d)  Home quarantine may be permitted in lieu of quarantine except during declaration of an area of infection. 
(e)  This section shall apply to any biting dog or cat and does not exempt any dog or cat which has been vaccinated or inoculated. 
(f)  The owner of any animal ordered quarantined under this section shall not refuse to comply with such order or remove the animal from DeKalb County prior to termination of the quarantine order without the approval of the animal control center. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9004; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-130. - Confinement of animal bitten by rabid animal. 
(a)  Any unvaccinated dog or cat bitten by an animal known or suspected to be rabid may be destroyed by order of the animal control center, or ordered by the animal control center to be quarantined and observed for a period of six (6) months. If rabies has not developed in such animal by the end of six (6) months, the animal control center may order the animal released from quarantine. The director shall be notified by the animal control center of the confinement and disposition of the animal. The animal control center shall maintain records of the confinement and disposition of animals and shall provide such records to the director upon request. The animal shall be revaccinated one (1) month before release. 
(b)  Any vaccinated dog or cat bitten by an animal known or suspected to be rabid shall be revaccinated and ordered quarantined by the animal control center for a period of ninety (90) days. 
(c)  Home quarantine may be permitted in lieu of quarantine except during declaration of an area of infection. 
(d)  In the event no owner of the bitten dog or cat can be found, the animal control center may, at any time during the period of confinement, humanely dispatch or otherwise dispose of the bitten animal. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9005; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-131. - General quarantine of dogs or cats within area of infection; epidemic measures. 
(a)  In the event rabies is known to exist within DeKalb County or a part of DeKalb County, the director shall determine an area of infection and may provide for immunization as shall be indicated for the prevention and control of the disease. 
(b)  All dogs or cats within the area of infection may be ordered by the director to be quarantined or confined and not exposed to other animals for a period of not less than ninety (90) days from the date of the last occurrence. All dogs or cats found on public highways or streets, or anywhere off the premises of the owner except on a leash, shall be quarantined. Dogs or cats thus impounded, if not reclaimed by the owner within five (5) days, shall be humanely dispatched or otherwise disposed of at the discretion of the animal control center. 
(c)  The director shall give public notice of such quarantine or confinement by publication in local newspapers, or by posting of notice in public places, or by both. 
(d)  Such quarantine or confinement shall apply to all dogs or cats and does not exempt dogs or cats which have been vaccinated or inoculated. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9006; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-132. - Examination of specimens. 
The head of any dog or cat suspected of having rabies at the time of its death shall be submitted by the animal control center for examination to a public health laboratory operated by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9007; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-133. - Laboratory results. 
(a)  The animal control center shall furnish the director with a copy of any laboratory results obtained on specimens submitted under sections 13-132 and 13-134 through 13-136. 
(b)  Animals known to transmit rabies which have escaped or are otherwise unavailable for examination shall be presumed rabid. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9008; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-134. - Biting wild carnivores. 
Any wild carnivore, which includes, but is not limited to, foxes, skunks, raccoons and bobcats, that has bitten a person or animal shall be destroyed by order of the animal control center, and its head shall be submitted for examination to a public health laboratory operated by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9009; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-135. - Biting bats. 
Any bat which bites a person or domestic animal shall be destroyed by order of the animal control center and the entire bat shall be submitted for examination to a public health laboratory operated by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9010; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-136. - Unprovoked biting rodents and rabbits. 
Only unprovoked rabbits, chipmunks, rats and mice which attack and bite a person or animal shall be destroyed by order of the animal control center and submitted for examination to a public health laboratory operated by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. A bite from a rodent or rabbit while it is being fed is not considered as an unprovoked attack. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9011; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-137. - Disposition of bitten cattle and other livestock. 
Any cattle or livestock known to have been bitten by a rabid animal shall be slaughtered immediately, or at the request of the owner, placed in strict confinement for six (6) months, after which the cattle or livestock may be released by order of the director, if normal, or slaughtered, if rabid. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9012; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-138. - Inoculation of dogs, cats. 
Any person who owns, keeps, maintains or harbors any dog or cat, three (3) months of age or over, at any place within DeKalb County shall have the dog or cat vaccinated at age three (3) months, and on or before the expiration date of the certificate of inoculation required in section 13-139. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9013) 
Cross reference— Rabies inoculation required, §§ 5-12, 5-14. 
State Law reference— Rules requiring rabies inoculations for canines required, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-5. 
Sec. 13-139. - State-issued tag, certificate of inoculation. 
(a)  Any person who owns, keeps, maintains or harbors any dog or cat, age three (3) months or over, shall obtain a Georgia Department of Human Resources issued numbered tag and certificate of inoculation in accordance with chapter 5 of this Code. The certificate shall include the tag number and shall be signed by a veterinarian. The numbered tag so issued shall be attached to a collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog or cat at all times. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any veterinarian issuing tags and certificates of inoculation to provide a copy of the registration certificate to the animal control center within forty-five (45) days of the date of inoculation. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9014; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Cross reference— Rabies inoculation, §§ 5-12, 5-14. 
State Law reference— Rabies tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
Sec. 13-140. - Confinement of puppies. 
Dogs under age three (3) months shall be confined to their owner's premises and not allowed to roam at large. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9015; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-141. - Impoundment of dogs, cats not wearing tags or not vaccinated. 
Any dog or cat, age three (3) months or over, not displaying a numbered tag or whose owner does not possess a certificate of inoculation for said dog or cat, and not confined on the premises of the owner, may be confined in the animal control center and disposed of as permitted in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9016; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-142. - Exemptions from tagging and inoculation. 
Dogs entering DeKalb County for the purpose of performing or for a temporary stay of fourteen (14) days or less, and kept under direct control by their owners or handlers, are exempt from the requirements of section 13-139(a). 
(Code 1976, § 12-9017; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-143. - When impoundment authorized; disclaimer of liability. 
(a)  Any animal may be captured and confined by the animal control center for either of the following reasons: 
(1)  Being vicious. 
(2)  Having bitten a person or animal, or which has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies. 
(b)  In addition to subsection (a) above, any dog or cat may be captured and contained for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Ownership being unknown. 
(2)  Being off the premises of its owner. 
(3)  Not having a numbered tag on a collar or harness, as required in section 13-139(a). 
(4)  Whose owner has no certificate or an expired certificate of inoculation for the animal. 
(c)  The director and other officials and employees of DeKalb County have no liability for any animal which incurs a disease or is injured while being handled, transported or impounded pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9018; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-144. - Animal control center. 
(a)  The animal control center established by the board of commissioners of DeKalb County shall be used by the director for the confinement of animals. 
(b)  The animal control center shall be capable of holding in confinement dogs and other small animals for the purpose of observation and, if necessary, destruction. 
(c)  The animal control center shall notify the owner or person having right of possession of any animal impounded. If said animal is not claimed by the owner or the person having right of possession within a period of time established by the animal control center, then it shall be the duty of the animal control center to order the animal to be painlessly destroyed, or otherwise disposed of at the discretion of the animal control center. 
(d)  Animals under observation shall remain in the animal control center for the periods established in sections 13-129 through 13-131. However, if no owner of the animal can be found, the animal control center may humanely destroy the animal at any time during the period of confinement. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9019; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
Sec. 13-145. - County rabies control officer. 
The director is designated as the county rabies control officer and shall be responsible for assuring compliance with this article. The director of the department in which the animal control center is established by the board of commissioners of DeKalb County may exercise the powers and duties of the county rabies control officer with respect to sections 13-128 through 13-130, and sections 13-132 through 13-144, and shall be responsible for the enforcement thereof, if authorized by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 12-9020; Ord. No. 92-05, § 1, 4-14-92) 
State Law reference— County rabies control officer, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-7. 
Secs. 13-146—13-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RODENT CONTROL 

Sec. 13-161. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicated a different meaning: 
Business building means any structure, whether public or private, that is used for transaction of business, or rendering professional service for amusement, for the display, or sale or storage of goods, wares, merchandise, articles or equipment, including hotels, apartment houses, roominghouses, office buildings, public buildings, stores, theatres, markets, restaurants, grain processors, abattoirs, warehouses, workshops, garages; also outhouses, sheds, barns and other structures on premises used for business purposes. 
Food means human food, grain and other food for animals and fowl. 
Occupant means the individual, partnership, or corporation that uses or occupies any building, or a part thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of a vacant building or any portion of a building, the owner, agent or other person having custody of the building shall have the responsibilities of an occupant of the building. 
Owner means the actual owner of a building whether an individual, partnership or corporation and includes also the agents for building or other person having custody or managerial control. In the case of business buildings leased or rented with a clause in the contract specifying that the lessee or tenant is responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee or tenant will be considered the owner. 
Rat control means block sanitation, distribution of rat poison or the setting of rat traps or such other methods as may be approved by the director to control the rat population. 
Rat harborage means any condition under which rats may find shelter or protection, and shall include any construction or condition which permits the entrance of rats into any business building. 
Ratproofing means a form of ratproofing which will prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings through the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements, roofs, sidewalk gratings, sidewalk openings, foundations and other places that may be reached and entered by rats by climbing, burrowing or otherwise. The material to be used for ratproofing shall include cement concrete, brick masonry laid in cement concrete mortar, sheet metal, twenty-four or twenty-six gauge wire cloth of not less than nineteen-gauge having a mesh not larger than one-half (½) inch. All materials for rat-proofing shall be of such strength and thickness as to be impervious to rat-gnawing. Windows and other openings for light or ventilation that may be reached or entered by rats shall be covered with wire cloth screen incorporated in a metal frame conforming to the above gauge and dimensions. All exterior doors shall be protected against the gnawing of rats by the use of materials prescribed above. When closed, all exterior doors shall have a maximum clearance between doors, door sills and jambs of not exceeding three-eighths ( 3/8 ) of an inch. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10001; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 13-162. - Rat eradication in business buildings generally. 
(a)  The owners of all business buildings shall have these buildings ratproofed, and kept ratproofed in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  All business buildings hereafter erected, enlarged or repaired shall be ratproofed and kept ratproofed in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Whenever conditions inside or under any business building provide harborage for rats such that the director deems it necessary for the prevention of rat-borne diseases that this harborage be eliminated, the director shall order the owner to install a cement concrete floor in the basement from masonry to masonry of this building, or order the owner to take such steps toward the elimination of the harborage as the director, in the director's discretion, deems essential. Failure to obey this order from the director after a given date shall be unlawful. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10002; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 13-163. - Duties of occupants. 
The occupant in charge of any business building shall at all times comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Store all garbage in a ratproof metal container of a type approved by the director, pending removal of this garbage. 
(2)  Keep the buildings and premises free of trash, debris, rubbish, salvage or similar materials which provide nesting places and harborage or rats. 
(3)  Maintain the buildings and premises in a rat-free condition by pursuing a program of a rat control approved by the director. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10003; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 13-164. - Maintenance of ratproofing. 
(a)  The occupants of all ratproofed buildings are required to maintain the premises in a ratproof condition and to repair all breaks that may occur in the ratproofing unless these breaks develop as the result of natural deterioration of the building. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility company, plumber or other person to remove the ratproofing from any business building for any purpose and fail to restore it in satisfactory condition or to make new openings that are not closed or sealed against the entrance of rats. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10004; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 13-165. - Who performs ratproofing. 
The owner of any business building in complying with the provisions hereof relative to ratproofing, and the occupant of any business building in pursuing a program of rat control as required by section 13-163, may personally do the work, or may engage a contractor to do the work, or may have the work performed by the employment of such labor and the purchase of such material as may be necessary, all with the approval of the director. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10004; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 13-166. - When private residences to be ratproofed. 
When in the opinion of the director the condition of rat infestation on private residential premises is such as to be a potential menace to the public health because of rat bites and ratborne diseases, the owners of these premises shall assume the duties and obligations as set forth in section 13-163. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10006; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Sec. 13-167. - Educational program. 
The director shall carry out an educational program of rat control which will include block sanitation, methods of poisoning, trapping and other means for the destruction of rats and the control of ectoparasites on rats. 
(Code 1976, § 12-10007; Ord. No. 91-02, § 1, 1-8-91) 
Secs. 13-168—13-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SWIMMING POOLS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-11, Pt. I, adopted June 20, 2006, repealed §§ 13-181—13-245 I their entirety and set out provisions included as §§ 13-181—13-218 to read as herein set out. Formerly said sections pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 93-06, § 1, 3-23-93 and subsequent amendatory ordinances. Further said Appendixes are not set out herein but are available for public inspection in county offices during regular business hours. See the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 13-181. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not therein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned pool means a pool which the owner and/or permit holder has permanently ceased using (usually resulting in a nuisance) or a pool upon which the pool contractor or builder has ceased construction. 
Approved means accepted or acceptable to the department based on a determination of conformity with this article and principles, practices and generally recognized standards that protect public health. 
Barrier means a fence, wall, building wall, or combination thereof, which completely surrounds the pool area and effectively obstructs access into the pool area. 
Bather means any person, wearing bathing attire, using a pool, spa, hot tub or other bathing facility and adjoining deck area for the purpose of water sports, recreation, therapy or related activities. Bather is also referred to as a user. 
Bathhouse means a facility that contains toilet rooms, shower rooms, and dressing rooms to be used by swimmers before and after swimming for the purpose of dressing and/or hygienic bathing. 
Bathing load means the maximum number of bathers allowed within the pool enclosure based on the amount of the pool's water surface area. 
Certified pool contractor means a person who: 
(1)  Engages in the design, construction or renovation of a swimming pool governed by this article; and 
(2)  Has passed an examination demonstrating their familiarity with this article; and 
(3)  Consistently complies with this article; and 
(4)  Possesses a current business license and valid certification from the department. 
Closed pool means a pool, including all areas within the pool enclosure, that are inaccessible to bathers by closing and securing all entry points into the pool enclosure, and is posted with a conspicuous sign "pool closed" at each entry point, as ordered by the department. 
Deck means the areas immediately adjacent to a pool, including the coping, that are constructed specifically for bathers to stand, walk or sit upon. 
Department means the DeKalb County Board of Health or its authorized representative(s). 
Design flow rate means the amount of water in gallons passing a specific point in the pool's circulation system in a given time in minutes, expressed as gallons per minute (g. p. m.). 
Handhold/foothold means any surface or object that provides a means for traversing the pool barrier, that is greater than one and one-quarter (¼) inches in horizontal width and/or is angled less than forty-five (45) degrees from horizontal. 
Hypo-chlorinator means a mechanical/electrical device for dispensing chlorine in a liquid state in measured doses. 
Imminent health hazard means a threat or danger to health or safety that is considered to exist when there is evidence sufficient to show that a product, practice, circumstance, or event creates a situation that merits immediate correction or cessation of operation to prevent injury or illness. 
Interactive play device means any manufactured apparatus using sprayed, jetted, or other type of water source that contacts bathers in a non-threatening manner. 
Modification means any repair, change, alteration or substitution made to the pool, pool equipment, decking, bathhouse, pool barrier, or any other area or facility related thereof. 
Major modification includes, but is not limited to, deck surface refinishing; filter, pump or chemical feeder replacement; bathhouse floor replacement; plumbing or hydraulic alterations or similar changes that would require a permit. 
Minor modification includes, but is not limited to, replacement of pressure gauges and flow meters. 
Multi-purpose pool means a pool which is designed and constructed with a combination of bathing features which includes, but is not limited to, a waterslide, diving well, zero-depth entry, and/or other similar features. 
Not open means any pool that has been closed by the pool owner, permit holder or designee with all entry points secured and posted with a conspicuous sign that reads "Pool Closed". 
Permit holder means the person or entity who possesses a valid permit to operate a swimming pool and is legally responsible for the operation of the swimming pool including, but not limited to, the pool owner, agent for the pool owner, or other such authorized or designated person. 
Person means any individual, owner, partnership, corporation, entity or association, or designee, including governmental entities. 
Pool operator means a person who: 
(1)  Has been trained as a pool operator; and 
(2)  Is responsible for the pool operation; and 
(3)  Is familiar with the pool's systems and this article. 
Private residential swimming pool means any swimming pool, as defined herein, for use by the members of a single-family residence and invited guests under the control of an individual homeowner, the use of which is not open to the general public. 
Public spa means any pool, and all facilities incident thereto, other than a private residential swimming pool, including, hot tubs and recreational whirlpools, primarily designed for individual or small group bathing, which may employ circulated water, tempered water, air-induced bubbles or a combination thereof, and is open for use by the general public, regardless of whether a fee is charged. 
Public swimming pool means any swimming pool, as defined herein, and all facilities incident thereto, other than a private residential pool, for collective use by the general public for swimming, regardless of whether the person be owner, operator, lessor, lessee, licensor, licensee or concessionaire. 
Renovation means any major modifications as defined in this section of an existing pool and/or facility involving replacement or reconstruction of equipment, pool surface, bathhouse, and/or deck, or similar changes. 
Ritual pool means a pool in which only baptisms and other similar religious functions are conducted. 
Seasonal pool means a pool that is opened for a few months during the calendar year, is then closed and reopens the next year during the same time period. 
Slip resisting means a surface that has been so treated or constructed to significantly reduce the chance of a user slipping. The surface shall have a minimum coefficient of friction of sixth-tenths (0.6) and not be an abrasion hazard. 
Special-purpose pool means any pool designed and used primarily for training, medical purposes, or physical therapy, or exercise. 
Splash pool means a pool designed and operated primarily to receive bathers from a water slide. 
Spray pool means an artificial pool or area into which water complying with this article is jetted but is not allowed to settle. 
Surge device means a structure and/or mechanical means for automatically compensating for the displacement of pool water from the pool by bathers, waves or similar actions in order to maintain the pool's normal operating water level. 
Swimming pool or pool used in this definition means a watertight structure composed of concrete, masonry or other approved material and finish, located either indoors or outdoors, which is used or designed to be used by humans for bathing, recreation, diving or other related purposes, together with the buildings, appurtenances and equipment required or used in connection therewith. A swimming pool or pool may be publicly or privately owned, and is operated by a person, as defined in this article, regardless whether or not a fee is charged for admission and use. "Pool" also means any swimming pool, whirlpool, wading pool, spray pool, slide pool, multi-purpose pool, zero-depth entry pool, interactive play attraction, or special purpose pool. Ritual pools are excluded from this article. Pools serving two (2) or less private residences are excluded from this article except for pool barrier/fencing and septic system review. 
Turnover rate or turnover means the period of time required to circulate a volume of water equal to the pool capacity. 
Wading pool means any pool used or designed to be used for dipping and bathing. 
Wave pool means a pool that has a mechanical means for generating waves at one (1) end of the pool, typically the deepest portion, with the undulations ending at the other end of the pool, typically a zero-depth entry point. 
Watercourse pool means a "pool" as defined in this section in which water is moving continuously from one (1) point to another, which users may be partially or wholly submerged, and users may float with or without inner tubes, rafts, or other similar approved water flotation devices. This type of pool is commonly known as a lazy river. 
Water slide, slide, or flume means any device having a water channel, for users to enter into a splash pool. 
Weir means a flap within a skimmer that adjusts automatically to small changes in water level and assures a continuous water flow to the skimmer. 
Whirlpool means a pool, spa, hot tub, or other similar structure, which may be used in conjunction with tempered water and air induction or high velocity water circulation systems, and designed for use by a small number of bathers. (Whirlpools that are emptied and cleaned after each individual use are exempt from regulation under this article.) 
Year-round pool means a pool that is opened and available for use throughout the calendar year. 
Zero-depth entry pool means a type of pool in which the pool floor intersects the pool water surface. 
Sec. 13-182. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  This article contains regulations establishing minimum standards governing the use and maintenance of swimming pools and structures; establishing minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things, and conditions essential to make swimming pools and surrounding premises safe, sanitary and fit for human use; establishing minimum standards governing the condition and maintenance of swimming pools and structures; fixing certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators and attendants of swimming pools; authorizing the inspection of swimming pools and structures and providing for the condemnation of all swimming pools and structures deemed unfit for human use. 
(b)  This article shall be known and may be cited as the DeKalb County Swimming Pool Regulations. 
(c)  The purpose of this article is to provide basic and uniform standards governing the construction and maintenance of swimming pools and related structures and premises located within DeKalb County, Georgia. Such purpose further provides the establishment of reasonable safeguards for the safety, health and welfare of the attendants and users thereof and of the general public. 
Sec. 13-183. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall construct, operate or modify a pool without having first applied for and received a valid permit from the department. The permit issued shall be valid until suspended, revoked, or has expired. Failure to pay a permit fee, which includes failure due to returned checks for insufficient funds, shall be a violation of this article and shall invalidate the permit accordingly. 
(b)  Other approvals. Any person constructing, operating or modifying a pool must comply with all other applicable regulations and codes. 
(c)  Use restrictions. The department may set use restrictions on any pool and shall require the permit holder or authorized agent to post appropriate compliance notices conspicuously in public view. The department shall post signs or require signs to be posted prohibiting or limiting the use of any pool for non-compliance with this article. Signs that are property of the department shall be removed only by the department. No person may enter the pool enclosure while the pool is posted "Closed" except an employee or agent of the department or other authorized personnel. The pool area shall remain closed until permission to reopen is requested from the permit holder or designee and permission is granted by the department. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge. Direct discharge of polluted waters, such as drainage from overflow facilities, filter backwash waters or contaminated pool drainage from any public or residential pool shall not be made to any outlet or to any portion of the public storm drain system, or to any natural stream or to any body of water or ground surface within the jurisdiction of the board, unless otherwise approved by the director; except that discharge from private residential pools may be discharged on the ground surface, provided the discharge is confined to the pool owner's property and does not result in a nuisance. 
(e)  Construction or modification without approval. Any pool constructed or modified without the prior written approval of the department shall be subject to compliance with the current code. 
Sec. 13-184. - Compliance requirements. 
(a)  Department inspections. The department shall conduct periodic inspections at each pool to insure that good operating practice is employed and that standards are maintained in compliance with this article. The department shall order the pool permit holder or operator to immediately cease operation whenever the department determines that the pool related facilities and/or appurtenances are not in compliance with this article, or for non-payment of fees. A fee shall be charged for each re-inspection, if necessary, after the initial and follow-up inspections following the closing of a pool. Additional inspections of a pool shall be performed as necessary to ensure compliance with this article. Representatives of the department, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any pool area during hours of operation for the purpose of performing inspections to determine compliance with this article. 
(b)  Inspection reports. Findings made during an inspection shall be recorded on an inspection report form. The inspection report shall also summarize the requirements of this article. A copy of the completed inspection report form shall be furnished to the owner, permit holder and/or designee at the conclusion of the inspection. The current inspection report shall be displayed in a conspicuous place where it is easily readable by the public upon entry into the pool area. The report is not to be removed until a new report is issued. 
(c)  Additional documentation. In addition to the inspection report findings, other evidence of non-compliance with this article may also be documented via photographs, samples, and any other means of documentation deemed necessary by the department. 
(d)  Routine compliance. Corrective actions for pools shall be implemented when any violations are found to exist, as outlined in the department's current "Enforcement Policy." 
(e)  Imminent health hazard. When an imminent health hazard is found to exist, corrective actions for pools shall be implemented as ordered by the department, and shall include immediate cessation of operation until the facility is determined by the department to be in compliance with all provisions of this article. Failure of the owner, permit holder and/or designee to comply with the corrective action plan and immediate cessation of operation of the pool shall subject the pool to immediate closure by the department. The following conditions shall be considered as or contributing to an imminent health hazard: 
(1)  The amount of disinfectant in the pool water is above the maximum or below the minimum level; and 
(2)  Inability to clearly see the main drain(s) or the inability to distinguish the type, shape, or number of grate openings in the pool; and 
(3)  Missing essential safety equipment, including but not limited to, life ring and/or rope, Shepherd's hook, or the existence of an inoperable pool phone; and 
(4)  Barrier not effective; and 
(5)  Any other condition deemed to be an imminent health hazard by the department including, but not limited to, the following: bathing load exceeded; occurrence of fecal matter, blood or vomitus incident in the pool; sanitary facilities not functioning properly or in an unsanitary condition; safety hazards. 
(f)  Procedure when infection is suspected. When the department has reasonable cause to suspect possible disease transmission, it may require any or all of the following measures, and any other actions necessary to be taken by the permit holder or authorized agent: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of any suspected person from the pool; and 
(2)  The immediate closing of the pool concerned until, in the opinion of the department, no further danger of disease transmission or outbreak exists; and 
(3)  Adequate medical and laboratory examination as deemed necessary. 
(g)  Accident reporting. All drownings or near-drownings, and all disembowelments or near-disembowelments shall be reported in writing within twenty-four (24) hours of the occurrence to the department and shall fully describe the incident. A copy of the paramedic, EMT, medical examiner or police report, if any, shall also be forwarded to the department with the report. 
(h)  Fecal or vomitus accidents. In order to prevent a fecal or vomitus accident in a pool, the permit holder or designee shall follow the department's current "Recommendations for Reducing the Risk of E. Coli Transmission in a Swimming Pool", which is adopted and incorporated herein by this reference. The permit holder or designee shall properly eliminate the possible contamination of bathers when a fecal, vomitus or blood accident occurs in a pool, by following the department's current "Recommended Procedures for Managing Fecal Accidents or Contamination with Vomitus or Blood in a Swimming Pool", which is adopted and incorporated herein by this reference. 
(i)  Suspension or revocation of permit. The department shall have the authority to suspend or revoke any permit for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. When an application for a permit is denied or a permit previously granted is to be suspended or revoked, the applicant or holder of the permit must be notified in writing, specifically stating any and all reasons why the action is to be taken. Suspension is effective upon service of a written notice at the address on file with the department for the operator, permit holder or by hand delivery thereof, and pool operation must cease immediately. The notice must state the basis for the suspension and advise the owner, permit holder, or designee of the right to a preliminary hearing to be conducted by an experienced supervisory level employee of the department not directly involved in the suspension. The request for a preliminary hearing by the permit holder must be requested in writing within ten (10) days of being served with the suspension or revocation notice. If requested, the preliminary hearing must be held within twenty (20) days of the request. The formal rules of evidence will not apply, but both, the department and the owner, permit holder, or designee may present and cross examine witnesses, introduce records and exhibits and make argument. The hearing official will be authorized to rescind or modify the suspension with conditions, or to continue the suspension, with or without conditions. If the suspension is not rescinded, the owner, permit holder or designee shall have ten (10) days to make written request for an additional evidentiary hearing before the director or her/his designee. If requested, the de novo evidentiary hearing must be held within thirty (30) days of the written request. If a hearing is not requested, upon correction of all violations, the owner, permit holder, or designee may request an inspection to reinstate the permit. The department may revoke any permit to operate a pool if the owner, permit holder or designee does not comply with the requirements of this article; if the operation of the facility does not comply with the requirements of this article; or if the operation of the pool otherwise constitutes an imminent health hazard or safety hazard to the public. 
(j)  Service of notice. A notice of hearing is properly served when it is hand delivered to the owner, permit holder, or designee, or when it is sent via certified or regular U.S. mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the owner, permit holder, or designee. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records of the department. 
(k)  Content of notice. All notices shall state the date, time, place, and nature of the hearing, and shall be filed in the records of the department. 
(l)  Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted at a time and place designated by the department. Any oral testimony given at a hearing shall be recorded verbatim via electronic recording device, and the hearing officer may make provisions for sufficient transcription and copies of the recording upon request. The hearing officer shall make a final determination based upon the complete hearing record and shall sustain, modify, or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the owner and/or permit holder by the department. 
Sec. 13-185. - Construction approval. 
(a)  Plan review. Upon request, the department shall provide construction application forms and hydraulic analysis forms for the approval of pool construction. All applications and any supplemental data shall be submitted to the department for review. 
(1)  Plan preparation. All drawings, specifications and data as required by the department shall be prepared and submitted by a certified pool contractor. 
(2)  Plan details. Complete plans and details of the pool construction project shall meet the requirements as set forth in the department's current, appropriate pool "Plan Review Construction Checklist" shall be accompanied by prints, including a hydraulic analysis of the pool piping and circulation equipment, samples of pool and/or flooring tiles or other surfacing materials, and manufacturer's cut sheets and/or specifications on all equipment. Prints or drawings shall comply with standard architectural/engineering practice, and shall bear identification of the certified pool contractor. Other additional data or information may be required by the department to clearly demonstrate and document the work to be undertaken. Minimum print scale shall be one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch per foot architectural, or one (1) inch per ten (10) feet. A copy of approved pool plans shall be maintained on the premises in the pool office or equipment room. 
(3)  Additional data. Additional data required by the department for the purpose of clarification, anticipated use of the pool or to support any changes in design or scope of the project must be submitted prior to issuance of a permit to construct. 
(4)  Changes to plans. Once a construction permit has been issued for a pool, construction must be in accordance with approved plans and specifications. Should any changes in the plans become necessary during construction, a letter, describing any changes, revised plans and specifications from the certified pool contractor, shall be submitted to the department for review and approval prior to initiation of such changes. Previously submitted plans shall not be altered without prior approval from the department. 
(5)  Plan review fee. A plan review fee shall be remitted to the department with the plans in accordance with the department's current fee schedule. A fee shall be charged for each additional major or minor plan resubmittal after the initial and follow up review in accordance with the departments' current fee schedule. 
(6)  Construction security. All pool construction shall be identified by maintaining a visible indication of possible hazard (flagging or "caution" tape, tree save fence, etc.) until the work is completed. 
(b)  Certified pool contractor. The certified pool contractor shall be responsible for ensuring that all pool construction is performed in accordance with this article but not for work which is outside his scope and shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Certification. Certification shall be obtained by passing a written examination administered by the department or by a department recognized and approved for reciprocity. 
(2)  Certification renewal. Renewal of certification shall be completed every five (5) years and prior to the contractor's certification anniversary. Certification renewal will be dependent upon the certified pool contractor's past performance, compliance with this article, and completion of mandatory continuing education conducted and/or accepted by the department within the five (5) year certification renewal period. 
(3)  Fee. A fee shall be remitted to the department with a completed application for certification. A fee shall be remitted for renewal of certification within the five (5) year period and prior to certification expiration in accordance with the department's current fee schedule. 
(4)  Abandoned construction. A certified pool contractor shall not abandon an incomplete installation without notification within forty-five (45) days of such event; such notification may not absolve the certified pool contractor of any liability which he/she might otherwise be subject unto for the abandonment. 
(5)  Suspension and revocation. A pool contractor's certificate may be suspended or revoked by the department upon a hearing to determine any violation of any of the requirements of this article pertaining to certified pool contractors. 
(6)  Duration of suspension and revocation. Suspension of a pool contractor's certification shall be levied for a minimum of one (1) year. Revocation of a contractor's certificate shall be levied for a minimum of five (5) years. Two (2) suspensions within a five-year period shall be grounds for permanent revocation. A pool contractor with a suspended or revoked certificate shall not be allowed to submit plans for construction nor construct any pool covered by this article. 
(7)  Appeal. A certified pool contractor may appeal in writing prior to the effective date of the suspension or revocation of their certificate. If notice of appeal of the pool contractor is timely filed with the department he or she will be afforded an opportunity for a hearing before this department to show cause why this certificate should not be suspended or revoked. The decision by the department shall be based on the certified pool contractor's performance and shall be final. 
(8)  Listing. The department shall maintain a current listing of certified pool contractors which shall include their last known mailing address. 
(9)  Inactivity or change. A certified pool contractor who has not presented pool construction plans in the metro health districts for a period of two (2) years or longer must be re-certified prior to the department's acceptance of their submittal of plans or applications to construct pools. Any certified pool contractor who has a change in employment or address must notify the department in writing within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the change. 
(10)  Inspections. A certified pool contractor must request a piping inspection and pressure test, a final construction inspection and, if necessary, any re-inspection of a newly constructed pool that they are responsible for prior to issuance of a permit to operate. A permit to operate will not be issued until all required inspections are completed. The certified pool contractor or his or her authorized representative shall be present at the site for each of these inspections. 
(11)  Instructions. Upon completion of construction and/or prior to the operation of any pool, the certified pool contractor shall give the permit holder complete oral and written operational instructions for the pool, on all of the pool equipment, on water chemistry, maintenance procedures, and other related information. 
(c)  Preliminary plan review. The owner or agent for the owner may request a preliminary review of the plans by the department without obtaining a permit to construct the pool. A fee shall be charged for this consultation service, in accordance with the department's current fee schedule. 
(d)  Other agencies' approvals. All work must be inspected and approved by all appropriate agencies prior to issuance of a permit to operate. 
(e)  Piping inspection. All pool piping shall be completely exposed and subject to an induced, static water, air, or water/air pressure test at a minimum of fifty (50) pounds per square inch (50 p.s.i.) for a minimum of thirty (30) minutes and shall be inspected by the department prior to being covered by earth, deck or the pool structure. If there are any variations from the approved plans and specifications, such variations must be brought into conformance by the certified pool contractor in accordance with the approved plans. Plans and specifications detailing the variations or changes must be submitted for a construction permit revision prior to continuance of construction. 
(f)  Final construction inspection. The department shall conduct an inspection before final pool construction approval. If the construction is not approved on the initial inspection and first follow-up inspection, then a fee shall be charged for each additional inspection until a final approval is granted. 
(g)  Invalid permit. If construction is not commenced within one (1) year from the date of approval, the construction permit expires and the project must be resubmitted to the department for approval. A written request for an extension of time prior to the expiration of the permit to commence construction may be approved by the department if no changes to the project are proposed or required. 
Sec. 13-186. - Modification approval. 
(a)  Modification approval. An application to modify a pool must be submitted to and approved by the department prior to the modification being made. All modifications shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the department. Changes in an approved project may be made only after written approval and the written consent of the department. Any additional data required by the department for purpose of clarification, anticipated use or to support the design or scope of the project must be submitted prior to issuance of a permit to modify. Permits to modify are not transferable. A permit to modify a pool is required before any major modification. Modification permits shall be effective for twelve (12) months from date of issuance or until the expiration date on the permit. Written notification shall be made to the department for all other modifications. Replacement of existing equipment with the same equipment (i.e., same manufacturer, model number and capacity) will not require a permit to modify. If the replacement equipment is not the same as the existing equipment, then a permit, along with submittal of the fee, specification sheet(s), and any other data deemed necessary by the Department, is required prior to commencement of any work. 
(b)  Invalid permit. If modifications are not commenced by the expiration date of the permit, the permit expires and the project must be resubmitted to the department before work may commence. A written request for an extension of time prior to the expiration of the permit to commence a modification may be approved by the department if no changes to the project are proposed or required. 
(c)  Fees. A permit fee shall be submitted with the application for a major modification. A fee shall be charged for each re-inspection, if necessary, after the initial and follow-up inspections. 
Sec. 13-187. - Operational approval. 
(a)  Permit required. No person or permit holder shall operate a pool without having first applied for and obtained a valid permit to operate from the department. A permit to operate a pool may be suspended or revoked for any violation of this article. Operating permits will become invalid as indicated by the permit expiration date. Valid operating permits shall be conspicuously posted for public viewing in the pool area as close to the entrance as possible. Any swimming pool operating without a valid permit from the department shall be subject to immediate closure. 
(b)  Permit nontransferable. Permits are not transferable from one (1) person to another or from one (1) entity to another. If the permit holder is changed, then the current permit to operate the swimming pool is invalid and a new permit to operate is required. 
(c)  Permit, current inspection report, and certified pool operator's certificate displayed. The operating permit shall be framed and displayed in a conspicuous place as close to the pool entrance as possible such that it is easily readable by the public at all times. The current inspection report from the department shall be displayed in a conspicuous place where it is easily readable by the public at all times. A copy of the pool operator's certificate shall be conspicuously displayed near the operating permit. 
(d)  Operating instructions. All instructions necessary for the proper operation and maintenance of all pool equipment and appurtenances must be easily accessible, readable and conspicuously posted in the filter or equipment room. 
(e)  Fees. For any pool a fee shall be submitted with the application for a permit to operate a pool. Permits are not transferable from one (1) person to another or from one (1) entity to another. If the permit holder is changed, then the current permit to operate the swimming pool is invalid and a new permit to operate is required. For any pool that is in operation beyond the permit expiration date without permission from the department, the fee for an application for a permit to operate shall be doubled, in accordance with the current fee schedule. 
(f)  Pools not in use/abandoned pools. Any pool that is closed, not open, not in use or operation, or seasonal pools that are closed until the next swim season, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The owner, permit holder or designee for any abandoned pool shall create an opening through the shell of the bottom of the pool for drainage and fill the entire pool with clean earth. Neither an abandoned pool nor any pool not in use shall be allowed to create a nuisance under law. 
Sec. 13-188. - Construction. 
(a)  Finish and materials. Pools shall be constructed of inert, impervious, durable, non-toxic materials that will provide a smooth, watertight and easily cleanable surface. All horizontal, interior pool surfaces at pool depths of five (5) feet or less, including steps, benches, or seats, shall be non-slip. The surface shall have no cracks or open joints and interior corners shall be coved. Except for water line tiles, maximum twelve (12) inch wide racing lane markers, or wall turn targets, the surface below normal water level shall be finished in a very light color. Vinyl pool liners are prohibited. Rough and abrasive materials are prohibited. Any pool with a metal-based shell or utilizing dissimilar metals shall be provided with sacrificial anodes or other approved means to reduce galvanic action and electrolytic corrosion. There shall be no extensions, means of entanglement or other obstructions in the pool that may cause entrapment or injury to the user. 
(b)  Design. Pools shall be constructed to provide adequate water circulation, bather access and egress and to afford proper operational control. Pool proportioning between deep and shallow water shall be in accordance with the anticipated uses of the pool, with sound engineering and public health design and construction principles in accordance with (see Appendix - Figure No. 1 Minimum / maximum dimension requirements) the ANSI Standard for Public Swimming Pools. No pool(s) shall be constructed in a manner that limits the use of life saving equipment, limits the pool operator's ability to supervise the facility or creates a hazard to bathers. No pool shall have more than twenty (20) percent of its perimeter elevated continuously. Vertical edged corners and all protrusions greater than six (6) inches below water level shall have a minimum three-inch radius. Horizontal edges and corners of steps, benches, seats, and similar surfaces shall have a minimum one-inch radius. The wall-to-floor juncture shall be coved with a minimum three-inch radius. Interior walls shall be vertical and shall not be greater than eleven (11) degrees from plumb. 
(c)  Size. The minimum pool surface area shall be five hundred (500) square feet, except where otherwise described in this article. Calculations for determining size of a pool and the number and type of associated facilities shall be based on the maximum bathing load. Pool usage shall not exceed the maximum bathing load. The bathing load shall be calculated on the basis of one (1) person for each ten (10) square feet of pool surface area where the depth is less than or equal to five (5) feet; one (1) person for each twenty (20) square feet of pool surface in that portion where the depth exceeds five (5) feet approved diving area; and one (1) person for every three hundred (300) square feet where depths exceed five (5) feet and one (1) or more diving boards/platforms are installed. The department shall determine the bathing load for any pool that is designated as a "Special Purpose" pool, any pool with use restrictions, or pools serving facilities with no dwelling units. Pool bathing load shall be determined by the department based on the anticipated usage and assessment of other, similar facilities. 
(d)  Depths. Minimum water depths shall be determined by the intended use of the pool. Depth at the slope-break shall not be greater than five (5) feet for pools with depths exceeding five (5) feet. In the diving well, depth shall be as stipulated in the ANSI Standard for Public Swimming Pools Section entitled "Diving" and in accordance with the minimum specifications as indicated in the (see Appendix — Figure No. 2) "Minimum Water Envelopes" from the same standard. 
(1)  Depth markers. Permanent, easily-readable, depth markers shall be provided with minimum four (4) inch high, black numbers and letters with a white background, indicated in feet and, when applicable, in inches (i.e., 5 FT or 5 FEET; 3 FT 6 IN or 3 FEET 6 INCHES). Metric depth markings can be used in conjunction with, but not substitute for, required depth markers. The depth of water shall be indicated on the vertical pool wall at or above the waterline. Depth markers shall indicate the actual pool depth within three (3) inches at normal operating water level when measured three (3) feet from the pool wall or at a tangent point where the cove radius meets the floor, whichever is deeper. Depth markers on the vertical pool wall shall be positioned to be read from the waterside. Depth markers shall be placed in such a way that they allow as much of the numerical value to be visible above the waterline as possible. Deck depth markers shall be installed within eighteen (18) inches of the pool wall and positioned to be read while standing on the deck facing the pool water. Horizontal depth markers shall be slip resisting. Depth markers shall be installed at the maximum and minimum water depths and at all points of slope change. Depth markers shall be installed at intermediate increments of water depth not to exceed two (2) feet. Depth markers shall be spaced not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet intervals. Depth markers shall be arranged uniformly on both sides and both ends of the pool. Depth markers on irregularly-shaped pools shall designate depths at all major deviations in shape. 
(2)  "No diving" markers. Deck areas at the shallow portion of the pool or where pool depths are five (5) feet or less shall be permanently marked "No Diving" in black letters with a white background with minimum two (2) inch high lettering, each warning spaced evenly around the pool perimeter, located next to depth markers "No Diving" markers shall be easily readable and slip resisting. An international "No Diving" symbol may be used in conjunction with, but not in lieu of approved, lettered, "No Diving" markers. "No Diving" markers shall be installed within eighteen (18) inches of the pool wall. 
(e)  Bottom slopes. The pool floor shall slope uniformly and continuously from the shallow point of the pool at a maximum of one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet to the deep point, the slope break, or other approved depth change. In pools with depths exceeding five (5) feet, the floor shall have a maximum uniform slope of one (1) foot in three (3) feet, see Appendix — Figure No. 1 — Minimum/maximum dimension requirements. Each pool shall be constructed to facilitate complete drainage of the pool. 
(f)  Steps and ladders. Steps and/or ladders shall be in such number and location as to provide bathers safe egress from the pool. They shall have an easily-cleanable, corrosion-resistant, impervious material, with treads that have a non-slip finish, and shall be self-draining. Steps shall have a maximum riser height of twelve (12) inches and a minimum tread depth of twelve (12) inches with a minimum unobstructed width of twenty (20) inches on both sides of each step. All steps shall have handrails anchored in the bottom step and extended over the coping and anchored in the deck, or a handrail double anchored in the deck that extends out to the center of the bottom step with a maximum height of six (6) inches above the normal water level at that point. Recessed step treads shall have a uniform vertical spacing of twelve (12) inches maximum and seven (7) inches minimum, with a minimum depth of five (5) inches and minimum width of twelve (12) inches. The maximum distance from the coping edge to the upper tread shall be twelve (12) inches. Recessed treads shall be self-draining. Each set of recessed treads shall be provided with a set of handrails or grab rails to serve all treads. An additional step or ladder will be required for each additional seventy-five (75) feet or major fraction thereof of pool perimeter over one hundred and fifty (150) feet. Steps shall be clearly and permanently marked on the horizontal surface, within two (2) inches of the step edge, by a minimum two (2) inches dark, continuous line of slip resisting tile. 
(g)  Benches and seats. Benches and seats shall be clearly and permanently marked on the horizontal surface within two (2) inches of the step edge, by a minimum two (2) inches dark, continuous line of slip resisting tile. 
(h)  Decks. A deck no less than five (5) feet in width, as measured from the inside wall of a pool, shall surround a minimum of sixty-five (65) percent of the pool perimeter. No non-deck area shall exceed twenty (20) feet or twenty (20) percent of the pool perimeter whichever is less. Where immediate access to the pool from the deck or from the deck to pool is prohibited or limited by the extended height of a pool wall, a column, or other structure, a stainless steel grab rail shall be installed continuously along the entire pool wall, at the normal water level, in the areas where access is prohibited or limited. 
(1)  Minimum deck width. A minimum of four (4) feet of unobstructed deck is required behind diving boards and platforms as measured from the edge of the board's or platform's ladder or handrail, whichever is the greatest distance. A minimum of ten (10) feet of complying deck shall separate a pool from any other pool. 
(2)  Minimum deck area. The minimum, complying deck area required shall be equal in size to or greater than the pool surface area. 
(3)  Deck surface. The required deck shall be unobstructed in all directions and shall be constructed at the same elevation as the outside edge of the coping. Minimum vertical clearance throughout the deck area shall be six (6) feet, eight (8) inches, except the ceiling for an indoor pool, which shall be eight (8) feet. The deck shall be light-colored, slip resisting, easily cleanable and drain properly. Rough and abrasive surfaces are prohibited. Prohibited deck surfaces include gravel, pea gravel, epoxy gravel, wood, carpeting, and vinyl. A sample of the deck surface material shall be submitted, other than broom-finished concrete, for approval prior to installation. 
(4)  Deck slope and drainage. Decks shall have a minimum transverse slope of one-quarter (¼) inch per foot and a maximum of one-half (½) inch per foot away from the pool or toward deck drains. The plane of the deck surface shall be uniform, with no steps, curbs, or similar structures, within the minimum required, complying deck area. Decks shall not retain any standing water greater than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inches in depth or greater than one (1) square foot of area for a period of time not to exceed twenty (20) minutes. Deck drainage shall not be incorporated with any pool water or any potable water source. Deck drain grates shall be secured, yet easily removable with an appropriate tool to facilitate cleaning the drains. Adjacent areas to the deck and walkway(s) within the pool enclosure shall be safe and well drained. 
(5)  Coping. A coping block made with a bull nosed, raised projection or other approved design, with a minimum one (1) inch radius, shall be installed along the entire perimeter of the pool except at the entry point for zero-depth entry pools. The coping shall not retain any water. The coping shall be considered as pool decking. 
(6)  Hose bibs. Hose bibs, with backflow prevention, shall be installed within the pool enclosure and located no more than one hundred (100) feet apart. 
(7)  Deck joints and gaps. The maximum gaps in decks, between pool decks and the coping, or between other decks or walkways, shall be one half (½) inch of horizontal clearance with a maximum vertical elevation of one quarter (¼) inch. Control joints in decks shall be provided to minimize the potential for cracks. Construction joints where pool coping meets concrete deck(s) or other adjacent structures shall be watertight. 
(8)  Deck edges. The edge and corners of deck(s) shall be rounded, tapered or designed and constructed to eliminate sharp corners. 
(9)  Trash receptacle. A minimum of one (1) covered and lined trash receptacle shall be provided and placed in a convenient location in the pool area. 
(i)  Construction tolerances. The certified pool contractor shall state on the plans of a pool that construction and design tolerances shall comply with the current edition of the ANSI/NSPI-1, "American National Standard for Public Swimming Pools." 
Sec. 13-189. - Water quality and sanitation. 
(a)  Water source. Water supplied to the pool, bathhouse, drinking fountain, hose bibs, or any other water supply or outlet shall be supplied from a community water supply regulated under the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 (Act 231 O.C.G.A. section 12-5-170 (Federal Safe Drinking Water Act PL 93-523). Water supplied to the pool must be delivered through a fill spout with a minimum three (3) inch air gap, installed at least two (2) pipe diameters above the rim of the pool or surge chamber, and located so as not to create an obstruction on the deck or through an approved make-up water system that is installed in a location which is readily accessible for inspection, repair or testing. 
(b)  Backflow prevention. Approved backflow prevention must be provided on all potable water lines. 
(c)  Pool water. A sufficient number of samples may be taken, whenever the department deems necessary, to affirm, via bacteriological analysis, that the pool water meets the requirements in this article. Samples shall be taken while the pool is in use during the peak bathing load. All samples shall be collected, de-chlorinated, and examined in accordance with the procedures outlined in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" (American Public Health Association) and/or approved equivalent by the department. 
(1)  Chemical quality. The pool shall be maintained in an alkaline condition at all times with the pH between seven and two-tenths (7.2) and seven and eight-tenths (7.8). Chlorine disinfection shall be provided on all pools except when other approved disinfection methods are utilized. The free-chlorine residual in all parts of the pool shall be maintained at a concentration of no less than one and one-half parts per million (1.5ppm) at all times. Where stabilizing agents are used, a free-chlorine residual shall be maintained at a concentration of no less than three parts per million (3ppm) at all times. The maximum stabilized or unstabilized free chlorine residual shall not exceed ten parts per million (10ppm) except when super-chlorinating or shocking the pool. A N-diethyl-p-phenylenediamine (D.P.D) test kit, or other approved method by the department to measure the free chlorine residual shall be provided and used. When bromine is utilized, the residual in all parts of the pool shall be maintained at a concentration of no less than three parts per million (3.0p.p.m.) and no greater than eight parts per million (8.0p.p.m.). A D.P.D. test kit or other approved method by the department to measure the bromine residual shall be provided and used. If Ultra-Violet (UV), ozone generating or ionization equipment is used, it is only recognized as a supplementary disinfection to the minimum requirements for chlorine or bromine disinfectants. 
(2)  Stabilizing chemicals. No stabilizing chemicals shall be utilized in any indoor pool. When cyanuric acid is used as a stabilizing agent, the maximum concentration shall not exceed one hundred parts per million (100 p.p.m.). At pools using cyanurates, a DPD test kit with cyanuric acid test reagents to measure the cyanurate concentration shall be provided and used. The cyanurate test kit must register readings in excess of the maximum permissible concentration. 
(3)  Pool chemicals. Only chemicals approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and by the department shall be used. 
(4)  Testing frequency. The pool water shall be tested for the disinfectant level and pH at least two (2) times each day or as often as necessary if circumstances warrant, including prior to opening and during peak bathing loads. If applicable, the cyanurate level shall be tested at least once a week. Test results shall be entered on a log that shall be maintained in the pool area for ready access whenever the pool is open. 
(5)  Cleanliness. All pools shall be kept free from sediment, dirt or debris by frequent brushing and vacuuming of the bottom and sidewalls. Visible scum shall be removed immediately. 
(6)  Clarity. At all times when a pool is in use, the water shall be of such clarity that the main drains on the bottom of the pool at the deepest point are clearly visible from the deck. The viewer shall be able to clearly distinguish the type, shape and number of openings of the main drain grates or covers. 
Sec. 13-190. - Circulation system. 
(a)  Design and operation. A separate circulation system is required for each pool and shall consist of pump(s), piping, filter(s), water conditioning and disinfection equipment, and other accessory equipment that will clarify, condition, and disinfect the water in accordance with this article. All pool equipment shall meet the standards set forth in the most recent edition of ANSI/NSF-50, "Circulation system components and related materials for swimming pools, spas/hot tubs" or other, independent testing and certifying organization, and shall be approved by the department. The equipment shall be operated continuously on a twenty-four (24) hour basis to obtain the minimum required number of four (4) turnovers per day, or one turnover every six (6) hours. All pool piping systems shall be designed to accommodate one hundred (100) percent of the design flow rate. During normal pool operation, a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the circulation flow shall be through the main drain and a minimum of eighty (80) percent shall be through the overflow gutters or skimmers. All circulation system components, including filter(s), pump(s), hair lint strainer(s) and other similar components, shall function properly and be maintained in a clean condition. For circulation systems utilizing over-the-gutter circulation, an approved surge device shall be provided. Timers used in conjunction with any circulation equipment are prohibited whenever the pool is open for use, but may be used when the pool is not open during the off season. 
(1)  Pumps. Pump(s) shall be adequate in number and capacity to provide the required pool turnover rate. Pumps shall supply the design circulation and backwash flows at a dynamic head sufficient to overcome friction losses in the piping, appurtenances and maximum filter head loss. If more than one (1) pump is utilized in design or construction, then all of the pumps shall be the same including manufacturer, size, capacity, and other similar factors. Pump performance curves shall be submitted with the plans. 
(2)  Filters. Filter(s) shall be sized and maintained to accommodate the required design circulation flow. If more than one (1) filter is utilized in design or construction, then all of the filters shall be the same including manufacturer, size, capacity, and other similar factors. 
(3)  Inlets. A minimum of two (2) adjustable inlets installed flush with the pool wall or floor shall be located in conjunction with the proposed method of circulation so as to provide effective, uniform circulation of the incoming water throughout the pool and to prevent stagnant areas. The total number of inlets shall be calculated based on one (1) inlet for twenty (20) linear feet of pool perimeter (or major fraction thereof). Inlets shall be evenly spaced either along the pool perimeter or on the pool floor. Inlets shall be installed below the normal water level. Floor inlets shall be provided on all pools with surface areas exceeding two thousand (2,000) square feet. Wall inlets may be used in addition to the minimum required number of floor inlets for steps, seats, and sunning areas. Wall inlet fittings shall not project more than one and one-half (1½) inches from the surface of the pool wall. 
(4)  Main drain openings. Unless the pool is initially designed without a main drain, each pool shall be provided with two (2) or more hydraulically balanced main drain openings for each main drain line at the deepest portion and constructed to completely drain the pool. Main drain openings must be covered by an approved, secured grating, removed only by a tool and not removable by bathers. The open area of the drain cover shall be at least four (4) times the cross-sectional area of the drain pipe, and sufficient flow area shall be provided so that the full flow velocity at any part of the grate will not exceed one and one-half (1½) feet per second. Openings between grate bars shall not exceed one-half (½) inch. Main drain openings shall be constructed in parallel, in a tee configuration, and spaced evenly across the deep portion of the pool, with a minimum spacing of five (5) feet between each main drain opening. Any previous "grandfather clause" is hereby revoked. 
(5)  Skimmers and overflow gutters. A surface skimming or gutter system shall be provided for each pool and shall be designed and constructed to skim the pool surface when the water level is maintained within the operating water level range of the system's weir device or rim. 
(6)  Vacuum cleaning system. A vacuum system shall be provided for pool cleaning. Wall-mounted type vacuum systems are prohibited. If approved for use, portable vacuum systems shall not be stored on the pool deck. 
(7)  Flow meters. An adequately sized flow meter, capable of measuring and indicating a minimum range of one-half (½) to one and one-half (1½) times the design flow rate shall be installed on the pool return line to accurately indicate the circulation rate in gallons per minute. Flow meters shall be conspicuously located and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions for placement. 
(8)  Heaters. Pools equipped with heaters shall have a fixed thermometer in the circulation line. Water temperature shall be thermostatically controlled. Adequate external valves and piping shall be provided to enable bypassing the heater and to facilitate complete removal for repairs without interruption of pool circulation. At all times the temperature in the pool water shall not exceed one hundred and four (104) degrees Fahrenheit. Heaters shall be installed according to the manufacturer's instructions and in accordance with all applicable state, county and local codes. An unbreakable thermometer designed for use in a pool must be available for bathers and pool staff to monitor pool water temperatures. Control of the pool's water temperature shall not be accessible to bathers. 
Sec. 13-191. - Piping and hydraulics. 
(a)  Piping. The piping system shall consist of non-toxic materials and be able to withstand a minimum pressure of fifty (50) pounds per square inch. Piping configuration shall be designed to minimize friction losses. All piping used for pool circulation and manufacturers must meet the standards set forth in the current edition of ANSI/NSF 50, "Circulation System Components and Related Materials for Swimming Pools, Spas/Hot Tubs", or alternate criteria approved by the local health authority. All pool piping shall bear the N.S.F. seal for potable water and be schedule 40 or greater. Pipe installation shall comply with the applicable local plumbing code and this article. All valves and piping in the equipment room shall be clearly labeled, and water flow direction shall be indicated on exposed piping in the filter room. Piping shall be installed to facilitate complete drainage of the system. Heat bending of any pool piping for installation is prohibited. 
(1)  Maximum velocity. Velocity shall not exceed ten (10) feet per second (10 f.p.s.) in pressure piping or five (5) feet per second (5 f.p.s.) in suction piping. 
(2)  Main drain line. The main drain line shall be designed and constructed to accommodate one hundred (100) percent of the design flow rate and head loss calculations shall include friction losses of the pipe, fittings and the hair and lint strainer. The size of the main drainpipe shall be continuous throughout the length of the line. 
(3)  Skimming system lines. The skimming system lines shall be designed and constructed to accommodate (100) percent of the design flow rate. The flow-through rate of the skimming system, based on the manufacturer's minimum recommendations, shall be used to determine the turnover rate if the turnover rate exceeds the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(4)  Waste lines. Pool wastewater shall be directed to a sanitary sewer. The backwash waste line shall be no smaller than the size of the pipe exiting the filter for the entire length of the backwash line. Discharge points shall be shown on the plans. 
(5)  Piping details. Plans must include complete details of all pool piping. All pool piping shall be supported in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
(6)  Filters. Existing pools utilizing sand filters with an unknown total dynamic head shall be considered to have a minimum of sixty (60) feet of head. Existing pools utilizing diatomaceous earth filters with an unknown total dynamic head shall be considered to have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of head on vacuum systems and ninety (90) feet of head on pressure systems. Existing pools utilizing cartridge filters with an unknown total of dynamic head shall be considered to have a minimum of fifty (50) feet of head. 
(7)  Hydraulic calculations. Hydraulic calculations shall be submitted on approved department forms together with the pool plans. All pool pipe sizing shall be determined by a friction/flow chart for schedule 40 rigid PVC pipe based on the "Williams and Hazen" formula using a constant of one hundred fifty (150) or approved equivalent. If approved, other types of piping shall be sized in accordance with an approved friction/flow chart. A copy of the friction/flow chart and a copy of the chart used to determine equivalent pipe lengths shall be submitted with the plans and specifications for new pool construction or for pool piping modification. 
Sec. 13-192. - Filters. 
(a)  Design. Filters shall be sized to accommodate or exceed the design flow rate of the system and provide water clarity as noted in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) below. 
(1)  Filters shall meet the standards of or be listed in the most recent edition of ANSI/NSF 50, or other approved certification organization listing. 
(2)  Filters shall be designed so that filtration surfaces can be inspected and serviced. 
(3)  The maximum flow rate of filters shall not exceed the requirements of the most recent edition of ANSI/NSF 50 or other approved organization certification listing. 
(b)  Internal pressure. On pressure-type filters, a means shall be provided to permit the release of internal pressure. 
(1)  Any filter incorporating an automatic internal air release as its principal means of air release shall have a lid(s) that provide(s) a slow and safe release of pressure as a part of this design and shall have manual air releases in addition to automatic releases. 
(2)  A separation tank used in conjunction with a filter tank shall have a manual method of air release or a lid that provides a slow and safe release as it is opened. 
(3)  The following statement shall be conspicuously visible within the area of the air release: "Do not start the system after maintenance without first opening the air release and properly reassembling the filter and separation tank and opening the air release valve." 
(c)  Filter Piping. Piping furnished with the filter shall be of suitable material capable of withstanding one and one-half (1½) times the working pressure. The suction piping should be of such construction that it will not collapse when there is a complete shut-off of flow on the suction side of the pump. 
Sec. 13-193. - Sand filters. 
(a)  Appurtenances. Each filter tank shall have an access port for inspection and servicing. Each filter shall have both influent and effluent pressure gauges with a minimum face size of two (2) inches, and a manual air relief valve. The filter system shall have an adequately sized, inline backwash sight glass, on the backwash line. All appurtenances shall be conspicuously located for quick inspection. 
(b)  Piping and valves. The filtering system shall be designed with all valves and piping required to permit filtering to pool, filtering to waste, filter bypass to waste, and complete drainage of the system. The piping layout shall accommodate proper maintenance, operation and inspection. 
Sec. 13-194. - Diatomaceous earth filters. 
(a)  Filter tank and septa. The filter area shall be determined on the basis of effective filtering surfaces, with no allowance given for areas of impaired filtration—such as broad supports, folds or portions which may bridge the filter elements. Where dissimilar metals are used, provision shall be made to avoid electrolytic corrosion by galvanic action. The bottom of open vacuum filter tanks shall slope to a drain to facilitate complete drainage of the tanks. 
(b)  Appurtenances. Pressure filters shall be equipped with an air-relief valve, influent and effluent pressure gauges with a minimum face size of two (2) inches, and an in-line sight glass, on the backwash line. A vacuum gauge with a minimum face size of two (2) inches shall be provided on the pump suction line for vacuum filter systems. All appurtenances shall be conspicuously located for quick inspection. 
(c)  Piping and valves. The filtering system shall be designed with all valves and piping to permit filtering to pool, pre-coat recirculation and/or pre-coat to waste, complete drainage of the system, bypass filter to waste, and backwashing to waste. The piping layout shall accommodate proper maintenance, operation and inspection. If pre-coat recirculation is used in a pressure system, an in-line sight glass, minimum two (2) inches in length, and a valve shall be provided in the pre-coat piping. 
Sec. 13-195. - Cartridge filters. 
(a)  Appurtenances. Each filter shall be equipped with an air relief valve and influent and effluent pressure gauges with a minimum face size of two (2) inches. All appurtenances shall be conspicuously located for quick inspection. 
(b)  Piping and valves. The filtering system shall be designed with valves and piping to permit filtering to pool, bypass filter to waste, and complete drainage of the system. The piping layout shall accommodate proper maintenance, operation and inspection. 
(c)  Cartridges. Two (2) sets of cartridges shall be provided so that one set may be cleaned while the filter is in operation. Disposable cartridges will be replaced when the required filtration rate is impaired. Modular-type cartridge filters, if approved, are not required to have a second set of cartridges. 
Sec. 13-196. - Skimmers and overflow gutters. 
(a)  Surface skimming. The actual water level shall be maintained within the operating water level range of the system's weir device or rim. Each skimmer or overflow system shall be designed and installed so as not to constitute a hazard to the user, and to prevent entrance or entrapment of limb, body, or hair. 
(1)  Number required. Each pool utilizing skimmers shall have at least two (2) skimmers. One additional skimmer shall be provided for each five hundred (500) square feet of water surface area, or fraction thereof, for pools having up to two thousand (2,000) square feet of water surface area. Pools ranging from two thousand and one (2,001) square feet up to five thousand (5,000) square feet of water surface area shall have one (1) additional skimmer for each two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of water surface area, or fraction thereof, in excess of two thousand (2,000) square feet of water surface area. (See Appendix — Figure No. 4, "Pool Surface Area vs. Number of Skimmers.") 
(2)  Skimmer location. Skimmers shall be built into the pool wall and shall be evenly spaced along the pool perimeter and located to prevent stagnant areas in circulation. 
(3)  Skimmer design. Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow through rate of at least twenty-five (25) gallons per minute. Additional skimmers shall be provided when the design flow through rate, based on the turnover rate of the pool, exceeds the manufacturer's recommendations. If the manufacturer's recommended maximum flow through the skimmers is not available, then a maximum of fifty-five (55) gallons per minute per skimmer shall be utilized. 
(4)  Skimmer weir. Each skimmer shall have a properly designed and operating weir or other departmentally approved means of providing effective skimming. 
(5)  Equalizer line. Each skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent air-lock in the circulation system suction line. Equalizer lines shall be at least one and a half (1½) inches in diameter, installed at least one (1) foot below the weir level, provided with an equalizer valve, provided with a check valve, and provided with a grated opening installed flush with the pool wall or floor, not exceeding one and one-half (1½) inches or the diameter of the pipe exiting the skimmer. 
(6)  Adjustments for circulation. Each skimmer shall be equipped with a valve that is adjustable to allow for fluctuation in water flow to balance water circulation during operation. 
(7)  Screen. A non-corrosive screen shall be provided to trap large debris. It shall be installed to allow ready removal and cleaning from an opening in the deck. 
(8)  Skimmer access. Skimmer openings in the deck shall be secured with a cover that is installed flush to the deck surface, has a slip-resisting surface, and is of such strength to withstand normal deck use. 
(b)  Overflow gutters. Overflow gutters shall be constructed of sufficient size to retain normal overflow, and the top of the gutter shall be uniformly level. Complete specifications and details of the gutter system and hydraulics analysis, sealed by a state certified engineer, shall be submitted with the pool plans. Overflow gutter drain lines shall be connected to the circulation system through a surge chamber or other approved surge system. The surge system capacity shall be based upon a minimum of one (1) gallon of surge chamber volume for each square foot of pool surface area. The hydraulic capacity of the overflow gutter system shall be capable of handling one hundred (100) percent of the circulation flow. Gutter drain lines shall carry the pool overflow to the circulation system. 
(c)  Recessed gutters. Recessed gutters shall not be less than four (4) inches deep and four (4) inches wide with a minimum of four (4) inches open area above the gutter lip. No part thereof shall be visible from a position directly above the gutter. 
(d)  Open gutters. Open gutters shall not be more than six (6) inches deep nor less than twelve (12) inches wide. 
(e)  Rollover or trough gutters. Rollover or trough gutters shall be provided with a sturdy, non-corrosive, non-slip grate to completely cover the trough. The grate shall be securely fastened to the gutter during operation. Openings in the grate shall not exceed one-quarter (¼) inches. 
Sec. 13-197. - Disinfection and chemical feeders. 
(a)  Disinfection required. The water in each pool shall be continuously chemically treated with an approved disinfecting agent, with associated, approved equipment, whereby the residual can be easily measured by simple and accurate field tests. Each pool shall have its own, separate, disinfecting equipment. 
(b)  Hypo-chlorinators. Positive-displacement, peristaltic, or other approved types of hypo-chlorinators or chemical solution feeders used for hypo-chlorination shall be of sturdy construction, shall be able to withstand normal wear, corrosion and deterioration by disinfectant solutions, and shall be capable of continuous, metered feeding of required, approved solution on a twenty-four-hour basis. The feed rate shall be adjustable from zero (0) to full range. Hypo-chlorinators shall be capable of feeding an unstabilized chlorine dosage to the circulation flow from chlorine solutions at a pressure greater than the circulation system pressure. Fail-safe features approved by the department shall be incorporated to prevent the disinfectant solution from siphoning or feeding directly into the pool, pool piping, water supply, or pool enclosure if the circulation equipment is not in operation or fails. External "on-off" timers used in conjunction with hypo-chlorinators are prohibited. An adequately sized, corrosion-resistant, and appropriately labeled container with a tight-fitting lid shall be provided and used to hold chlorine solutions. Chlorine solutions shall be delivered down-line from the pool filter and, if applicable, the pool heater, to achieve an effective pressure differential. A hypo-chlorinator shall be required for any pool with a surface area greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(c)  Chemical feeders. If chemical feeders are provided to add pH solutions into return pool piping, they shall meet the requirements of subsection (b) above. A single feeder may not be alternately used for chlorination and pH control. Timers used in conjunction with chemical feeders are prohibited. An adequately sized, corrosion-resistant, and appropriately labeled container with a tight-fitting lid shall be provided and used to hold pH solutions. A chemical feeder shall be required for any pool with a surface area greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
(d)  Carbon dioxide gas. Pools utilizing compressed carbon dioxide gas for pH control shall adhere to all applicable local, state, and federal requirements. 
(e)  Chlorine erosion feeders. Only those erosion feeders specifically approved by the department may be used for pool disinfection. Erosion feeders designed for delivering stabilized chlorine shall be utilized for pools with surface areas greater than two thousand (2,000) square feet in conjunction with hypo-chlorinators for super-chlorination and chemical feeders for pH control meeting the requirements of subsection (b) and (c) above. Erosion feeders shall be capable of feeding a chlorine dosage to the circulation return piping. Each pool shall have its own erosion feeder, if an erosion feeder is permitted. 
(f)  Bromine feeders. Only those bromine feeders specifically approved by the department may be used for pool disinfection. Bromine feeders shall be capable of feeding a bromine dosage to the circulation return piping. Each pool shall have its own bromine feeder, if a bromine feeder is permitted. 
(g)  Other chemicals and methods. No other chemical for disinfection or pH control may be used unless the chemical is specifically approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the department following demonstration of all aspects of the disinfection and toxicological properties thereof. No other method of disinfection or pH control may be used unless listed by the National Sanitation Foundation, complies with the most recent edition of ANSI/NSF-50, "Circulation system components and related materials for swimming pools, spas/hot tubs," and is approved by the department. 
(h)  Gas chlorination prohibited. Chlorine gas cylinders are prohibited for use in all new pools. Existing pools using gas chlorine shall convert to an alternative disinfectant during any major renovation. 
(i)  Hand feeding. Whenever a pool is open to a member of the public, no disinfectant or pH control chemical may be added by hand, whether to skimmers or directly to the pool, as the sole or primary method of adding disinfecting or pH control chemicals. 
(j)  Automatic controllers. If an automatic controller for adjusting chemical levels is to be used at a pool, the device and connections thereof shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The device must be directly wired to the recirculation pump and a flow switch, such that when the pump stops, the chemical feeders are switched off. Automatic controllers must be submitted for approval by the department prior to installation. An automatic pool chemical controller, if approved for installation, shall not substitute for the requirement to manually perform onsite chemical pool water tests. 
(k)  Chemical storage. All pools shall have adequate, safe and secure dedicated storage for pool chemicals. If used, storage rooms must have ventilation with one air change every three minutes exhausted to the exterior away from occupied areas. Chemical vaults or storage containers must not allow a person to enter inside. 
Sec. 13-198. - Equipment room. 
(a)  Equipment room or enclosure. Pumps, disinfection equipment, filters, appurtenances and any other approved equipment shall be located in a permanent room, or completely enclosed area. The entry door shall open to the exterior of the equipment room or enclosure and shall be kept locked except for servicing the pool equipment. The equipment room or enclosure and any storage area used for pool supplies, additional equipment, or chemicals shall be kept clean, safe and adequately lighted. Approved overhead protection shall be provided to completely cover the entire equipment room or enclosure. 
(b)  Ventilation and drainage. Ready access, suitable drainage (such as a sump pump) and ventilation of fresh make-up air must be provided for all equipment rooms. The enclosure must be ventilated with outside air by a chlorine-resistant exhaust fan with vents that are located a maximum of four (4) inches above the floor level, equipped with automatic louvers to achieve cross-flow ventilation located at the top of the enclosure for admitting fresh air, and capable of providing one (1) enclosure air change every three (3) minutes. The exhaust fan shall be installed so as to exhaust the equipment room air away from the pool enclosure and adjacent inhabited areas. The entire enclosure shall have a concrete floor that slopes one-quarter (¼) inch per foot to a floor drain connected to a sanitary sewer. A hose bibb with an approved backflow prevention system shall be provided in the equipment room or enclosure. 
(c)  Equipment clearance. All equipment and piping shall be installed to facilitate servicing with minimal effort. Filter tanks shall be at least eight (8) inches apart, twelve (12) inches from walls, and thirty-six (36) inches from the ceiling. (Minimum eight (8) foot ceiling height). Clearance around all equipment and appurtenances must permit unobstructed, ready access for inspection, maintenance, and operation. 
(d)  Electrical controls. No switches, starters, panel boards or similar electrical equipment shall be located in areas accessible to bathers, except for therapy or booster pump jet or inlet timers and emergency shut-off switches that must be properly grounded. 
(e)  Zoning. In the event that a separate equipment room meeting the requirements of this section cannot be provided (building setbacks, zoning restrictions, etc.) and sufficient evidence of this can be given the department, the department may allow for a variance from the equipment room so long as the equipment is provided with a secure enclosure to prevent unauthorized access and is approved for such installation. 
Sec. 13-199. - Diving areas and equipment. 
(a)  Dimensions. Dimensions (width, depth and length) of the diving area shall be in accordance with anticipated use by divers and with the most recent edition of ANSI/NSPI-1, "American National Standards for Public Swimming Pools", or the applicable sanctioning organization recognized and approved by the department (see Appendix — Figures No. 1 & No. 2). 
(b)  Clearance. Diving boards or diving platforms must be installed no less than ten (10) feet apart (edge to edge) and no less than ten (10) feet from any pool side wall, or in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications, whichever is the greater distance. At least fifteen (15) feet of free, unobstructed clearance shall be provided above diving boards and diving platforms. 
(c)  Finish and use. Diving boards and platforms shall have a light colored, non-slip finish. Starting platforms shall be used only for competitive swimming, shall have a light-colored, non-slip finish, and shall be removed from the deck when not being used for their intended purpose. 
(d)  Safety. Approved diving equipment shall be installed only on pool types that are equal to or larger than the pool type designated by the manufacturer. Diving equipment shall be installed according to the manufacturer's instructions and specifications and this article. All diving stands higher than twenty-one (21) inches measured from the deck to the top of the secured end of the board shall be provided with stairs and/or a ladder. Steps and ladders shall be of corrosion-resistant material, easily cleanable and with treads that are non-slip and self-draining. Platforms and diving equipment of one (1) meter shall be protected with guardrails that shall be at least thirty inches [thirty (30) inches] above the diving board or platform surface and extend to the edge of the pool wall. All platforms or diving equipment higher than one (1) meter shall have dual guardrails that are approximately eighteen (18) inches from the bottom rail and thirty-six (36) inches from the top rail above the diving board or platform surface. All platform or diving equipment greater than one (1) meter in height shall have dual guardrails installed at a maximum of one (1) meter above the deck level and continuous above the board or platform, and in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. Diving equipment shall be permanently anchored to the pool deck. A sign stating "Only one user allowed on diving board or platform at any time" shall be posted at the base of access to the diving board. For access to a diving board or platform by a ladder, a sign shall be posted at the base stating "Only one user allowed on the ladder at any time." 
Sec. 13-200. - Lighting. 
(a)  Lighting required. Artificial lighting shall be provided for all indoor pools and any outdoor pools to be used after dusk. Lighting shall be adequate to illuminate the entire swimming pool and enclosure without glare. Electrical wiring, fixtures, and installation shall conform to all applicable state, county and local building code requirements. Ground-fault interrupters must be provided. Light fixtures located within the pool area shall be protected by a shatter-resistant lens. Underwater lights with a colored lens or bulb are prohibited. Supplemental lighting, such as fiber optics, shall not be considered as the primary source for pool lighting. 
(b)  Lighting requirements. Lighting in dressing rooms, sanitary facilities, and equipment rooms shall comply with the local code requirements. Pool and deck areas shall be lighted in accordance with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Underwater lighting. A minimum of one (1) watt underwater lighting per square foot of pool surface area shall be provided. Underwater light fixtures shall be installed so as to effectively illuminate the entire pool. 
(2)  Deck and pool lighting. A minimum of twenty (20) foot candles shall be maintained in service on all deck areas. A minimum of ten (10) foot candles shall be maintained in service on all deck and pool surface areas whenever the pool is closed. 
Sec. 13-201. - Sanitary facilities. 
(a)  Sanitary facilities required. Adequate sanitary facilities including toilets, urinals, lavatories and showers are to be enclosed in a bathhouse and are required at all new pools, except for those pools that meet the criteria stated in subsection (b) below. In determining the number of sanitary fixtures required, the minimum bathing load as determined by Appendix Figure No. 3, or the maximum bathing load of the pool, whichever is less, shall be used. Each pool shall have the "Maximum Bather Load" determined at time of plan review. The bathing load composition shall be assumed to be one-half (½) men and one-half (½) women. The bathhouse and sanitary facilities shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. A standard architectural drawing of the bathhouse showing the layout of the facility, the location of all fixtures, the flooring, including drainage and slopes, and any other pertinent information that the department deems necessary to ensure compliance with this article, shall be submitted for approval by the department prior to any work performed. Fixtures shall be installed in accordance with applicable plumbing codes and shall be properly protected to prevent cross-connections. 
(b)  Sanitary facilities. If all dwelling units or individual sanitary facilities, meeting the requirements of this article, are located within three hundred (300) inches of the pool, as measured from the inside the nearest pool wall, no additional sanitary facilities will be required. If sanitary facilities are provided but not required for bathers they shall meet all requirements of this article. If there is more than one (1) pool at a single address or property and all units are within three hundred (300) feet in any direction from at least one (1) of the pools, then no separate bathhouse is required. A shower with tempered water with a temperature range maintained between seventy (70) degrees F and one hundred four (104) degrees F, meeting local plumbing code requirements, shall be provided at each approved entrance into the pool area if no bathhouse is required. Footbaths are prohibited. 
(c)  Facility size requirements. Facilities shall be provided in proportion to the maximum bathing load (see Appendix Figure No. 3) based on the number of dwelling/living units outside a three hundred (300) foot radius as measured in any direction from inside the nearest pool wall. Separate facilities shall be provided for men and women. Family or unisex facilities will be allowed only when the minimum number of required men and women's facilities are provided. In calculating facility size requirements, the number of required fixtures shall be rounded up to the next whole number. 
(1)  Toilets. One (1) toilet shall be provided for each bather increment of one hundred (100) men or fifty (50) women. 
(2)  Urinals. One (1) urinal shall be provided for each one hundred (100) men. A toilet may be substituted for a urinal with department approval. 
(3)  Lavatories. One (1) lavatory, with tempered water with a temperature range between seventy (70) degree F and one hundred four (104) degree F, shall be provided for each one hundred (100) men or women. 
(4)  Showers. One (1) shower, with tempered water with a temperature range between seventy (70) degrees F and one hundred four (104) degrees F, shall be provided for each one hundred (100) men or women. Showers shall be an integral part of the interior of the bathhouse and located for bather use prior to entering the pool area. Shower floors shall slope one-quarter (¼) inch per foot to a drain and shall meet the same requirements for bathhouse floors as stated in subsection (e) below. An exterior shower shall not substitute for the minimum required number of interior showers. 
(d)  Location. The bathhouse to pool configuration shall be such that bathers must pass through or by the bathhouse as they enter into the pool enclosure. If the entrance(s) into the pool area is more than twenty-five (25) feet from the bathhouse, then a shower with proper drainage and backflow prevention is required at each approved entrance. A minimum of ten (10) feet of complying deck or walkway shall be provided between the bathhouse/sanitary facilities and the edge of any pool within the pool enclosure. 
(e)  Floors. Floors shall be smooth, impervious, light-colored, non-slip easily cleanable, shall have a slope of one-quarter (¼) inch per foot to drain(s), and shall be coved at the wall junction with ceramic tile or approved equivalent. A sufficient number and effective spacing of floor drains shall be provided to ensure complete drainage. A maximum of ten (10) percent of the total floor surface area may be any color. Any standing water in the floor shall not exceed a depth of one-eighth ( 1/8 )inches, shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area, and shall not remain on the floor more than ten (10) minutes. A sample of the proposed flooring material, other than concrete, shall be submitted to the department upon request for approval prior to installation. 
(f)  Walls. Partition walls shall terminate at least six (6) inches above the floor or shall be placed on a continuous raised masonry or concrete base at least four (4) inches high. 
(g)  Hose bibs. At least one (1) hose bib with backflow prevention shall be provided with a sufficient length of hose to service both the men and women's sections of the bathhouse. 
(h)  Water fountain. If provided, an approved, sanitary drinking fountain shall be conveniently accessible within the pool enclosure to all bathers. 
(i)  Light and ventilation. The interior of the bathhouse, including the sanitary facility area, locker or dressing area, and hallway, shall be well-lighted with a minimum of thirty (30) foot-candles (30 f. c.), as measured at floor level, of incandescent light or equivalent for each square foot of floor area, and shall be adequately ventilated with a minimum of one (1) air change every five (5) minutes. 
(j)  Solid waste disposal. An adequately sized, covered and lined trash receptacle shall be provided in each men and women's sanitary facility area. 
(k)  Bathhouse amenities. At all times, an adequate supply of liquid soap, toilet paper and paper towels shall be provided and stored in appropriate dispensers conveniently accessible to users. A minimum of one (1) diaper changing station for babies shall be provided in each men's and women's section of the bathhouse. Bar soap shall not be provided to bathers. 
Sec. 13-202. - Safety. 
(a)  Pool barrier. Each public and residential outdoor pool, including in-ground and above-ground pool facilities, shall be completely enclosed by a separate effective barrier. 
(1)  Construction. Examples of effective pool barriers are a fence, wall or building that does not permit entrance or access into the pool area. Barriers shall be constructed so as to facilitate control of bather entry into the pool area, to prevent unauthorized entry, and to prevent animals and unsupervised children from entering the pool area. The barrier shall not be less than five (5) feet in height, as measured from the exterior grade. No climbable objects shall be allowed within three (3) feet from the barrier measured horizontally from the exterior grade. At least two (2) contiguous, horizontal elements of the barrier must be separated by a minimum of forty-eight (48) inches of unclimbable, vertical space, as measured from the tops of the horizontal elements, with no projections or recessions exceeding one and one-quarter (1¼) inches to allow a foothold or handhold. The barrier shall not have any openings wherein a sphere, four (4) inches in diameter, is able to be passed through any portion of the barrier, either between barrier elements or from the bottom of the horizontal bar or element of the barrier to the finished grade. The barrier shall be installed in accordance with this article, approved plans, and, if applicable, the manufacturer's instructions. Barriers or fences composed of wood are prohibited, except for residential pools. No decorative elements within the required, complying fence material are allowed. Maximum mesh opening size for chain link fences shall be one and one-quarter (1¼) inches. 
(2)  Entrance. Entry into the pool area shall be at the shallow end of the pool through a self-closing gate(s) or door(s) that has a positive-latching mechanism mounted a minimum of forty-five (45) inches above the ground surface directly below the gate. The entrance gate must be able to self-close when opened four (4) inches or more as measured from the gate latch to the latching mechanism. 
(3)  Closure. When the pool is not open for use access to the pool area shall be prohibited by the closing and securing of all entry points. Pool covers alone will not satisfy this requirement. 
(4)  Construction. A detailed drawing of the barrier, including the barrier composition, placement, dimensions, elevations, and any other pertinent data as required, shall be submitted to the department and must be approved prior to installation. The barrier must be completely constructed prior to filling and/or operation of the pool. 
(b)  Pool operator. A pool operator shall be responsible for the operation of a pool. The pool operator shall be in full charge of all pool use and shall have authority to enforce all rules of safety and sanitation, and shall be responsible for the proper maintenance of the pool and all physical and mechanical equipment. The pool operator shall be trained in a pool operator' course approved by the department. Additional personnel shall be provided as needed to supervise other pools and facilities and to ensure bather compliance with pool entry conditions. The pool operator's name, telephone number, and address shall be conspicuously posted at the exterior of the pool area's main entrance. A fee may be charged for pool operator training by the department. The provisions for training shall become effective two (2) years after date of enactment of this article for existing pools and shall become effective immediately for new pools. 
(c)  Record keeping. Each pool operator shall maintain and make available for inspection onsite upon request a daily record of operating information, together with other data as may be required for each pool relative to operation of the pool. The records to be made available for inspection shall include data on disinfectant levels, pH, maintenance procedures, together with such other data as may be required by the department relative to maintenance of the pool. The certified pool operator shall be responsible for closing the pool when necessary and excluding unauthorized persons from entering the pool area. 
(d)  Lifesaving equipment. Each pool shall be provided with a Shepherd's hook attached to a non-telescoping pole, with a minimum length of fourteen (14) feet, and made with a blunt end. Each pool shall be provided with a Coast Guard approved lifesaving ring having an outside diameter of fifteen (15) to twenty-four (24) inches, firmly attached to a one-quarter (¼) inch to three-eighths ( 3/8 ) inch diameter throwing rope that is as long as one and one-half (1½) times the maximum width of the pool, or fifty (50) feet, whichever is longer. Additional sets of lifesaving equipment are required for pools longer than fifty (50) feet and shall be provided for each fifty (50) feet of pool length or major fraction thereof. Lifesaving equipment shall be mounted in a conspicuous place and be readily available for use and in good condition. 
(e)  Lifeguard chairs. If used, the chairs shall be located to provide lifeguards a clear, unobstructed view of the entire pool, including the pool bottom at its deepest point. Lifeguard chairs shall be secured from bathers when not in use. Portable lifeguard chairs shall be removed from the pool-deck edge and secured when not in use. Lifeguard chairs shall only be occupied by a qualified lifeguard at all times the pool is open. 
(f)  No lifeguard on duty. Where no lifeguard is on duty, signs shall be posted in a conspicuous location at or near the entrance to the pool area and within the pool area stating, in clear legible letters at least four (4) inches high, "WARNING - NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY." 
(g)  Telephone. An operable, hard-wired, weatherproof telephone, with direct 911 access or capability installed in a conspicuous location shall be readily available at all times within the pool enclosure. Directions to telephone locations must be conspicuously posted if the telephone is not readily visible in the pool area. 
(h)  Emergency telephone numbers. A list of local emergency telephone numbers including police, fire and ambulance shall be posted at the telephone. Alternatively, the telephone may be equipped with 911 speed dial access. The telephone number of the pool operator and manager and of the department shall be posted at the telephone. 
(i)  Emergency action plan. Each pool facility shall have in place a departmentally approved emergency action plan. A written copy of the emergency action plan shall be located to allow for immediate access in case of an emergency. The emergency action plan shall include a "Chemical Emergency Evacuation Plan," "Emergency Crisis Plan," "Water Rescue and Injury Emergency Plan," "Drill Procedures for Emergency Situations," and other emergency plans and safety programs. The plans shall be periodically practiced, but not when the pool facility is open. 
(j)  Electrical requirements. All requirements for electrical compliance shall conform to code(s) of all authorities having jurisdiction. 
(k)  First aid kit. Each pool shall be supplied with a readily available first aid kit equipped to treat at least fifteen (15) people and that meets OSHA (Occupational Safety and Health Administration) requirements for that size kit. The container shall be durable and weather-resistant, and shall at all times be kept supplied and ready for use. The first aid kit shall be mounted in a conspicuous location in the pool area, or secured by pool personnel on site knowledgeable of its whereabouts. If the kit is not in the immediate pool area, then adequate signage shall be posted within the immediate pool area with a minimum one-inch (1) high letters that clearly states the location of the first aid kit. 
(l)  Float line with floats. A tightly stretched polypropylene or nylon rope or float line with plastic floats shall be installed across the pool along the slope-break in pools where the depths exceed five (5) feet. The floats shall be spaced no greater than seven (7) feet apart. The floats shall be secured so that they will not move. The float line shall be of sufficient size and strength to provide an adequate handhold and support loads imposed by all bathers. The float line shall be securely fastened to recessed wall anchors made of corrosion-resistant materials. A float line shall also be installed to separate swimming from other areas within the pool, such as sliding, diving, or from an amusement area in a multi-purpose pool. A four-inch non-slip tile shall be installed directly beneath and for the entire length of each float line. 
(m)  Rules and regulations. Safety rules and regulations shall be easily readable and shall be conspicuously posted in the pool area. The lettering shall be a minimum of three-fourths (¾) inch, except as otherwise noted, and shall state the following: 
(1)  "No glass, sharp objects or hazardous materials allowed. 
(2)  "No animals other than seeing-eye dogs allowed." 
(3)  "Shower and rinse thoroughly before entering the pool." 
(4)  "No food or drink allowed within five feet (5') of pool." 
(5)  "Children must be accompanied by an adult." Minimum two (2) inch letters. 
(6)  "Bathers with open wounds, skin conditions, or any communicable condition not allowed" 
(7)  "No solo bathing" Minimum two (2) inch letters 
(8)  "Bathers shall wear bathing attire" 
(9)  "No spitting, spouting, blowing nose, or any bodily excretion allowed" 
(10)  "No running, rough or boisterous play allowed." 
(11)  "Maximum bather load _______." 
(12)  Hours of operation. 
Sec. 13-203. - Wading pools. 
(a)  Application. All sections of this article shall apply to wading pools with the following exceptions: 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  Location. A wading pool must be located so that a lifeguard or operator may easily keep bathers under surveillance. A wading pool shall not be located adjacent to the deep end of any other pool. If a wading pool is located within another approved pool area, and if a separate barrier is installed for the wading pool area, then clear visibility through the wading pool barrier shall be provided. 
(2)  Depth. The depth of a wading pool shall not exceed eighteen (18) inches. 
(3)  Slope. The bottom slope shall not be more than one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet. Wading pools shall be completely self-draining. 
(4)  Walk areas and decks. A minimum of ten (10) feet of complying deck surface shall separate a wading pool from any part of any other pool, as measured from the wading pool edge to another, nearest pool edge. 
(5)  Underwater lighting. Underwater lighting is not required for wading pools, but other lighting requirements as stated in the section "Lighting". 
(c)  Circulation system. 
(1)  Circulation. The circulation equipment shall be operated continuously on a twenty-four (24) hour basis to achieve the minimum requirement of one (1) turnover every two (2) hours. Fill and draw-type wading pools are prohibited from use. 
(2)  Skimmers. One skimmer shall be provided for each two hundred (200) square feet of wading pool surface area. Equalizer lines shall be installed at the lowest portion of the wall or in the floor, and be covered by a non-removable, approved grate. 
(3)  Inlets. A minimum of two (2) adjustable inlets shall be provided. The number of inlets shall be calculated based on one (1) inlet per ten (10) feet or major fraction thereof of pool perimeter. Inlets shall be evenly spaced either along the pool perimeter or on the pool floor. Wall inlets shall be placed as close to the pool floor as possible. 
Sec. 13-204. - Spray pools. 
(a)  Application. All sections of this article shall apply to spray pools with the following additional provisions: 
(1)  Construction. The bottom of a spray pool shall slope a maximum of one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet to an approved drain. The bottom of a spray pool shall be completely self-draining and allow for no standing water. Water attraction devices, if provided shall comply with the section in this article entitled "Interactive Play Devices." All play equipment shall conform to standards set forth by the most recent edition of the U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission, "Handbook for Public Playground Safety," which the department adopts herein by this reference, or the most recent edition of the American Society for Testing Materials, "Standard Consumer Safety Performance Specification for Playground Equipment for Public Use," which the department also adopts herein by this reference, and in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions for installation and operation. Depth markings and "No Diving" markings are not required. 
(2)  Circulation. The circulation equipment shall be operated continuously on a twenty-four (24) hour basis to obtain the minimum required number of one (1) turnover every thirty (30) minutes. All circulated water from the pool shall be collected in an approved surge device. 
(3)  Water source. Spray heads shall be served by an approved water source that has approved backflow prevention. Spray heads and supply fixtures shall not constitute a tripping hazard. Spray heads shall be installed so as to eliminate any possibility of their submergence. 
(4)  Location. Spray pools must be located so that the lifeguard or operator may easily keep bathers under surveillance. Spray pools shall not be located near the deep end of any other pool. 
(5)  Safety. Spray pools are exempt from the section in this Code titled "Safety Life Saving Equipment." 
Sec. 13-205. - Whirlpools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article for pools shall apply to whirlpools with the following additional provisions: Whirlpools that are emptied and cleaned after each single-bather use are exempt from this article. 
(1)  Depths. Water depth shall be no more than four (4) feet. No seat or bench shall be more than two (2) feet below the normal waterline. 
(2)  Slopes. Slope of the whirlpool floor shall not exceed one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet. The whirlpool floor, seat and steps shall be completely self-draining. 
(3)  Walk areas and decks. A walk area or deck no less than feet five (5) feet in width as measured from the inside wall of the whirlpool shall surround the whirlpool on at least one-half (½) of the perimeter of the whirlpool. 
(4)  Thermometer. All whirlpools shall have a non-mercury based, shatter-proof thermometer that is in close proximity to and can be viewed by bathers at all times. 
(b)  Circulation system. 
(1)  Circulation. The circulation equipment shall be operated continuously on a twenty-four (24) hour basis to obtain the minimum required rate of one turnover every thirty (30) minutes. One (1) skimmer shall be provided for each one hundred (100) square feet of whirlpool surface area. Air intakes for therapy pumps shall be protected with an approved screen or grate, shall be located within the equipment room, and shall have the intake opening installed at least twelve (12) inches from the surface of the floor. 
(2)  Inlets. A minimum of two (2) inlets shall be provided. Inlets shall be evenly spaced a maximum of ten (10) feet apart or major fraction thereof and located as close to the floor as possible or in the floor. No inlet shall be less than eighteen (18) inches below the normal water level. Hydrotherapy inlets shall be installed flush with the pool wall or floor. 
(3)  Main drain openings. Source water for hydrotherapy systems shall be through the main drains, a surge chamber, or other approved device. Sufficient flow area shall be provided so that the combined circulation and hydrotherapy full-flow velocity through the main drain grates does not exceed one and one-half (1½) feet per second. The main drains shall be spaced evenly and as far apart as possible in the deepest portion of the whirlpool floor. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. In addition to the minimum safety rules (see [section 13-202] Safety, sections (f) and (m), the following additional statements shall be required. 
(1)  "Elderly persons and pregnant women not allowed without written permission from their medical doctor." 
(2)  "Persons with any health condition not allowed without written permission from their medical doctor" 
(3)  "Persons under the influence of alcohol, drugs or stimulants not allowed in whirlpool." 
(4)  "Do not enter if water temperature exceeds 104 Degrees Fahrenheit" Minimum 2" letters. 
(5)  "Do not use for more than ten (10) minutes without exiting and "cooling down". 
(6)  "Enter and exit with caution." 
(d)  Safety equipment. Whirlpools with surface areas less than two hundred and fifty (250) square feet are exempt from the safety equipment requirements stated in section "Safety" (d) for swimming pools. All whirlpools shall have the following equipment: 
(1)  A clock, with a minimum twelve-inch face that shall be provided and mounted vertically so as to be clearly seen by all bathers in the whirlpool and whirlpool area. 
(2)  If used, the therapy or booster pump timer shall be mounted on a wall at normal switch height above the floor, at least four (4) feet away from the pool edge, equipped with a maximum timer limit of fifteen (15) minutes. 
Sec. 13-206. - Waterslides/splash pools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article for swimming pools shall apply to any pool used in whole or part as a splash pool for a waterslide(s) with the following additional provisions: 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  Design, construction and maintenance. All slides and slide components shall be constructed and maintained first in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications and this article so that they will not constitute a safety, physical or health hazard given its normal intended use and purpose. Design and materials used in construction shall be in accordance with proper structural engineering practice for providing a sound, durable structure. 
(2)  Flume clearances. The distance between the side of a flume exit and a pool side wall shall be at least five (5) feet and the distance between sides of adjacent flume exits shall be at least six (6) feet, or in accordance with the slide manufacturer's recommendations, whichever is the greater distance. The distance between flume exits and the opposite side of the pool, excluding steps and handrails, shall be at least twenty (20) feet or, in accordance with the slide manufacturer's recommendations, whichever is the greater distance. If more than one (1) waterslide or flume is present, then both flume terminals shall be constructed at least parallel to each other or to any pool sidewall or other pool structure. 
(3)  High-speed slides. Special provisions, approved by the department, shall be made in flume exit design, pool depth and pool width as measured from the flume exit, to safely accommodate high-speed slides in accordance with the slide manufacturer's instructions. 
(4)  Flume terminus. The flume shall terminate at a depth no greater than six (6) inches below nor greater than two (2) inches above the normal water surface level. The flume terminus shall be parallel with the vertical pool wall, or in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(5)  Depths. The operating water depth of the splash pool at the end of a flume shall be three (3) feet or in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, whichever is the greater depth. This depth shall be maintained in front of the flume for a distance of at least twenty (20) feet. 
(6)  Decks. Decks along the exit side of the splash pool and along at least one (1) side of the splash pool shall be at least five (5) feet wide. 
(7)  Access to slide. A surfaced walkway, steps or stairway shall be provided between the pool and the top of the flume. Ladders to the top of the slide, if approved, shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The access to the top of the slide shall be slip resistant and not allow for standing water, be separated from the flume by a physical barrier, set back far enough from the operating flume such that it cannot be contacted by users on the way down the slide. 
(8)  Lighting. For an outdoor water-slide used at night and for an indoor waterslide, adequate lighting shall be provided for all areas of the flume, in accordance with the Section, "Lighting." 
(9)  Volume of pump reservoirs. The pump reservoirs shall have sufficient volume, in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, to contain enough water to insure that the lower splash pool will maintain a constant water depth. An approved, automatic make-up water device, with backflow prevention, shall be provided for each reservoir. 
(c)  Circulation system. A water circulation system consisting of pumps, piping, filters, water conditioning, and disinfection equipment and other accessory equipment shall be provided in order to clarify, condition and disinfect the pool volume of water. The equipment shall be operated on a twenty-four (24) hour basis to obtain the minimum one (1) turnover every hour. 
(d)  Main drains. If main drains separate from the circulation system's main drains are used for make-up water for the slide, they shall be located at a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the slide terminus and shall comply with the requirements for main drains in Sections "Circulation" and "Piping and Hydraulics." The circulation system main drains shall be located no less than five (5) feet and no more than ten (10) feet from the slide terminus. 
(e)  Bathing load. The bathing load shall be calculated on the basis of one (1) person in the minimum required splash pool surface area, and a maximum of one (1) person for every thirty (30) square feet of pool surface area in those areas of the splash pool that exceed the minimum required splash pool area. If the slide is a component of a pool other than a dedicated splash pool, then the bathing load is one (1) person in the minimum required splash pool area, and the remaining pool area shall comply with the section, "Bathing Loads." 
(f)  Safety. At least one (1) person responsible for the operation of the slide shall monitor and be stationed at the bottom of the slide at all times the slide is open for use. If that person's view of the slide's entry is obscured at any point, then a second slide operator shall monitor and be stationed at the slide's entry point, or if the length of the slide or flume exceeds thirty (30) feet in length. Approved signage shall be posted that state; that at any time, only one (1) bather, or device with bathers such as a raft, shall be allowed on the slide after the previous user or raft has exited the splash pool or run-out; only one (1) bather or device with bathers, such as a raft, shall be allowed on the platform to the slide; and only one (1) bather or device with bathers such as a raft shall be allowed in the splash pool. Slide monitors shall enforce these rules. A key-operated, properly grounded switch to operate the pump supplying water to the slide shall be installed on the deck near the slide. An emergency cut-off switch for the slide shall be readily accessible to the slide monitor. 
Sec. 13-207. - Zero-depth entry pools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article for swimming pools shall apply to zero-depth entry pools with the following additional provisions: 
(b)  Construction. A zero-depth entry pool shall be designed and constructed so that the pool and the deck surface meet at a maximum slope of one (1) foot in twelve (12) feet, continuing to the deepest portion of the pool or slope break. Where the water depth in these pools is less than one and one-half (1½) feet, floor inlets shall be provided and spaced uniformly at a distance no greater than twenty (20) feet apart and located not further than twenty (20) feet from the point where the pool bottom intersects the deck, and not more than twenty (20) feet from any wall. A grated gutter, as described in the Section "Skimmers and Overflow Gutters," or other suitable, approved skimming system, shall be installed along the entire zero-depth entry at the normal water level, and shall be designed and constructed to accommodate variations in the normal water level. 
Sec. 13-208. - Indoor-outdoor pools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article for swimming pools shall apply to indoor-outdoor pools with the following additional provisions: 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  Separations. Removable, underwater separations between indoor-outdoor pools shall be constructed of a clearly marked, solid barrier made of plastic, such as Lucite, or other approved material approved by the department. The barrier shall be smooth, unbreakable, and shall not have any openings except an opening to allow bathers to swim through. 
(2)  Connecting channels. The connecting channel at the separation or barrier for bathers to swim through shall be a minimum of three (3) feet in depth and three (3) feet in height, as measured from the pool water's normal level, and a minimum of four (4) feet in width as measured at the normal water level. The edges of the opening for bathers to swim through shall be smooth and rounded, or have an approved, permanently installed protective sleeve along the entire edge. If the separation between the indoor-outdoor pools extends below the normal water level, then an approved, protective sleeve shall completely encase the entire edge of the separation at a minimum height of twelve (12) inches. The protective sleeve and the separation or barrier combined shall extend below the normal water level less than twelve (12) inches. 
(3)  Separate pools. If each pool is designed to be physically separated, then each portion of an indoor-outdoor pool shall be considered as a separate pool, and each portion or pool shall be designed and constructed with its own, separate circulation system, appurtenances, decking, safety equipment, and other required equipment in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Ingress and egress. The pools, deck and the physical separation between the two pools shall be designed and constructed to enable ready access and egress. If the deck-to-deck distance at the separation or barrier exceeds six (6) feet, then an approved, taut, secured safety rope or handrail shall be attached to the entire length of the separation or barrier, except for the opening that bathers pass through. The rope or handrail shall be installed above, and within, six (6) inches of the normal water level. 
Sec. 13-209. - Interactive play devices. 
(a)  Construction. The interactive play device's design and construction shall provide for a safe and sanitary recreational environment for its users. The design and construction of the devices or play equipment shall be in accordance with this article, approved by the department and complies with the standards of the American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) or other, similar certified agency. Installation of interactive play devices shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and approved by the department. Interactive play devices shall be designed, installed, and maintained so that the surfaces are smooth, non-toxic and easily cleanable. The devices shall not pose a health or safety hazard to users or bathers, and shall not interfere with the circulation or disinfection of the water. 
(b)  Circulation. Any apparatus, device or equipment that discharges water into the pool or that uses the pool as a source of water for the operation of the device shall either use only water that has been filtered and disinfected prior to being discharged into a pool, or shall have a separate disinfection system for the device approved by the department. If water for the device is not taken directly from the pool, then the water for the device shall be circulated through a separate system consisting of pump(s), filter(s), disinfection equipment, and other appurtenances, as required by the department and this article. This includes, but is not limited to, spray guns, "mushrooms," buckets, water wheels, and other similar devices. Any water being discharged into pool water, or that makes contact with users or bathers, shall have the same minimum level of disinfection that is required for the type of pool that the device is installed within, as required in the section [13-197], "Disinfection and chemical feeders." 
Sec. 13-210. - Special purpose pools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article for swimming pools shall apply to special purpose pools with the following additional provisions: 
(b)  Construction. The design and construction of these special purpose pools shall be based on their intended purpose and use and upon sound public health and engineering principles, and shall not pose a health or safety hazard to the users. Special purpose pools shall be reviewed by the department on an individual basis for intended use and construction. Therefore, unique or special features may be permitted, such as a ramp to allow physically challenged individuals access and egress from the pool in lieu of steps or a ladder. The bathing load may be limited and shall be determined by the department, based on the purpose or intended use of the pool. The purpose of the pool shall be clearly stated on the plans when submitted to the department. A sign, with minimum one (1) inch high, black letters on a white background, stating the purpose of the pool and the bathing load, shall be conspicuously posted at the entrance to the pool area. 
(c)  Operation. Special purpose pools are prohibited for general recreational use, without prior written approval from the department. 
Sec. 13-211. - Multi-purpose pools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article that apply to swimming pools shall apply to multi-purpose pools with the following additional provisions: 
(1)  Design, construction and operation. The design, construction and operation of each portion of a multi-purpose pool shall comply with the pertinent section(s) of this article concerning Construction Approval, Piping and Hydraulics, Filters, Disinfection and Chemical Feeders, Lighting, and Safety. 
(2)  Circulation. The turnover rate for multi-purpose pools shall be a minimum of four (4) hours. 
Sec. 13-212. - Wave pools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article that apply to swimming pools shall apply to special purpose pools with the following provisions: 
(1)  Operation. The generation of waves more than three (3) feet in height above the normal, calm water level, regardless of the depth of the pool, shall not continue for more than fifteen (15) minutes at a time, with a minimum of three (3) minutes of calm water or no waves between each fifteen-minute period. 
(2)  Circulation. The turnover rate for wave pools shall be a minimum of three (3) hours. 
(3)  Access. Bathers must gain access to a wave pool only at the shallow end. The sides of the pool must be guarded from unauthorized entry into the pool by an approved barrier. 
(4)  Handholds. Each wave pool must be provided with approved handholds at the static water level. Handholds must be self-draining and must be installed so that their outer edge is flush with the pool wall. The design of handholds must ensure that body extremities will not become entangled. 
(5)  Life jackets. Life jackets must be provided free for use by bathers upon request. 
(6)  Lifeguard. Qualified lifeguard(s) shall be stationed at the wave pool during operation per the American Red Cross Guidelines. 
(7)  Shut-off switch. A clearly labeled emergency shut-off switch for control of wave action shall be installed and readily accessible to each of the required lifeguard(s) on duty. 
(8)  Warning system. An audible and visible warning system must be provided at the wave pool area to alert users of the beginning of wave generation and sufficient time before the beginning of wave generation for bathers to exit the pool. 
(9)  Stepholes and handrails. Stepholes and handrails must be provided at one (1) or more locations along the wall of the wave pool. The stepholes and handrails must extend down the pool wall so they will be accessible during wave generation at the lowest water level. The distance between the handrail and the pool wall must not exceed six (6) inches. 
Sec. 13-213. - Watercourse pools. 
(a)  Application. All elements of this article that apply to swimming pools shall apply to special purpose pools with the following provisions: 
(1)  Handrails, steps, stairs, booster inlets. Handrails, steps, stairs, and booster inlets for watercourse pools must not protrude into the watercourse. 
(2)  Shape. The watercourse must not be narrower than twelve (12) feet and not deeper than three and one half (3½) feet at any point. 
(3)  Egress. An approved method of exiting the watercourse must be provided at least every two hundred (200) feet along the watercourse. 
(4)  Deck. An approved deck must be provided along at least one (1) side of the entire watercourse according to the Construction, Decking section [13-188(h)]. 
(5)  Circulation. The turnover rate for watercourse pools shall be a minimum of four (4) hours. 
(6)  Velocity. The design velocity of the water in the watercourse must not exceed two (2) miles per hour. 
Sec. 13-214. - New equipment, construction and materials. 
The department may allow test grants, conditional construction permits or conditional permits for new designs, new equipment, new materials, or new processes proposed for use or installation in new or existing pools, if satisfactory proof is submitted to the department that sound engineering and public health principles are complied with as determined by the department. Performance guarantees shall be required. Conditional permits shall require satisfactory performance in the field for a defined time to be established by the department before a final permit is issued. The department reserves the right to revoke any temporary permit if satisfactory performance cannot be demonstrated in accordance with the current policy and procedures addressing new products and processes and this article. A fee shall be required for each evaluation in accordance with the department's current fee schedule. 
Sec. 13-215. - Grandfathering and upgrade provisions. 
The requirements of this article shall apply to all new pools approved for construction and/or major modifications or renovation after the date of enactment of this article. For existing pools, the following requirements shall become effective on January 1, 2007: disinfection standards, main drain requirements, depth, no diving requirements, certifications, storage, rules, signage, life-saving equipment and emergency action plans. For existing pools, all other requirements of this article shall be required to be implemented if any major modification of the pool is undertaken, or shall be implemented if a particular item or piece of equipment is in need of repair. 
This article shall become effective ninety (90) days after adoption by the board of commissioners and approval by the chief executive officer. 
Sec. 13-216. - Procedural due process rights. 
As required by O.C.G.A. § 31-40-4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this article may secure review by appeal to the Georgia Department of Human Resources in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq., and as may be hereafter be amended. 
Sec. 13-217. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or entity to violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
Sec. 13-218. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all matters affecting or related to the regulation of swimming pools in DeKalb County. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Code specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. 
(b)  The board of health, its officers, agents, and employees are responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation of this article, and upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Secs. 13-219—13-245. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ON-SITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-15, Pt. I, adopted Feb. 22, 2000, deleted Art. IX of this chapter in its entirety and adopted new provisions as Art. IX. Former Art. IX, §§ 13-246—13-262, 13-269, 13-270, 13-275, pertained to on-site sewage disposal systems and derived from Ord. No. 90-10, § 1, adopted May 22, 1990. 

Sec. 13-246. - Adoption of state rules and regulations. 
Chapter 290-5-26 of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, in its entirety, is adopted by reference as if set out fully in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, Pt. 1, 2-22-00) 
Sec. 13-247. - Minimum lot size. 
Minimum lot size for purposes of installation of an on-site sewage management system shall be twenty-five thousand five hundred (25,500) square feet with maximum slope of twenty-five (25) percent for each individual lot. The minimum lot size refers to square footage of contiguous usable soils. Where a lot is comprised of more than one (1) soil type, approval will be based on the soil type comprising the majority of the lot. Site plans may be submitted for review in cases where alternatives are proposed to overcome the limitations presented by noncontiguous soils. Sufficient unobstructed land area meeting all requirements for the installation of a replacement sewage management system absorption field is required in addition to the area for the original installation. Flood plains, areas within fifty (50) feet of the normal watermark of any body of water, and the right-of-way of any street or road shall not be included. Paved areas, easements, recorded buffer zones, buildings, parking lots or other areas may be excluded after examination by the health director if a condition exists which may adversely affect the location, installation, or operation of an onsite sewage management system. Should any portion of this section be in conflict with any other ordinance, rule, regulation or law, then the provisions of this section shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, Pt. 1, 2-22-00) 
Sec. 13-248. - Prohibited uses. 
An on-site sewage disposal system shall not be installed on a lot developed for or used for the following: Multiple dwellings as defined in section 7-351 of the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia; food service establishments as defined in Chapter 13, Article X, of the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia; hotels and motels; schools; child or adult day care facilities with more than six (6) clients; nursing care facilities; personal care homes with more than six (6) clients; and other residential facilities containing food service establishments as previously defined in this section; commercial laundries; and funeral homes. Facilities which discharge or propose to discharge special wastes, such as heavy metals and other hazardous materials, may be prohibited from installing or utilizing an on-site sewage disposal system or may be required to provide pre-treatment after review by the health director. 
(Ord. No. 00-15, Pt. 1, 2-22-00) 
Secs. 13-249—13-280. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FOOD SERVICE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-07, Pt. I, adopted April 8, 2008, amended Art. X in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Art. X derived from Ord. No. 89-24, § 1, adopted June 27, 1989; Ord. No. 99-13, Pt. I, adopted May 25, 1999; Ord. No. 01-01, Pt. I, adopted Feb. 13, 2001; and Ord. No. 01-24, Pt. I, adopted Aug. 28, 2001. 
The rules and regulations referenced in § 13-281 are on file and available for inspection at the county health department offices. 

Sec. 13-281. - Rules and regulations—Adopted. 
(a)  All food service shall be in compliance with the July 31, 1995, rules of the department of human resources, public health chapter 290-5-14, Food Service as revised October 8, 2007, which rules and subsequent amendments are hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. As future new versions, editions and/or amendments of the Georgia Food Service Code are adopted by the department of human resources, as may be codified at chapter 290-5-14 of the rules of department regarding "food service," they shall become part of or replacement for the adopted code, rules, and regulations or standards and shall become enforceable as prescribed without separate adoption by the governing authority of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(b)  The rules identified in subsection (a) have been adopted by the governing authority with the following additions: 
(1)  Permit. 
(A)  Fees will be assessed by the DeKalb County Board of Health (hereinafter referred to as the "health authority"). Before a food service permit is issued or renewed, all required fees must be paid in the amount established by official action of the health authority and the DeKalb County governing authority, a copy of said fee schedule is to be maintained on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(B)  Food service permits granted by the health authority shall expire on June 30 of each year. Permit holders do not have an automatic right to renewal and such establishments must be in satisfactory compliance with the provisions of the Code for the granting of permits at the time of renewal. All required fees must be received by the health authority within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the permit. 
(C)  Permit holders who fail to satisfy compliance with the food service ordinance for DeKalb County or fail to submit fee payments as required, are subject to administrative closure of the establishment. 
(2)  Change of ownership of establishment. 
(A)  Change of ownership shall not include: 
(i)  Withdrawal of one (1) or more partners in favor of one (1) or more partners who were partners at the time of the permit issuance; or 
(ii)  Transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporate owner at the time of permit issuance which does not result in any person increasing stock holdings to a total of ten (10) or more percent of any class of corporate stock, or any other entity having financial interest in the entity; or 
(iii)  Interchanging of ownership names of a corporation such as parent corporation name versus subsidiary name. 
(3)  Certified food safety manager (CFSM)—Enforcement. 
(A)  Failure to comply with the requirement to employ a CFSM shall subject the establishment to legal action by the health authority which may include court action or suspension of the food service permit. 
(B)  The health authority may require the CFSM to complete a refresher course when continuous violations of the Code occur; a food-borne outbreak implicates food processed in the establishment supervised by the CFSM; or when the health authority determines that such a course is necessary to acquaint an owner or operator with current developments in food protection principles. 
(C)  After enforcement or penalty actions of any kind, the health authority may: 
(i)  Require the owner or operator to develop a risk control plan subject to approval that includes, but is not limited to: 
(I)  Identification of hazards in the day-to-day operation of the food service establishment; 
(II)  Development and implementation of policies and procedures to prevent food-borne illness; 
(III)  Food preparation activities and corrective action taken, as needed, to protect the health of the consumer. 
(ii)  Require an additional CFSM be on staff to allow at least one (1) CFSM manager to be physically present whenever the establishment is in operation. 
(Ord. No. 08-07, Pt. I, 4-8-08; Ord. No. 08-08, Pt. I, 4-8-08) 
Secs. 13-282—13-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - BODY CRAFT AND TATTOO REGULATIONS 

Sec. 13-300. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are defined. Where words have not been defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antiseptic agent means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA). 
Biohazard means any infectious agent(s) or parts thereof presenting a real or potential risk to the physical health or well-being of human or other species, directly or indirectly, through infection or indirectly through disruption of the environment. 
Body crafting means the practice of physical body alteration by permitted establishments and by licensed operators using, but not limited to, the following techniques: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. Body crafting does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Georgia State Medical Board, which shall not be performed in a body craft studio. Body crafting does not include the painting of the skin with tempura or temporary, non-indelible inks, paints or dyes. 
Body craft studio means any building or structure where body craft is performed. 
Body crafter means any person who performs body crafting. 
Body piercing means puncturing or penetration of the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion of jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening. 
Cosmetic tattooing means to mark or color the skin by picking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. Cosmetic tattooing shall include, but not be limited to, permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
County means DeKalb County, Georgia and includes the DeKalb County Board of Health and its duly authorized representatives or employees. 
Currently licensed health care professional means those professionals licensed by the State of Georgia to perform health care services and includes, but is not limited to, licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
Department means the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. 
Director means the director of the DeKalb County Board of Health or the director's designee. 
Disinfection means a process that eliminates many or all, pathogenic microorganisms, with the exception of bacterial spores from inanimate objects. High-level disinfection can be expected to destroy all microorganisms, with the exception of high numbers of bacterial spores. Intermediate-level disinfection inactivates Mycobacterium tuberculosis, vegetative bacteria, most viruses, and most fungi. Low-level disinfection can kill most bacteria, some viruses, and some fungi. Guideline for Environmental Infection Control in Health-care Facilities: Recommendation of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2003). 
Easily cleanable means composed of readily accessible, non-absorbent material and of such constitution, finish, and fabrication that residue may be completely removed by non-mechanical low friction methods. 
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
Hand hygiene means hand washing, antiseptic hand wash, antiseptic hand rub, or surgical hand antisepsis. Guideline for Hand Hygiene in Health-care Settings: Recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR); October 25, 2002; 51 (RR16); 1-44. 
Instrument means any hand piece, needle, needle bar, sharp, device, or other object that is used or may come into contact with a client or may be exposed to bodily fluids during body crafting. 
Owner means the person, partnership, corporation, association or any other form of business organization that owns, maintains or controls a body craft studio and who is responsible for the operation of the studio. 
Permit means the written authorization granted by the county to the owner to operate a body craft studio. 
Plan of correction means a written document that describes the owner's plan to correct deficiencies in meeting the requirements of this article. 
Procedure room means the actual room within a body craft studio where the body crafter performs body crafting. 
Sanitary means free of visible debris, residue, or contamination, and with reduced microbial contaminants. 
Sanitized means an effective antimicrobial treatment by a process that provides sufficient concentration of chemicals or other suitable method on surfaces for enough time to reduce the microbial count to a sanitary level. 
Sharps means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin or tissues. 
Single-use means an instrument or article which is reasonably anticipated to come into direct contact with blood and compromised tissue surfaces during its intended use. Such articles are not to be used on more than one (1) customer or client for any reason, and must be disposed of after use as soon as is possible without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body crafter, the client or the surrounding environment. The director shall determine and publish a list of instruments and articles that are considered single-use. 
Standard precautions means a set of guidelines and controls, published by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) which include specific recommendations for the use of gloves, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment when contact with blood or bodily fluids containing blood is anticipated. Standard Precautions apply to blood, all body fluids, secretions, and excretions, excluding sweat, regardless of whether or not they contain visible blood, non-intact skin, and mucous membranes. ( Guidelines for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol (1996); 17:53-80. Additional references include Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers. Morbidity and Morality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989; 38: No. S-6. Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures. MMWR , July 12, 1991; 40: No. RR-8. Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease. MMWR , October 16, 1998; 47: No. RR-19. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Blood-borne Pathogens Precautions Standard. 29 CFR 1910, 1030. In the event that the CDC, OSHA, or other primary reference or regulatory authority publish materials or amend regulations applicable to this definition, this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations, and recommendations. 
Sterilization means the reduction of microbial life at an order of 10 LOG 6 using equipment capable of delivering full efficacy to all surfaces within the unit chamber, including tubes, lumens, cracks, or other obscured surfaces, including those inside packaging. 
Sterilizer means a piece of equipment that performs the act of sterilization as defined herein. 
Sterilizer indicator means a device designed to give visual verification that sterilization temperature and/or pressure has been achieved during the sterilization procedure. 
Studio means a body craft studio. 
Suspension means the piercing of human tissue or skin with hooks or other piercing apparatuses for supporting or bearing weight, either human or object. 
Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as may hereafter be amended. The term "tattoo" also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-301. - Purpose and findings. 
The governing authority finds that the unregulated operation of body craft studios and tattoo procedures constitutes a health risk to the general public, and poses a significant risk of transfer of communicable diseases, infections, pathogens and other harmful agents to and among the citizens of DeKalb County. Substandard and poor sanitary conditions exist in the body craft and tattoo industry in DeKalb County, and these unsanitary conditions pose a health risk to the safety and welfare of the general public. These regulations include reasonable standards that will ameliorate the substandard sanitary conditions in this industry and serve to safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of DeKalb County and the individuals who utilize body craft and tattoo procedure rooms. The county finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety, and general welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-302. - Responsibilities of body craft studio owner. 
The owner shall comply with all requirements of this article, all requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1 et seq., and all applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, including, but not limited to, all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding the disclosure of ownership. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-303. - Body craft studio minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  All body craft studios shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained so as to protect the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
(b)  The studio shall be constructed in a manner to allow the customer receiving the procedure adequate privacy from observers; thus, the procedure room shall be separated by a fixed and solid door, wall, or partition extending from floor to ceiling from any other area including the waiting area. 
(c)  All body craft studios shall be separated by solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling, from any other room used for human habitation, any food service establishment, hair salon, nail salon, retail sales area, or other similar areas where such activities may potentially cause contamination of work surfaces in the body craft studio. 
(d)  Insects, vermin, and rodents shall not be present in, on, or upon any part of the body craft studio, building, or premises. Effective pest control measures shall be taken by the owner to prevent the breeding or presence of insects, vermin, and rodents on the premises. 
(e)  The body craft studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation that complies with all applicable provisions of this Code and any other applicable state and local building code. 
(f)  Walls and ceilings of the procedure room shall be painted or covered in a manner which allows for effective cleaning. All paint and coverings shall be light in color. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be painted or covered in a manner which allows them to be easily cleanable. 
(g)  Floors shall be constructed of approved, nonabsorbent material, which will allow for effective cleaning and disinfection. Floors in the procedure room areas shall not be covered by carpet or wood. 
(h)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility with a self-closing door and exhaust fan shall be made accessible to customers. Such facilities shall be separate from the procedure room. 
(i)  The procedure room shall be equipped with facilities to enable effective hand hygiene using methods currently approved and recommended by the CDC, such as a brushless alcohol-based scrub system or a sink providing hot and cold water under pressure through a mixing valve with no aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls. These facilities shall be for the use of the body crafter for sanitizing his or her hands and preparing customers for the application of body crafting. This area shall be supplied with the supplies necessary to prepare for and perform body crafting procedures as defined in this document. 
(j)  An equipment-washing sink shall be provided in the studio, distinct from the hand sinks, and shall be located in the equipment handling and assembly area. This sink shall meet National Safety Foundation standards. 
(k)  The procedure room shall be equipped with an artificial light source equivalent to at least twenty (20) lumens, three (3) feet off the floor. Body craft procedure areas, and equipment handling and assembly areas shall be equipped with an artificial light source equivalent to one hundred (100) lumens at the level where the procedure is performed. 
(l)  The body craft studio shall utilize a hot water heater, capable of continuously heating water to one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit and maintaining such temperature, to provide hot water to the studio. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-304. - Body crafting not allowed in mobile, transitory facilities. 
Body crafting shall not be allowed to occur in automobiles, mobile, transitory, or other non-fixed facilities. Such non-fixed facilities include, mobile homes, tents, recreational vehicles, and trailers. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-305. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the body craft studio shall be maintained in a sanitary condition, intact, and functional at all times. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for the storage of instruments, dyes, pigments, single-use articles, carbon, stencils, jewelry, studs, and other supplies shall be provided for each procedure room and shall be designed, manufactured, and maintained in a manner so as to protect the contents from blood and bodily fluid contamination. 
(c)  Appropriate furnishings shall be provided for each procedure room. Surfaces of all furnishings shall be constructed of material, which is smooth, light-colored, nonporous, nonabsorbent, corrosion-resistant, and easily capable of being cleaned and disinfected. 
(d)  Furnishings shall be disinfected with an EPA-approved disinfectant after each body crafting procedure. 
(e)  Smoking, eating, or drinking by anyone is prohibited in the procedure room where body crafting procedures are performed, except as required to ensure the health and safety of the body crafting professional and/or the client. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-306. - Body craft studio supplies. 
(a)  Single-use sterile articles shall be in an uncompromised, sterilized condition at the time of their use, either by processing in a unit that meets the requirements for a sterilizer as defined herein, or packaged and sterilized by the manufacturer in an FDA approved facility. These articles shall be handled in such fashion as to prevent their contamination including all requirements defined by this ordinance and shall be stored in an area separate from chemical supplies and facilities utilizing open supplies of running water. 
(b)  Any jewelry used in any body crafting procedure shall consist of a material rated by the American Society for Testing Materials or the International Standards Organization as being suitable for permanent surgical implant, such as stainless steel, titanium, niobium, solid platinum or a dense low porosity plastic such as Tygon or PTFE. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards must be available for inspection on request of the director. Solid 14 karat, or higher, white or yellow nickel-free gold may also be used. Purity verification must be available for inspection on request of the director. 
(c)  Only single-use sterile gauze shall be used. 
(d)  Single-use articles shall not be used on more than one (1) client or customer for any reason, and must be disposed of after use as soon as possible without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body crafter, the client, or the surrounding environment. The director shall determine and publish a list of instruments and articles that are considered single-use. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-307. - Dyes and pigments. 
(a)  Dyes and pigments shall be dispensed into single-use containers. 
(b)  After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded, along with the container, into a biohazard container. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-308. - Body crafting procedure. 
(a)  Body crafters shall comply with all standard precautions, as that term is defined in this article. 
(b)  Body crafters shall remove all jewelry, such as watches, rings, etc., prior to beginning any body craft procedure. Body crafters shall also secure their hair using a hat, cap, net, or holder prior to beginning a procedure. 
(c)  Prior to performing body crafting on each client, the body crafter shall ensure that his/her fingernails are closely trimmed and shall perform hand hygiene. This includes use of a CDC-approved method of hand decontamination (such as a brushless based system), washing the hands, or other means of hand hygiene through use of provided procedure room facilities as defined and required in this article. 
(d)  Prior to the start of any craft procedure, the body crafter shall inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, lesions, scabs and abrasions. If a cut, sore, lesion, or an abrasion is detected a bandage shall be applied for added protection before gloving. 
(e)  Single-use medical gloves shall be worn during the body crafting procedure. They shall be donned in such a fashion that their integrity is not compromised. They shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or their integrity has been compromised in such a fashion that they pose a contamination risk to the body crafter, client, or the surrounding environment. The body crafter shall perform hand hygiene before donning and after removing each set of gloves. 
(f)  When exposure to blood or other potentially infectious materials is anticipated, the body crafter shall adhere to standard precautions. Items such as eye protection, masks, disposable lap towels, smocks, aprons, and sleeve protectors shall be made available and utilized as required by standard precautions as defined herein. 
(g)  Body crafters who are experiencing symptoms of illness including, but not limited to, diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, jaundice, or skin infections shall refrain from performing any form of body crafting. 
(h)  To minimize exposure to infectious body fluids, solution used during procedures shall be sprayed onto a clean towel and applied to client or applied using a squeeze bottle. 
(i)  Only single-use razors shall be used to shave the area of the body where the body crafting procedure will be performed. 
(j)  All sharps used in body crafting procedures shall be sterile at the time of the procedure. All sharps shall be visually inspected for integrity before and after use. If a sharp is not intact prior to use it shall be discarded. If a sharp is not intact or is not accounted for after use, the client shall be immediately notified and instructed to seek medical attention. The event shall be noted in the client's record. 
(k)  All fixed surfaces contaminated with blood shall be cleaned according to the OSHA blood-borne pathogens requirements, and then disinfected using an EPA-approved tuberculoidicidal disinfectant. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-309. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Instrument cleaning. 
(1)  All non-single-use, non-disposable instruments shall be sterilized after each use according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  Employees shall wear heavy-duty, multi-use, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments. 
(3)  Used instruments shall be soaked in an enzymatic solution or cool water until cleaning can be performed. 
(4)  Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning. 
(5)  All instrument components shall be cleaned, either manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specific to the type of cleaning performed. 
(b)  Instrument packaging. 
(1)  Employees shall wear clean gloves while packaging or wrapping instruments. 
(2)  Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a sterilizer indicator on each package. 
(3)  All packages shall be labeled with the time and date of sterilization. Packages shall no longer be considered sterile if the integrity of the package is damaged. 
(c)  Instrument sterilization. 
(1)  Except as provided in this subsection, all studios shall utilize a sterilizer that shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer to achieve the sterilization definition. 
(2)  The operator's manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises at all times and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(3)  The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(4)  A sterilizer load log shall be maintained according to the manufacturer's recommendations for the life of the facility and made available for inspection by the director and the customer or client. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load: 
(A)  A description of instruments contained in the load; 
(B)  The date of sterilization, and time if more than one (1) load is processed in a single day; 
(C)  Manufacturer's recommended cycle data; 
(D)  An indication of the proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; 
(E)  Any action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur; 
(F)  Maintenance log, including: 
(i)  Date of service; 
(ii)  Sterilizer model and serial number; 
(iii)  Sterilizer location; 
(iv)  Name of person requesting service; 
(v)  Description of malfunctions; 
(vi)  Name of person performing maintenance; 
(vii)  Description of services and parts replaced; 
(viii)  Results of biologic validation and testing; 
(ix)  Signature and title of person acknowledging completed work. 
(d)  Sterilization monitoring. 
(1)  Sterilizer monitoring shall be performed at least monthly, unless the manufacturer specifies more frequent monitoring, or after forty (40) hours of usage, whichever comes first, by using a commercial biological monitoring (spore) system. 
(2)  All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the studio, with reports sent to the studio. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained on the premises for the life of the studio and must be available for inspection by the director at all times. 
(4)  Upon notification of a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function and the owner shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately upon receipt of the positive report. Three (3) consecutive passed biological tests must be achieved before the studio is reopened. The studio shall have the option to obtain a properly functioning sterilizer in order to remain open. 
(e)  Instrument storage. 
(1)  Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized instruments. 
(2)  After sterilization, the instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area reserved for storage of sterilized instruments. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-310. - Tattoo preparation and care. 
(a)  Before placing the tattoo design on the client's skin, the body crafter shall treat the skin area to be affected with an antiseptic. 
(b)  If a paper stencil is used by a body crafter for transferring the design to the skin, the stencil shall be single-use and disposable. 
(c)  If the design is drawn directly onto the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use sterile instrument only. 
(d)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with an antiseptic solution. 
(e)  After the area has dried, a layer of antiseptic from a single-use collapsible tube shall be applied. 
(f)  After the application of the antiseptic, a bandage shall be applied to the tattoo using sealed, non-sticking absorbent pads. 
(g)  The client shall be given written and oral instructions on how to care for the tattoo during the healing process. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-311. - Procedures specific to body piercing care. 
(a)  Before piercing the skin of the client, the body crafter shall apply an antiseptic solution to the skin. 
(b)  The client shall then be given both written and oral instructions on how to care for the piercing during the healing process. 
(c)  A facility that limits its piercing practice to the piercing of the lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems shall be exempt from the regulatory requirements of this article. Compliance with the requirements for this exemption may be verified by inspection at the option of the director. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-312. - Disinfection of the body craft studio. 
(a)  Each body craft studio shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(b)  The owner shall develop and implement a written cleaning protocol that includes appropriate methods of facility decontamination plus any tasks or procedures to be performed daily. This written protocol shall be based on the types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination present, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and their location within the studio. Adherence to the protocol must be documented on a weekly basis to be appended to the maintenance log. All workers shall adhere to the protocol. This protocol shall be available for review by county employees or inspectors during normal operation hours and to the general public upon request. 
(c)  All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA-approved disinfectant at the beginning of each work day, after completion of body crafting on each individual, and at the end of each work day. 
(d)  All protective coverings, such as barrier films, plastic wrap, and aluminum foil shall be considered single-use products. 
(e)  Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated on a weekly basis with a current, EPA-approved disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminated immediately. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-313. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Contaminated needles shall not be bent, broken or their structure otherwise compromised. 
(b)  Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture resistant waste container that is leak proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid. These containers shall be labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD" shall be prominently displayed. Sharps waste shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations regarding biohazardous waste. 
(c)  Biohazardous non-sharps waste shall be discarded in a biohazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with all applicable local, state, and federal laws, rules and regulations regarding biohazardous waste. 
(d)  Non-biohazardous disposable waste shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(e)  Non-biohazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of so as to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(f)  Self-closing waste containers lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for each waste container shall be located within each procedure room and restroom and shall be emptied at least once per day into a commercially approved dumpster. This dumpster must be picked up and emptied by a commercial contractor at least once per week. 
(g)  All sewage, including liquid waste, shall be disposed of by a public sewage system or by a sewage system constructed and operated according o the applicable provisions of this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-314. - Body crafter requirements and permit. 
(a)  All persons performing body craft in the county shall only perform such body craft procedures in a validly permitted body craft studio. 
(b)  All persons performing body crafting procedures must satisfy all of the following requirements prior to performing any body craft in the county: 
(1)  Current certification in emergency first aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training, from agencies licensed by the state or applicable federal authority. This certification is not required for body crafters who are licensed health care professionals; 
(c)  All persons performing body-crafting procedures shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the director. 
(1)  The permit application shall be on forms provided by the director and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in all respects, including the payment of any fees required. Application fees shall be set by the DeKalb County Board of Health and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(2)  The application for permit shall include the full legal name of the applicant, as well as any aliases ever used, current home addresses and telephone numbers and a copy of a valid driver's license or valid state-issued photo identification. 
(d)  Every owner must maintain on the premises of the body craft studio an employee application for each body crafter, which shall immediately be available for inspection by the director, and shall include all of the following information pertaining to the body crafter: 
(1)  Copies of emergency first-aid, CPR, blood-borne pathogen or infection control certifications; and 
(e)  The body craft studio permit must be renewed annually and expires three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date of its issuance. The permit shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in public view on the premises. Permits shall not be defaced, altered or shielded in any manner. The owner shall not post a reproduction of the permit issued. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-315. - Denial, suspension or revocation of body crafter permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation of the director or official action of the board of health, a body crafter permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body crafter permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The body crafter violated the conditions of the permit; or 
(3)  The body crafter committed any violation of this article. 
(b)  After a body crafter permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and the body crafter comports with all requirements of this article as determined by the director. 
(c)  No body crafter permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant if within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 31-40-4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this article may secure review by appeal to the Georgia Department of Human Resources in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-316. - Client records. 
(a)  The owner shall maintain a written detailed client record that describes the body crafting procedure(s) administered to each client for a minimum of five (5) years after the procedure. Client records shall be immediately made available for inspection by the director within seven (7) days of request. 
(b)  The client record shall be created prior to any body craft procedure being performed and shall reflect the client's name and signature, address, proof of age, body craft procedure performed, date, design, its precise location upon the body, and name of the body crafter(s) and other persons performing and assisting in the procedure. The client record shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose during the procedure and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of a valid state issued driver's license or photo identification must be obtained from the client and maintained in the client's record. 
(c)  Each client shall be provided with an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure and each client shall be required to sign the informed consent statement prior to receiving any body crafting procedure. The informed consent statement signed by the client shall be maintained by the owner in the client record, with a copy given to the customer. 
(d)  A "disclaimer of liability" form promulgated by the director shall also be signed by the client prior to the performance of any body-crafting procedure. The owner shall keep a copy of the disclaimer in the client's record, with a copy given to the client or customer. 
(e)  The client record shall also contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time the body crafting procedure is performed. 
(f)  The client record shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she has received, read, and understood a copy of an after-care procedures form. 
(g)  The client has the right to request and receive their entire client record. If the client's record is available on the premises of the body crafting facility the record shall be made available immediately upon request. If the record is not available on the premises, then the client's request for the client record must be fulfilled within five (5) business days. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-317. - Body craft studio permit requirement and application process. 
(a)  All owners of body craft studios must obtain a permit from the director. No body craft shall be performed outside the confines of a current and validly permitted body craft studio. The owner shall apply to the director for a permit to operate in DeKalb County at least thirty (30) days prior to the anticipated date of operation of the body craft studio. 
(b)  The permit application shall be on forms promulgated by the director and shall not be considered authorized or accepted unless and until complete in all respects, including the payment of any application fees. Application fees shall be set by the board of health. 
(c)  The application for a permit shall list the full legal names, home addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner of the body craft studio. 
(d)  Any individual or entity with any ownership interest in the body craft studio shall be fully disclosed, and the extent or amount of such ownership shall be provided to the director in the application for a permit. 
(e)  The application shall contain written proof that the studio complies with all applicable provisions of this Code, including, but not limited to, the county's building, gas, electrical, and plumbing codes and zoning ordinances. 
(f)  The application shall include the owner's written statement of policies and procedures that ensures that: 
(1)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall perform body crafting upon any person; 
(2)  Body crafters shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs while performing body-crafting procedures; 
(3)  No body crafting procedure shall be performed upon a person who reasonably appears to be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs; 
(4)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body craft studio, except service animals used by persons with legally recognized disabilities; 
(5)  Each body crafter who will perform body crafting at the studio shall have a valid body crafter permit. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-318. - Body craft studio permit. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to any owner to perform body crafting in any area of the county that is zoned for any type of residential use by the county's zoning ordinances. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued to any owner who is not in full compliance with all requirements of this article and any other applicable provisions of this Code or state law. 
(c)  The body craft studio permit must be renewed annually and expires three hundred sixty-five (365) days from the date of its issuance. The permit shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in public view on the premises. Permits shall not be defaced, altered, or shielded in any manner. The owner shall not post a reproduction of the permit issued. 
(d)  Permits are not transferable from owner to owner, or from business location to business location, or from person to person. 
(e)  The holder of a body crafting studio permit shall only hire, employ, or use individuals to perform body crafting who have complied with the applicable requirements of this article. 
(f)  Body crafting studio permits are the exclusive property of the DeKalb County Board of Health. Permits may be confiscated by the DeKalb County Board of Health, or its designee, in accordance with the applicable provisions of this Code or other applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-319. - Inspections. 
(a)  The director shall make all of the required inspections and shall issue written reports of such inspections. The premises of any body crafting studio and all records required to be maintained under this article shall be available for review and examination by the director and properly identified representatives of the county at anytime during normal business hours for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this article. The owner shall be responsible for having an employee who is knowledgeable as to the whereabouts of these records on duty at the body crafting studio during all hours of operation. 
(b)  Construction or work which is necessary to receive a permit shall at all times be subject to inspection by the director. It shall be the duty of the owner to ensure that all aspects of construction or work shall remain accessible and available for inspection purposes until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of any violation of the provisions of this article or of other applicable provisions of the Code which may at any time occur. Results of inspections shall not be presumed to authorize a violation or nullify any provisions of this article or of other provisions of the Code or other applicable law. Neither the director nor the county shall be liable for any expense entailed in the removal of any material required to be moved for inspection purposes. 
(c)  Before issuing a permit, the director is authorized to examine buildings, structures, sites, and records associated with the filing of an application. 
(d)  Studio inspection shall be performed at least two (2) times annually. Additional studio inspections shall be performed as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article. Each inspection will carry an inspection fee to be set by the DeKalb County Board of Health and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(e)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or whenever the director has reasonable cause to believe that a condition exits in a building or structure or upon the premises which is contrary to or in violation of this article, the director is authorized to enter the building, structure, or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this article. If such building, structure, or premises is occupied, credentials shall be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having ownership or control of the building, structure, or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the director shall have recourse to any remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(f)  A copy of the most current inspection report shall be posted in an unobscured manner in public view. The report shall be posted at eye level (five (5) feet six (6) inches), within fifteen (15) feet of the main door of the studio, and shall be approachable to within one (1) foot. 
(g)  If an individual becomes aware of a licensed body craft studio that is in violation of this Code, or other state or federal law, they may contact the director. The alleged violation will be investigated at the discretion of the director. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(h)  If an individual becomes aware of an unlicensed individual or facility that performs, or has performed, body crafting, they may contact the director. The alleged unlicensed individual or facility will be investigated at the discretion of the director. The name, address, telephone number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless otherwise required to be disclosed by law. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-320. - Denial, suspension or revocation of body craft studio permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation of the director or official action of the board of health, a body craft studio permit issued pursuant to any provision of this article may be denied, suspended or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application for a body craft studio permit contains false or misleading information, or if the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The premises covered by the permit are found to be in violation of any applicable provision of this Code, or other state or federal law; 
(3)  The studio is determined to be a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(4)  The owner or body crafter violated the provisions of this article; or 
(5)  Violations of the conditions of the permit are committed. 
(b)  After a body craft studio permit has been revoked, a valid permit shall not be issued until all violations have ceased and all changes, alterations, additions or improvements comport with all requirements of this article as determined by the director. 
(c)  No body craft studio permit shall be issued pursuant to any provision of this article to any applicant, business, or legally or organizationally related entity to the applicant if within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of any application under this article, the same applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity to the applicant requesting a permit has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 31-40-4, any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this article may secure review by appeal to the Georgia Department of Human Resources in accordance with the hearing requirements of O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq., and as may hereafter be amended. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-321. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or entity to violate any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed to perform body crafting unless that person is employed by a body crafting studio and holds a current body crafter permit. No person shall be allowed to perform body craft outside the confines of a validly permitted body craft studio. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for body crafters to be under the influence of any alcohol and/or drugs while performing body crafting procedures. 
(d)  No animals of any kind shall be allowed inside a body craft studio, except service animals used by persons with legally recognized disabilities. 
(e)  An owner of a body craft studio shall be deemed responsible for any act, omission or violation of this article committed by any body crafter in his employ, working upon his premises, or performing body crafting for the owner as an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-322. - Body crafting and tattooing of certain persons prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall perform body crafting procedures on an individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  No person shall perform body crafting procedures on an individual who is, or reasonably appears to be, under the influence of alcohol, drugs or other stimulants or depressants or is of unsound mind or body. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-323. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all matters affecting or related to the regulation of body crafting procedures and body craft studios in DeKalb County. Where, in any specific case, different sections of this Code specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. 
(b)  The board of health, its officers, agents, and employees are responsible for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to issuance of a violation of this article, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-324. - Effective date. 
Article XI of Chapter 13 of this Code shall become effective ninety (90) days after the article is enacted by the board of commissioners and approved by the chief executive officer. Completed applications for a body craft studio permit and body crafter permit received within six (6) months of the enactment of this Code section shall be approved or denied within ninety (90) days. Applications for a body craft studio permit and body crafter permit received after six (6) months of enactment of this Code section shall be approved or denied within forty-five (45) days. If approval is not obtained within the applicable forty-five- or ninety-day period, then the application for a body craft studio permit and body crafter permit shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Sec. 13-325. - No private right of action created. 
(a)  No private right of action is created in any individual or entity for or against any other individual or entity by the enactment of this article. 
(b)  No private right of action is created in any individual or entity for or against the county, or any of its agents, employees or contractors by the enactment of this article. 
(Ord. No. 05-13, Pt. I, 8-23-05) 
Secs. 13-326—13-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - REGULATIONS AND ADOPTED CODES 

Sec. 13-350. - Adoption of the rules and regulations certifying portable sanitation contractors and for other purposes. 
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 31-2A-6 et seq., and now and as it may hereinafter be amended, there is hereby adopted as if fully set forth herein the state regulations currently codified as Ga. Comp. R. Regs. R. 511-3-6-.01 et seq., relating to portable sanitation units now as may hereafter be promulgated by the Georgia Department of Public Health that mandate the permit requirements, certification of contractors, companies, providers, and individuals involved in the rental, servicing, disposal, maintenance, construction, and installation of portable sanitation units, and requires certified contractors to supply a minimum number of units during anticipated peak attendance at construction sites and for special events, now and as may be amended hereafter by the public health department. 
(Ord. No. 16-10, Pt. I, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 31-2A-6, 31-12-8, 31-27-9, 12-8-1. 
Chapter 13.5 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; land development; Ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 23; zoning, Ch. 27. 

Sec. 13.5-1. - Purpose. 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of DeKalb County is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
In order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
In order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and 
In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
The board of commissioners of DeKalb County hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 1, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-2. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.] 
Application for designation means a formal request in writing in a form specified by the historic preservation commission that the commission consider a property or district for possible designation as a historic property or historic district. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Designation means a decision by the governing authority of DeKalb County to designate a property or district as a "historic property" or as a "historic district" and thereafter prohibit all material change in appearance of such property or within such district prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission of DeKalb County. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind of texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
Governing authority means the chief executive officer and board of commissioners of DeKalb County. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area designated by the governing authority as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in this chapter. 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the governing authority as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in this chapter. 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Ordinance of designation means an ordinance formally proposed by the historic preservation commission for consideration by the governing authority after the commission has studied a proposed historic property or historic district and determined that they appear to meet the criteria for designation established in this chapter. 
Person includes any natural person or corporation. 
Preservation commission means the DeKalb County Historic Preservation Commission and hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 2, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-3. - Historic preservation commission—Creation and appointment. 
There is created a commission whose title shall be "DeKalb County Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter "preservation commission"). The preservation commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each of whom shall serve a maximum of two (2) consecutive three-year terms. All members shall be residents of DeKalb County for at least one (1) year prior to taking office and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in the preservation of historic resources, history, or architecture. At least a majority of members shall be licensed architects, landscape architects, or interior designers or professionals in the fields of history, architectural history, planning or archaeology. 
When appointing preservation commission members, the governing authority shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform county residents that an opening exists on the preservation commission, including the publication of a notice in the principal newspaper of general circulation in DeKalb County. The governing authority shall accept applications from interested individuals. Acting as a committee of the whole chaired by the chief executive officer, the board of commissioners shall review the applications, interview applicants, and recommend a short list of potential candidates to the chief executive officer. The chief executive officer shall nominate individuals for confirmation by the board of commissioners, as provided by law, within thirty (30) days of receiving recommendations from the board of commissioners. Should a member of the preservation commission be unable to complete a term of office, the governing authority shall fill the vacancy for the remainder of the unexpired term in the same manner as making initial appointments. An individual appointed to serve the remainder of an unexpired term shall be eligible to be reappointed for an additional consecutive three-year term. 
In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be determined by lottery as follows: two (2) members for one (1) year; two (2) members for one (1) year; two (2) members for two (2) years; and three (3) members for three (3) years. 
Members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members of the preservation commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 3, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-4. - Same—Powers and duties. 
The preservation commission shall: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all properties within its jurisdiction which have previously been placed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Georgia Register of Historic Places or which otherwise have the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the governing authority specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and O.C.G.A. Section 44-10-28; 
(4)  Recommend to the governing authority that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, object or work of art as a historic property or as a historic district be amended, revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the county, with the approval of the governing authority; 
(6)  Recommend to the governing authority the acquisition by the county of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of state and federal law; 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within DeKalb County and on general historic preservation topics; 
(8)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts or other persons, as the governing authority or the preservation commission may itself, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purpose of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal, and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the governing authority concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the Office of Historic Preservation of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources a list of designated historic properties and historic districts; 
(11)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and, with the consent of the governing authority, enter into agreements to do the same; 
(12)  Review and make comments to the state office of historic preservation concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places or the Georgia Register of Historic Places. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 4, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-5. - Assistance by county. 
The governing authority shall provide technical and clerical assistance as the preservation commission may require and shall maintain permanent and complete records of the activities of the preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 5, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-6. - Bylaws. 
The preservation commission shall adopt rules and procedures, such as bylaws and design guidelines, for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness. The preservation commission shall have the prerogative to adopt reasonable rules and standards without amendment to this chapter or the vote of the governing authority. The preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The preservation commission will meet at least monthly unless the chair determines that insufficient business warrants holding a meeting, in which case the preservation commission shall meet the following month. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
The preservation commission shall elect a chair and such other officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. Officers shall serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for reelection. The preservation commission shall elect its initial officers at the first meeting following their appointment and thereafter in January of each year. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 6, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-7. - Designations. 
Designation of places, districts, sites buildings, structures, objects, or works of art or historic properties or districts shall be by ordinance adopted by the governing authority, which shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Studies. The governing authority, a historical society, neighborhood organization, property owner(s) or resident(s), may request that the preservation commission initiate studies of individual properties or districts to determine whether they meet the criteria specified in this section of designation as historic properties or historic districts. The preservation commission may also initiate such a study or studies on its own initiative based on a review of the county's historic resources. Upon determining that such recommended properties or districts meet the criteria for designation, the preservation commission may submit an ordinance for designation to the governing authority in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Reports. The preservation commission shall prepare a report prior to submitting an ordinance for designation to the governing authority. The report shall contain, as a minimum: 
a.  A physical description of the property(ies) and/or district(s) proposed for designation; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance of the same; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (e.g. historic, non-historic, intrusive and other significant categories) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
These reports shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designation. 
(3)  Criteria. The preservation commission shall consider, but not be limited to, the following criteria when considering recommendations to the governing authority for designation of historic properties or districts. 
a.  Historic properties whether they: 
1.  Are an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
2.  Are one (1) of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
3.  Are a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to DeKalb County, the State of Georgia, or the nation; 
4.  Are a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the county, state or nation; or 
5.  Are currently on or have been declared eligible by the appropriate authorities for listing on the National Register of Historic Places or Georgia Register of Historic Places. 
b.  Historic districts whether they: 
1.  Have special character or special historic or aesthetic value or interest; 
2.  Represent one (1) or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one (1) or more eras in the history of the county, state or nation; 
3.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the county; or 
4.  Are currently on or have been declared eligible by the appropriate authorities for listing on the National Register of Historic Places or Georgia Register of Historic Places. 
(4)  Notice to state. At least thirty (30) days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic and at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing for such designation, the preservation commission must submit a report to the office of historic preservation of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources or its successor for review and comment, as required by O.C.G.A. Section 44-10-26(b). 
(5)  Ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property as historic property or any district as a historic district shall: 
a.  Require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the county and be kept by the county as a public record to provide notice of such designation in addition to other notice requirements specified by this section; 
b.  Describe each property to be designated, set forth the name or names of the owner or owners of the property and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
c.  Include a description of the boundaries of such district, list each property located therein, set forth the name or names of the owner or owners of each such property and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of any structure, site or work of art located within the designated historic district. 
(6)  Notice and hearing. The preservation commission and the governing authority shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three (3) issues of the principal newspaper of general circulation within DeKalb County and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice mailed to the last known owner of the property shown on the DeKalb tax records and a notice mailed to the address of the property on which residences or businesses are located to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
This published notice shall state the time, date, place and purpose of the hearing. This published notice shall also include the location or boundaries of the property or properties, the existing zoning classification and historic designation, if any, and a statement that the property could be proposed for historic designation during the proposal process. 
The preservation commission shall give notification of the proposal by mail to all abutting property owners as shown by DeKalb County tax records. Such notification shall be mailed not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for the public hearing and shall include a description of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearing. 
The commission shall cause to be erected a sign or signs giving notification of the date, time and place of a public hearing to consider the proposed historic designation. In the case of a historic property, one (1) sign shall be placed on the property visible from a public street. In the case of a historic district, signs shall be placed at each point where the district boundary intersects a public street. 
(7)  Recommendation to governing authority. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the preservation commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the governing authority. 
Following receipt of the preservation commission's recommendation, the governing authority may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(8)  Final notice. Within thirty (30) days following a designation by the governing authority, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the governing authority. The notice shall apprise owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. 
(9)  Moratorium. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the preservation commission shall notify the development division of the DeKalb County public works department and no permit of any kind shall be issued for work which would constitute a material change in the appearance of a structure, site, landscape or piece of art within the designated area until the proposed ordinance is enacted or rejected by the governing authority no more than sixty (60) days after the development division denies a building permit based on the moratorium. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 7, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-8. - Certification of appropriateness. 
After the designation by ordinance of a historic property or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of any building, structure, site or work of art within such historic district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or authorized agent unless or until an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted and approved by the preservation commission. 
(1)  Application for certificate of appropriateness. Owners of historic property or of property in a historic district, or their duly authorized agents, must make application for a certificate of appropriateness on forms and according to procedures promulgated by the preservation commission for such purpose. The Georgia Department of Transportation and contractors performing work funded by the Georgia Department of Transportation are exempt from provisions of this chapter. Local governments are also exempt from obtaining certificates of appropriateness but shall notify the preservation commission at least forty-five (45) days prior to beginning or undertaking any work that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness, so as to allow the preservation commission an opportunity to comment. All applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as required by the preservation commission. Notarized authorization of the property owner shall be required if the applicant is not the owner of record. 
(2)  Public notice. Prior to reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the preservation commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected materially by the application (i.e. any owner of adjoining property or owner of property whose property line is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the applicant's property according to the DeKalb County tax records) and shall give the applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the preservation commission deems it necessary, or upon the written request of the applicant or an abutting property owner, the preservation commission shall hold a public hearing concerning the application. A request for public hearing must be made by the applicant at the time of filing the application or by an abutting property owner within three (3) days of receipt of notice that an application is pending before the commission. Written notice of a public hearing shall be mailed by the preservation commission to all owners and occupants of the proposed property and all abutting property owners as shown by the DeKalb County tax records not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set for hearing of the application. 
(3)  Review of applications. When reviewing applications for certificates of appropriateness, the preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, historical and architectural value and significance; architectural style; scale; height; setback; landscaping; general design; arrangement; texture and materials of the architectural features involved and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style; and pertinent features of other properties in the immediate neighborhood. When considering applications for existing buildings, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects, including the Standards for Rehabilitation, shall be used as a guideline. 
(4)  Interior changes. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangements or uses having no effect on exterior architectural features. The preservation commission may delegate the responsibility for determining the extent of interior change and its effect on the exterior appearance to the planning director or his designee. 
(5)  Demolition. A decision may be made by the preservation commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites or objects. 
(6)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property, that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, is excluded from review. 
(7)  Approval. The preservation commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. The preservation commission may approve the application as proposed, approve it with modifications, or deny the application. The preservation commission shall approve, approve with modifications or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the applicant unless an extension is requested by the applicant and granted by the preservation commission. Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the preservation commission. Failure of the preservation commission to act within said forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval and a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued. 
(8)  Final action. The preservation commission's decision, whether to accept or reject an application shall be in writing. The written decision shall be signed by the chair or the vice-chair and must clearly set forth the reasons for the decision, including whether the guidelines have been met and specifically which factors, as set forth in section 13.5-8(3), were considered in reaching the decision. Approval of an application shall also result in the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who have filed a written request for such notice with the preservation commission. All work performed pursuant to a certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate and by other applicable laws. In the event work is performed which is not in accordance with such certificate or laws, the county shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within twelve (12) months of the date of the issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are not renewable. 
(9)  Revised applications. The preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action if it denies the application submitted. The applicant may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after making such modifications as suggested by the preservation commission. 
(10)  Prohibition on issuance of development permits. In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure, which would require the issuance of a permit of any kind, the denial of the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be binding upon the county and no permit related to the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be issued by the county. 
(11)  Official record. The preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the preservation commission's proceedings in connection with applications. Such records shall be maintained by the planning director. In the event of an appeal to the governing authority, the official record of the preservation commission's decision shall consist of the application, any accompanying drawings, renderings or photographs, written comments from planning department staff, written comments of any participant at the hearing before the commission and the preservation commission's written decision. Such records shall be available for review in the planning department within ten (10) days of a final decision by the preservation commission on the certificate of appropriateness. 
(12)  Appeal to the governing authority. Any person adversely affected by any decision made by the preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness (i.e. the applicant or any owner of adjoining property or owner of property whose property line is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the applicant's property according to the DeKalb County tax records) may appeal such decision to the governing authority. The appeal shall be limited to a review of the record of the proceedings before the preservation commission. The standard of review shall be an abuse of discretion. An abuse of discretion exists where the record presented to the governing authority shows that the preservation commission exceeded the limits of its authority or that the preservation commission's decision was not based on factors set forth in the section 13.5-8(3) or the guidelines adopted by the preservation commission pursuant to section 13.5-6 or that the preservation commission's decision was otherwise arbitrary and capricious. If the governing authority finds no abuse of discretion, then it may affirm the decision of the preservation commission. If the governing authority finds that the preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching a decision, then it may reverse the preservation commission's decision, or it may reverse the preservation commission's decision and remand the application to the preservation commission with direction. All appeals must comply with the procedures set forth below: 
a.  Any appeal must be filed in writing with the clerk to the board of commissioners using an appeal form provided by the planning director, within fifteen (15) days after the date of issuance or denial of the certificate of appropriateness. The appellant shall also deliver copies of the appeal to the planning department and the county attorney. 
b.  In the written appeal, the appellant must describe how the preservation commission's decision constitutes an abuse of discretion. Specifically, the appellant must, citing to the preservation commission's written decision, show at least one (1) of the following: that the preservation commission exceeded the limits of its authority, or that the preservation commission's decision was not based on factors set forth in the section 13.5-8(3) or on the guidelines adopted by the preservation commission pursuant to section 13.5-6, or that the preservation commission's decision was otherwise arbitrary and capricious. 
c.  In addition to the appeal form, the appellant may submit a written supplementary explanation in support of the appeal. The supplementary explanation shall be submitted with the appeal. The supplementary explanation may not exceed three (3) pages and must be typewritten and double-spaced using a twelve-point font with a one-inch margin on all four (4) sides. The governing authority will not consider text in excess of the page limit set forth herein. 
d.  Any adversely affected person may also submit a written supplementary explanation that must comply with all of the requirements set forth in section 13.5-8(12)c, in support of, or in opposition to the appeal. All written supplementary explanations authorized by this subsection must be filed within five (5) days after the appeal is filed. Such written supplementary explanations must be filed with the clerk to the board of commissioners with copies to the planning director, and the county attorney. 
e.  The planning department shall submit appeals of the decisions of the historic preservation commission to the governing authority for consideration at any of the board of commissioners' regularly scheduled meetings within forty-five (45) days of the issuance of the decision from the preservation commission. 
f.  The agenda item shall set forth the standard of review to be used by the governing authority in deciding the appeal. The official record of the preservation commission's decision together with the appeal and all properly filed written supplemental explanations in support and in opposition to the appeal, will be attached to the governing authority's agenda item. The governing authority may not consider any written document that is not attached as the official record to the governing authority's agenda item for the appeal. The appellant and any person who has filed a statement in opposition to, or in support of the appeal may attend the meeting and may be called upon by any member of the governing authority to provide information or answer questions. There shall be no other public participation in the appeal. 
g.  The governing authority shall render a decision on the appeal within thirty (30) days of the first appearance of the appeal on the board of commissioners' agenda. 
(13)  Appeals to Superior Court. An appeal from a decision of the governing authority shall be made by a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
(14)  Court action. The governing authority is authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or district. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 8, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 26-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 13.5-9. - Acquisitions. 
The preservation commission may, where such action is authorized by the governing authority, enter into negotiations with the owners of historic properties or of properties within historic districts for the acquisition by gift or purchase of ownership of the property or any interest therein. Final approval and ownership of these properties would be determined by the governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 9, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-10. - Failure to maintain historic property. 
Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The preservation commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings, structures, sites and works of art located in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. 
If the preservation commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance and repair, the preservation commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property shall have thirty (30) days to initiate the appropriate repairs. 
In the event that efforts to correct the condition are not commenced within thirty (30) days, the owner shall be considered in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to fines not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each day of violation. Alternatively, at the direction of the governing authority, the preservation commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 10, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-11. - Exceptions. 
Where by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of any specific property, the preservation commission in passing upon applications shall have power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions or to interpret the meaning of said provisions so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variance, modifications, or interpretation shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variations, the preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall be a situation beyond the control of the applicant, which is a problem unique to a specific property or in order to comply with this chapter, the person will violate another ordinance of DeKalb County. The burden of demonstrating the existence of the hardship by a preponderance of evidence shall be with the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 11, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-12. - Application fees. 
Each application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by the governing authority, a copy of which will remain on file in the planning department, to partially defray the public expense in processing such application. The fee shall not be required for an application filed by the county. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 12, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-13. - Penalties. 
Any person who does anything prohibited by the chapter as it exists or as it may hereafter be amended, or who fails to do anything required by this chapter as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation, shall be subject to punishment as provided by law. Each day this violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 13, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-14. - Severability. 
In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 14, 4-26-94) 
Sec. 13.5-15. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
This chapter is the Historic Preservation Ordinance of DeKalb County, and all other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 94-09, § 15, 4-26-94) 
Chapter 14 - LAND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Airport area development restrictions, § 6-201 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; historic preservation, Ch. 13.5; zoning, Ch. 27; local acts relating to planning, App. B, § 1101 et seq. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected to a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls is new construction. 
Aggrieved person(s) means a person(s) whose property is the subject of the action appealed from or a person's who has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
Agricultural operations means those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard, the preparation and planting of pasture land, farm ponds, dairy operations, livestock and poultry management practices and the construction of farm buildings. 
Alley means a minor way, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise fronting on a street. 
Appeal means a review authorized by this chapter of any final order, requirement, or decision of the planning director or the chief executive officer based on or made in the enforcement of this chapter, excluding section 14-39. 
Applicant means any person who acts in the person's own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
As-built drawings means amended site plans specifying the location, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of public improvements, including water, sewer, road and drainage structures and stormwater management facilities as they have been constructed. 
Bank (stream bank) means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
Basement means a space having one-half (½) or more of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half (6½) feet. 
Best management practices (BMP's) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Bicycle lane means that part of a street or highway adjacent to the roadway, designated by official signs or markings for use by persons riding bicycles. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the planning director may delineate the outline of the block. 
BNR means the board of natural resources. 
Board or board of commissioners means the board of commissioners of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or the supporting system. 
Buffer area means that portion of a lot set aside for open space and/or visual screening purposes, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the DeKalb County Code and all conditions of zoning, to separate different use districts, or to separate uses on one (1) property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. 
Buffer, county means an area of land fifty (50) feet in width immediately adjacent to the state buffer. 
Buffer, stream means the state buffer and the county buffer as measured horizontally from the top of the stream bank. 
Buffer, state means an area of land twenty-five (25) feet in width immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Buildable area means the area of a lot remaining after all setback requirements, including buffer areas, have been met. 
Builder as used in sections 14-135 and 14-136 means a person who constructs a structure or dwelling for residential occupancy by humans. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Building permit means required written permission issued by the development director for the construction, repair, alteration, or addition to a structure. 
Building setback line. Building setback line means the minimum horizontal distance required between the public right-of-way or the utility easement abutting a private street and the principal building or structure on a lot or any projection thereof except projections that are authorized exceptions to building set back line requirements in chapter 27 of the Code of DeKalb County and any zoning conditions approved by the board of commissioners pursuant thereto. The size of the utility easement(s) for a private street shall be equal to the required size of the public right of way and shall not be any smaller in width or length than what would be required for a public right of way. 
CPESC means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Caliper means the diameter of a tree trunk, applied only to new or replacement plantings, that is taken six (6) inches above the ground for up to and including four-inch caliper size, and twelve (12) inches above the ground for larger sizes. 
Certified personnel means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conduct continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Channel protection means the protection of stream channels, in accord with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, from bank and bed erosion and degradation by preserving or restoring the applicable stream buffer, by providing extended detention, and by integrating erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
Chief executive officer means the chief executive officer of DeKalb County or designee. 
Clean concrete means concrete that is free of added paints, insulators, reinforcing materials, sealers, asphalt, clay balls, soils, epoxy expansion material, or any other deleterious material that could potentially contaminate groundwater. 
Collector street means a street or road designated as a collector street in the DeKalb County Thoroughfare Plan. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Comprehensive plan means the DeKalb County Comprehensive Plan adopted by the board of commissioners, as it may be amended from time to time, which divides the unincorporated areas of the county into land use categories and which constitutes the official policy of the county regarding long term planning and use of land. 
Conservation easement means a restriction or limitation on the use of real property which is expressly recited in any deed or other instrument of grant or conveyance executed by or on behalf of the owner of the land described therein and whose purpose is to preserve land or water areas predominantly in their natural scenic landscape or open condition or in an agricultural farming, forest or open space use and includes conservation easements authorized by state law. 
Construction means any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development or changed use, including particularly any preparation for, building of or erection of a structure. 
Construction waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such waste includes, but is not limited to: asbestos-containing waste, wood, tree stumps, tree tops, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, glass, wire, plastics, and other typical construction waste products and refuse. 
County means DeKalb County, Georgia, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia. When appropriate to the context, the term "county" also includes authorized officers, employees and agents thereof. 
County arborist means the county official having the primary responsibilities of administration and enforcement of the tree protection ordinance. 
County zoning ordinance or zoning ordinance means the zoning ordinance of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Critical root zone means an area of root space that is within a circle circumscribed around the trunk of a healthy tree using a radius of one (1) foot per inch DBH. 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten (10) feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded, and which is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
DBH (Diameter at breast height) means the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of four and one-half (4½) feet above the ground. If a tree splits into multiple trunks below four and one-half (4½) feet, then the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the split. 
DNR means the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Georgia. 
DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System means a stormwater conveyance or system of stormwater conveyances that are all of the following: owned or maintained by the County; designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; is not a combined sewer; not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW); and not located within the boundaries of a city located within the county or owned or operated by any other government entity. 
DeKalb County Stormwater Management Manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Deck, elevated means an open, unenclosed structure elevated above pervious natural grade that is attached to the primary structure. 
Density factor means a unit of measurement used to prescribe the calculated required tree coverage on a site. 
Department means the development department. 
Design professional means a professional licensed by the State in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge of the stormwater, as that term is defined by state law, the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Manual or this Code. 
Detention facility means a facility that provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or storm. 
Developer means any person who acts in the person's own behalf or as the agent of an owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
Development means all activities associated with the conversion of land or the expansion of replacement of an existing use to any new use intended for human operation, occupancy, or habitation, other than for agricultural purposes devoted strictly to the cultivation of land, dairying or animal husbandry. Such activities include, but are not limited to, land disturbance (clearing and grubbing the land of vegetation and stumps, and grading) and the construction of improvements such as, but not limited to, streets, driveways or parking area, water sewer mains, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks or other structures permanently placed in or on the property. Where appropriate to the context, development also may be used to denote a specific subdivision or project which is a single entity or intended to be constructed as in interrelated whole, whether simultaneously or in phases. 
Development director means the director of the development department of DeKalb County or designee. 
Development permit means any permit that authorizes land disturbance for the use, construction thereon or alteration of any real property within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
Director means the director of the planning and development department, or his designee. 
Director, EPD means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the DeKalb County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage means the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area, either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owners of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
Drainage plan means a plan prepared using appropriate and commonly accepted engineering standards, which specifies the means for alteration or development of a drainage system. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Drainage system means the surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including, but not limited to, both the natural elements of streams, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, detention facilities that comprise the storm drainage system. 
EPD means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), and/or shear walls. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity and that conforms to the requirements of the Manual for Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia. 
Exceptional and historical trees means those trees or stands of trees which are exceptional representatives of their species in terms of size, age or unusual botanical quality, or are associated with historically notable events. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was completed before June 6, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years. 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which properly compacted soils have been added: the depth above the original ground. 
Final stabilization means that all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the usual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood hazard map means the official county map designating the elevation and boundaries of flooding and associated floodways under base flood conditions maintained by the county, based upon the flood insurance study for the county dated January 5, 1983 or any revision thereto, the United States Corps of Engineers or other reputable reports accepted by the roads and drainage director, and based upon competent engineering studies prepared by a currently state-registered professional engineer, or the county. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain in section 14-44.1 et seq. means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of a flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan; i.e., the regulatory flood. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot. 
Floor means the top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., the top of slab in concrete slab construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Footpath in section 14-44.1 et seq. means any unpaved, narrow and pervious trail in a stream buffer allowing for pedestrian travel. 
Frontage, lot means the distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. 
Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Georgia Stormwater Management Manual is the manual adopted by the board of commissioners that provides the criteria, technical design specifications and standards for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter. 
Governing authority of DeKalb County means the county's board of commissioners and chief executive officer. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Historic structure. See Chapter 13.5. 
Impervious surface means any surface that is highly resistant to infiltration by water, including but not limited to surfaces such as concrete or asphalt as well as most conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, and other similar structures. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the soil. 
Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement executed by an owner in a form approved by the director that will provide the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Intermediate regional flood (IRF) means a one-hundred-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every one hundred (100) years or having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. Also known as the base flood, or one hundred-year flood. 
Intermediate regional floodplain means the land area within the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year as defined on the flood hazard map. Also known as area of special flood hazard, or one hundred-year floodplain. 
Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 14-38(b)(3)e. 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one (1) plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement, piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design, or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Live detention means that quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of DeKalb County. 
Local street means a street used primarily for access to abutting properties in residential, industrial or other developments. 
Lot means a designated parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot, corner means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Lot, double-frontage means a lot that abuts two (2) parallel streets or that abuts two (2) streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot. A double-frontage lot may also be referred to as a through lot. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. 
Maintenance of detention facility means preserving the enclosed walls or impounding embankments of the detention facility in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from excessive sediment; removing obstructions affecting operation of outlet device(s) and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
Major thoroughfare/major arterial means a street, road or highway shown as a major thoroughfare in the DeKalb County Transportation and Thoroughfare Plan. 
Manufactured home means a new or used structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8) body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. section 5401 et seq. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law found at O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Minor thoroughfare/minor arterial means a street, road or highway shown as a minor thoroughfare in the DeKalb County Transportation and Thoroughfare Plan. 
Multi-phase residential development means any development undertaken by a single developer or a group of developers acting in concert, to develop lots for sale in a residential subdivision where such land is developed pursuant to multiple preliminary or final plats and such land is contiguous or is known, designated, or advertised as a common unit or by a common name. 
Multiuse trail means a recreation corridor intended for the use of non-motorized forms of transportation such as, but not limited to, walking, running, bicycles, in-line skates, as identified in a master plan for multi-use trails in DeKalb County approved by the board of commissioners. 
NOI means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
NOT means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD), as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU's) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed chapters are present. 
New construction means any structure for which the permitted date of construction commenced after adoption of this chapter. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 6, 1974. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component and practice of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, vegetated channels and natural depressions. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
One hundred-year floodplain means land in the floodplain subject to a one (1) percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
Open space means that portion of a lot, including yards, established pursuant to the requirements of this chapter as open space, which is open and unobstructed from ground level to the sky, with the exception of natural foliage or accessory recreational facilities or walkways, which is accessible to all persons occupying a building on the lot and is not a part of the roof of any portion of any building. 
Operator means the party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm-water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm-water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through twenty-five-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the person in whom is vested the fee ownership, dominion or title of property, the proprietor; this term may also include a tenant, if chargeable under the lease for maintenance of the property, and any agent of the owner or tenant including a developer. 
Parcel in section 14-44.1 et seq. means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased means subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of DeKalb County. 
Planning director means the director of the department of planning of DeKalb County or designee. 
Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Potential purchaser as used in sections 14-135 and 14-136 means a person purchasing property in a residential subdivision or a multi-phase residential development from a developer and/or builder for occupancy as a residence or as a residence to be rented or leased to others. 
Predevelopment refers to the wooded conditions of a site. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia Manual" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Protected zone means all areas of a parcel required to remain in open space, including all areas required as yard areas, buffer areas, stream buffers, state buffer zones or landscaped areas according to provisions of the DeKalb County Zoning Ordinance or by conditions of zoning or variance approval. 
Public facilities shall mean the roads, water, sewer, schools, traffic control devices, and electrical service. 
Public works director means the director of the public works department or designee. 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Reach means a longitudinal segment of a stream or river measured along specified points on the stream or river. 
Reasonable access means a fifteen-foot access easement from the public right-of-way to the stormwater management facility and a ten-foot drainage and maintenance easement on all four (4) sides of the stormwater management facility. 
Recreation areas means those portions of open space designed and intended for active recreational use, such as sports fields and other play areas. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Recycled concrete aggregate means clean concrete made up of previously used concrete construction material that has been cleaned and crushed for use in future construction projects. 
Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Residential shall have the same meaning as given in Chapter 27 except that it shall not include apartments. 
Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one (1) side of a traveled way consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Rock outcropping means a single, contiguous piece of exposed rock that has a horizontal surface area equal to or greater than two hundred (200) square feet. 
Runoff means the portion of precipitation on the land that reaches the drainage system. 
Runoff coefficient means the ratio of runoff to rainfall. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Sedimentation facility means a detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process which may be constructed as part of or separately from a detention facility. 
Sediment basin means a detention facility specifically developed for the purpose of allowing the deposit of sediment resulting from the land development process that may be constructed as part of or separately from a detention facility. 
Seller as used in sections 14-135 and 14-136 means a builder or developer. 
Significant tree means any existing, healthy, living tree eight (8) inches DBH or greater in size. 
Site plan means that plan required to acquire a development, construction or building permit which shows the means by which the applicant will conform with applicable provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the DeKalb County Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Soil stabilizer means construction material placed on the soil surface to add stability for future construction projects. 
Specimen tree means any tree that has been determined to meet the criteria within section 14-39 for the determination of specimen trees. 
SS&WCC means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvements, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. 
State means the State of Georgia. 
State general permit means the national pollution discharge elimination system general permit or permits for storm-water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state, which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation except as defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approach and technique that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. Examples of stormwater hotspots include, but are not limited to the following: gas/fueling stations, vehicle maintenance areas, vehicle washing/steam cleaning facilities, auto recycling facilities, outdoor material storage areas, loading and transfer areas, landfills, construction sites, industrial sites, and industrial rooftops. 
Stormwater management facility means those structures and facilities that are designed for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff into and through the drainage system. 
Stormwater management manual means the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater quality site development review tool is an Excel spreadsheet tool available from the DeKalb County Public Works Department or website for use by both local government review staff and the development community to quickly evaluate the water quality performance of stormwater management plans for development sites. All new development and redevelopments in DeKalb County use the stormwater quality site development review tool to facilitate the evaluation of the project in accordance with recommendations of this chapter and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stream in section 14-44.1 et seq. means state waters, and natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground, and includes, but is not limited to, all natural or manmade streams depicted on the 1995 DeKalb County Geographic Information System (GIS) map maintained by the DeKalb County GIS director. Stream starts at the location of a spring, seep or groundwater outflow that sustains stream flow. No stream shall be excluded from this definition due to its failure to be identified on the GIS map. Field verification shall be performed to make a final determination as to the existence of a stream where a dispute exists. Such field verification may be performed by the director. 
Stream channel in section 14-44.1 et seq. means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
Streambank means as measured horizontally from that point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action. 
Street, private means an access way similar to and having the same function as a public street, providing access to more than one (1) property but held in private ownership. Private streets, when authorized, shall be developed in accordance with the specifications for public streets established in Division 3, Part B of this chapter. 
Street, public means any right-of-way set aside for public travel deeded to the county and any right-of-way that has been accepted for maintenance as a street by the county. 
Street right-of-way line means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a street right-of-way. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on or in the ground. This does not include telephone poles and utility boxes. 
Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are rip rap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Structural fill material means construction material used to support structures or build up a piece of land or embankment. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Subdivision means any division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel, regardless of its existing and future use, into two (2) or more lots, tracts or parcels. Where appropriate to context, subdivision may also be used to reference the aggregate of all lots held in common ownership at the time of division. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration or improvements to a structure taking place during the life of a structure, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures that have incurred substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by a code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration to a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivision is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
SWCD means the Soil and Water Conservation District of DeKalb County. 
Thoroughfare plan means a comprehensive street plan of the county indicating proposed location and right-of-way widths for major thoroughfares, minor thoroughfares, collector streets and other streets. 
Tree means any living, self-supporting, woody perennial plant which has a trunk caliper of two (2) inches or more measured at a point six (6) inches above the ground and which normally attains a height of at least ten (10) feet at maturity usually with one (1) main stem or trunk and many branches. 
Tree harvesting means the felling, loading, and transporting of timber products done pursuant to a special exception issued by the zoning board of appeals. 
Tree save area means the boundaries of the area or areas surrounding trees wherein it is essential that they remain undisturbed in order to prevent damage and loss of trees that are to be retained on site during the development and building process. 
Tree replacement means the replacement of trees and landscape plant materials into the minimum required landscape areas, as determined by the zoning regulations or the tree protection ordinance. 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia De partment of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 
Trout waters, first order means streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Trout waters, primary means streams or waters supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. 
Trout waters, secondary means streams or waters in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
Used for includes the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" and "occupied for." 
Vegetation means all plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses and grasses. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by: covering the soil with permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing longterm vegetative cover; temporary seeding, producing shortterm vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Water quality protection means the requirement that all developments must improve the quality of storm runoff from the development site. 
Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Mo. of 1-23-01; Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. I, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 35-02, Pt. I, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 36-02, Pt. I, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 19-03, Pt. I, 7-22-03; Ord. No. 04-04, Pt. I, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 07-17, Pt. I, 7-24-07; Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. I, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 11-05, Pt. I, 3-15-11; Ord. No. 16-08 , Pt. I, 7-19-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Motor vehicles in parks. 
Any bike path or park trail designated as an alternative transportation road is subject to the requirements of sections 19-28 and 19-32(d). 
(Ord. No. 10-04, Pt. I, 3-23-10) 
Secs. 14-3—14-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-00, adopted Dec. 28, 2000, deleted provisions formerly set out as Art. II of this chapter and added new provisions as Art. II to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 14-26—14-41, pertained to environmental control and derived from the following ordinances: 

 

 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 14-27. - Preamble. 
(a)  This article establishes public policies for the protection of the natural environment and specifies standards for land development to ensure achievement of these public policies. 
(b)  By declaration of public policies for environmental protection, the board of commissioners expresses its intent to protect the public interest by seeking to assure, where appropriate, maintenance of the natural environment, prevention of its degradation and assuring high quality land development. The board further declares its intent that these policies shall constitute the public policy framework within which a comprehensive program for protection of the natural environment and implementation of a comprehensive drainage improvement program shall be accomplished. 
(c)  The development process, as established by this Chapter 14, is guided by the policies and provisions contained in the comprehensive plan of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00) 
Sec. 14-28. - Purposes. 
(a)  It is the purpose of this article to establish public policies for the protection of the natural environment and to establish requirements, standards and procedures for land development. The public policy objective of protecting the natural environment is to be achieved by: 
(1)  Regulating the alteration of land and topography. 
(2)  Regulating the removal and requiring the replacement of certain vegetation. 
(3)  Requiring erosion control and sedimentation control. 
(4)  Protecting county streams and floodplains from substantial alteration of their natural functions and from sediment and debris accumulation. 
(5)  Specifying standards for drainage system design. 
(6)  Assuring the continuous and efficient operation of the drainage system. 
(7)  Protecting the water quality within intermittent and perennial streams throughout DeKalb County. 
(b)  It is the board of commissioners' intent that land development be accomplished in conformity with the public policy statements. To that end, the plans required under applicable provisions of this article shall be reviewed by the county to enable a full exchange of information between the county and the applicant as to the county's public policies for land development. However, these policies shall not be used as a control or regulatory mechanism nor be construed as land development standards enforceable under applicable provisions of this article. 
(c)  The board further declares its intent that these public policies be evaluated periodically so as to reflect the community's interests in protection of the natural environment and to give direction to county actions in matters affecting the natural environment and land development. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00) 
Sec. 14-29. - Scope and applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply to all development activity within the county. 
(b)  Sections 14-31, 14-32, 14-33, 14-34, 14-35, 14-36, 14-37, 14-38, 14-40, 14-41, 14-42, and 14-43, shall not apply to any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid and complete application for a land disturbance permit or for sketch plat approval which are received by the director prior to the effective date of this Article II of Chapter 14. Such applications will be subject to the provisions of Chapter 14 in effect prior to the effective date of this Article II. 
(c)  Before filing a land development application on a project for review and approval, the applicant shall meet with the department to discuss the procedure for approval of a land development permit and the requirements as to the general layout of streets, parking, open space/lot coverage, street improvements, drainage, sewage, fire protection and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services, including schools. The department and the applicant shall review the applicant's stormwater management plans, inspection and maintenance requirements and water quality control requirements. The department may advise the applicant, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed project with those officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the project coming within their jurisdiction. This meeting will also allow county officials to discuss with the applicant the necessary regulations that will properly accomplish the project. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, a valid and complete application for a land disturbance permit shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Six (6) copies of complete civil plans, that include a site plan, a grading and drainage plan, a utility plan, a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, a landscape plan, and a tree survey; 
(2)  One (1) hydrology report and completed stormwater quality site development review tool documentation; 
(3)  An application signed by the owner of the property, or a completed indemnification agreement signed by the owner of the property; and 
(4)  Payment of the appropriate development review application fee. 
(e)  For purposes of this section, a valid and complete application for a sketch plat approval shall consist of the following: 
(1)  Four (4) copies of the preliminary plat site plan that is in conformance with the zoning of the property in effect at the time of the application, and, a tree survey; 
(2)  An application signed by the owner of the property, or if the application is not signed by the owner, a completed indemnification agreement signed by the owner of the property; and 
(3)  Payment of the appropriate development review application fee. 
(f)  In no event shall any project excepted from the provisions of this article pursuant to section 14-29(b) above, be extended for a greater time period than eighteen (18) months from the effective date of this Article II of Chapter 14. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 14-30. - Amendment procedure. 
This article may be amended by the board of commissioners after giving public notice and holding a public hearing thereon in accordance with all applicable procedural requirements. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00) 
Sec. 14-31. - Administration and enforcement generally. 
The county shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article as follows: 
(a)  The director is designated to administer and enforce the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control, drainage and water quality provisions of this article for all development and construction projects with the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Advise permittee when additional federal or state permits may be required, and if specific federal or state permits are known to be required, that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file with the development permit; and 
(3)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(b)  The director shall administer and enforce those provisions of this article that apply to developed and occupied areas and to property in an undeveloped state affecting county responsibility for maintenance of the storm drainage system. The director shall assure that maintenance is provided within any altered or relocated portion of any watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 14-32. - Inspection; right of entry. 
(a)  Upon presentation of county identification to the applicant, contractor, owner, owner's agent, operator or occupants, county employees may enter during all reasonable hours any property under proposed or existing development or construction. These employees may make inspections of the facilities for the purpose of determining plan requirements or compliance with all ordinance provisions. 
(b)  All new developments and redevelopments shall execute an inspection and maintenance agreement unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the county. The applicant shall execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement that will bind all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice. 
(c)  County employees may inspect any drainage system within or outside of an existing drainage easement. All stormwater management facilities located on private property, whether dedicated to the county or not, shall be accessible at all times for county inspection. Where stormwater management facilities are accepted by the county for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided. Reasonable access shall be provided to all drainage easements for inspection and maintenance functions. 
(d)  The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant under the conditions specified in this section. The warrant shall authorize the director to conduct a search or inspection of property without the consent of the person whose property is to be searched or inspected, under the conditions set out in this section. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by recorder's court when all of the following conditions are met: 
(A)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property; and 
(B)  The issuing judge determines that the issuance of the warrant is authorized by law. 
(2)  The inspection warrant shall be validly issued only if it meets all of the following requirements: 
(A)  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant; 
(B)  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or possessor of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection; 
(C)  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities, or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal; and 
(D)  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the ordinance provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 14-33. - Emergency maintenance operations. 
(a)  The director may conduct emergency maintenance operations on private land and on drainage systems where emergency conditions exist. Emergency maintenance shall constitute the removal of trees and other debris, which in the judgment of the roads and drainage director create a condition potentially injurious to life, property and the public road system. 
(b)  The provisions of section 14-39 of this chapter shall not apply in the case of tree trimming, removal or cutting necessitated by emergencies such as floods, windstorms, ice storms or other disasters. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any drainage system shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of the county. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00) 
Sec. 14-34. - Issuance of notice of violation; variances; specification of time period for correction; appeals. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the director determines that development activity or inactivity on a property does not comply with the approved development and construction plans, that approved and required erosion and sedimentation control facilities or devices have been altered, damaged or destroyed, or that any other activities violate the provisions of this article, the director shall issue a notice of violation. Whenever the director determines that the drainage system has been unlawfully altered, causing inadequate drainage, the director shall issue a notice of violation. The provisions of this section 14-34(a) shall be in addition to any other penalty provisions applicable to this article. The notice of violation of the provisions of this article or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto shall be addressed to the owner of the property or the owner's agent and to the person, tenant, firm, corporation, property owner or property owner's agent found to be violating the provisions of this article and shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred; 
(3)  List the specific provisions of this article which have been violated; 
(4)  State that, if these repairs, construction or alterations are not completed within a reasonable time period specified by the inspector, summons shall be issued for the person, firm, corporation, owner, or owner's agent to appear in recorder's court. However, in the judgment of the director, where the violation is willful, in wanton disregard of the provisions of this article or constitutes a public health and safety hazard or endangers the ecosystem, the director may issue a court summons in lieu of a notice of violation. 
(b)  Penalty. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended. Any person, firm or corporation that shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon conviction of a violation in recorder's court shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10 of the Code. Where any offense or violation continues from day-to-day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this article exists, and any architect, builder, engineer, contractor, or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits, or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Variances. 
(1)  Except as further limited herein, an applicant may request a variance from the terms of the requirements of sections 14-37, 14-38, 14-40, and 14-42. The director shall have no power to consider or to grant variances which are the responsibility of the director of the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and other relevant state statutes and regulations. Where variances involving the same project are requested from both the director of the EPD and the director, the director shall take no action on any such request for variance until the director of the EPD grants the variance or otherwise approves the request pending before the EPD. Receiving a variance from the director of the EPD does not obligate the director to permit the project to proceed if the project does not also meet all the other requirements of this article. No variance from the provisions of Chapter 14 shall be authorized except as specifically authorized in this section or specifically authorized in another section of chapter 14. 
(2)  Applications for variances authorized in subsection (1) above shall be made in writing to the director and shall contain all of those materials and documents required by the director that are necessary to demonstrate that said request meets the criteria for granting variances. 
(3)  In considering a request for a variance to the terms of this article authorized in subsection (1) above, the director shall use all of the following criteria: 
(A)  The request, while not strictly meeting the requirements of Chapter 14, will in the judgment of the director be at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as would a plan which met the strict application of these requirements. In making such a judgment, the director shall examine whether the request will be at least as protective of the natural resources and the environment with regard to the following factors: 
(i)  Stream bank or soil stabilization; 
(ii)  Trapping of sediment in surface runoff; 
(iii)  Removal of nutrients, heavy metals, pesticides and other pollutants from surface runoff; 
(iv)  Terrestrial habitat, food chain, and migration corridor; 
(v)  Buffering of flood flows; 
(vi)  Infiltration of surface runoff; 
(vii)  Noise and visual buffers; 
(viii)  Downstream water quality; and 
(ix)  Impact on threatened and endangered species, as those species are designated by law or federal or state regulation. 
(B)  By reason of exceptional topographic or other relevant physical conditions of the subject property that were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for any development under any design configuration unless a variance is granted. 
(C)  The request does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief and does not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties that are similarly situated. 
(D)  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the area in which the property is located. 
(E)  The literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of Chapter 14 would cause an extreme hardship, provided the hardship was not created by the owner. 
(4)  The director's decision shall be in writing, shall state the basis for the decision, and shall be made no more than thirty (30) days following application. 
(d)  Appeals. 
(1)  Appeals. Appeals shall be made to the zoning board of appeals, as established in Chapter 27 of the Code, and shall be administered in accordance with the notice requirements, criteria and procedural requirements set forth therein, except as otherwise specified below. 
(2)  Basis for appeal. Whenever the director approves a variance pursuant to section 14-34(b) and it is alleged that said variance request did not meet the standards of said section, or where the director denies a variance request pursuant to section 14-34(b) and it is alleged that said variance request did meet the standards of said section, or where it is alleged by the applicant that there is error in any final order, requirement, or final decision made by an administrative official based on or made in the interpretation or enforcement of this Chapter 14, the aggrieved person, or any DeKalb County official, department, board or agency affected by said order, requirement or decision, shall have the right to appeal said final order, requirement or decision to the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  Initiation of appeal. Appeals shall be made by filing with the secretary of the zoning board of appeals an application for appeal specifying the grounds thereof, within thirty (30) days after the action appealed from was taken. 
(4)  Appeal stays all legal proceedings. An appeal shall stay all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of appeals, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such a case, proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the Superior Court of DeKalb County on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(5)  Time and notice of hearing. The zoning board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal and shall give notice thereof pursuant to the requirements of section 27-917 of the Code of DeKalb County as well as due notice to the parties in interest. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an agent, or by an attorney and may present oral and/or written documentation, testimony and evidence in accordance with the rules and procedures set by the zoning board of appeals. 
(6)  Decision of the zoning board of appeals. Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the zoning board of appeals shall make a determination on each appeal. The zoning board of appeals shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time but in no event more than sixty (60) days from the date of the final hearing. An appeal shall be sustained only upon an express finding by the zoning board of appeals that the administrative official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the administrative official acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the zoning board of appeals may reserve or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit provided all requirements imposed by all other applicable laws are met. 
(e)  All appeals of final decisions of the zoning board of appeals under the provisions of this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the zoning board of appeals, or any officer, department, board or agency affected by such decision, may seek review of such decision by petitioning the Superior Court of DeKalb County for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision of the zoning board of appeals is rendered. 
(2)  In any such petition filed, the zoning board of appeals shall be designated the respondent in certiorari and DeKalb County shall be designated the defendant in certiorari. The secretary of the zoning board of appeals shall be authorized to acknowledge service of a copy of the petition and writ for the zoning board of appeals as respondent. Service upon the county as defendant shall be as otherwise provided by law. Within the time prescribed by law, the zoning board of appeals shall cause to be filed with the clerk of DeKalb County Superior Court a duly certified record of the proceedings had before the board, including a transcript of the evidence heard before it, if any, and the written decision of the board. 
(f)  This article is not intended to abrogate, annul or otherwise interfere with any easement, covenant or other private agreement or legal relationship provided that when the regulations of this article are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements, covenants, or other private agreements or legal relationships, the regulations of this article shall govern. Further, where there is a conflict between any standard or requirement within Chapter 14, or between the Chapter 14 standards and any other provision of the Code, the more restrictive standard or requirement shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Mo. of 1-23-01; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. I, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 14-35. - Plan submission requirements. 
(a)  All site plans submitted in accordance with applicable provisions of this article shall meet the requirements for their preparation and shall also provide information to enable a determination to be made by the director as to plan conformance with the public policy statements of this article. 
(b)  All persons proposing developments, redevelopments or construction shall submit site plans to the director illustrating the means by which conformance with policy provisions may be achieved and illustrating compliance with applicable development standards before issuance of a development or building permit. 
(c)  Electric, telephone and gas utilities shall submit plans and obtain a development permit only for major transmission installations located within rights-of-way or easements devoted exclusively to installations of utility facilities. Individual single-family lots within approved subdivisions shall be exempt from these requirements for new residential construction with the exception that individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional floodplain shall be submitted for review and approval in accordance with this article and other applicable provisions of the Code. Owners and developers of individual single-family lots shall be required to use best management practices to prevent sedimentation from leaving the site. 
(d)  Grading, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage plans shall be prepared under the supervision of a currently state-registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect, or combination as may be appropriate for project planning and design. Tree protection plans may be prepared by and implemented under the supervision of a currently state-registered professional architect, forester, landscape architect or engineer as may be appropriate for project planning and design. When the hydrologic engineering analysis includes applications of the principles for flood routing, super critical flow, high energy dissipation or conversion, backwater curves, floodplain studies or other advanced hydrologic engineering techniques, the analysis shall be made by a currently state-registered professional engineer proficient in hydrology. 
(e)  Site plans and supporting documentation to show conformance with this article shall be submitted in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 27 and all conditions of zoning and shall include the following: 
(1)  Evidence of conformance with the requirements of this article for grading, vegetation alteration, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage system alteration or development. Grading plans shall illustrate existing and proposed contours to the two-foot interval at a minimum; golf courses and other open space areas shall be exempt from this requirement but general grading plans for golf courses and other open space areas shall be submitted. Water quality plans shall include the identification of existing wetland areas within the development site and shall demonstrate use of the stormwater quality site development review tool. Related plans shall show locations of structures, roads, surface drainage, existing and proposed drainage conduits, buffer areas, stream buffers, state buffer zones, and proposed alterations to the existing site; 
(2)  A hydrologic engineering analysis of stormwater runoff under pre-developed and post-developed site conditions and a detailed evaluation of the projected effects on upstream and downstream properties within the affected drainage basin. In determining downstream effects from stormwater management structures, BMPs, and the development, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering studies shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten (10) percent of the total watershed. This analysis shall include a determination of the culvert, floodplain and channel cross-section area required to carry the affected runoff at the intermediate regional flood stage level. The requirement for a complete hydrologic study may be waived in writing by the director for any development where the site plan submitted illustrates predeveloped or proposed improvements sufficient to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this article; 
(3)  Delineation of the boundaries, contour elevations and floodways of the intermediate regional floodplain for streams draining in excess of one hundred (100) acres. Unless shown on the flood hazard map, the intermediate regional flood contour elevations and floodways shall be established by engineering field control surveys and then be added to the flood hazard map upon approval of the director and be clearly designated on each site plan, subdivision plat and construction plan. The actual building site in relation to the intermediate regional floodplain boundaries shall be shown; the same information shall be indicated by the seller to the purchaser of each property so affected. The elevation contours representing the intermediate regional flood conditions shall be shown when they are located outside established ditch banks. A benchmark suitable for determining intermediate regional flood elevations shall be established; 
(4)  The projected sequence of work represented by the grading, vegetation, erosion control, sedimentation control, water quality control and drainage plans as related to other major items of construction; 
(5)  Upon development project completion, location, size and invert elevations of piped segments of the storm drainage system, of control weirs, BMPs and water surface elevations and volumes in detention ponds shall be shown on the final plat for a subdivision, and on a final plan for other developments which shall be submitted to the director prior to approval. The currently state-registered professional engineer, architect or landscape architect reviewing the construction shall provide a certificate that the development is in substantial compliance with approved plans. As-built elevation certifications prepared by currently state-registered land surveyors or currently state-registered professional engineers for all developments, including fill, allowed within a flood-prone area, shall be submitted to the director; and 
(6)  A separate tree protection plan in conformance with the requirements of section 14-39 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 14-36. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-37. - Grading. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Encourage the design of residential grading plans to provide natural appearance of land contours and to provide ease of use in public areas. 
(2)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon existing vegetation. 
(3)  Minimize the adverse effects of land clearance and grading upon the drainage system by strict erosion control and sedimentation control measures. 
(4)  Minimize erosion and shear failure potential by encouraging limited cutting and filling. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  All grading operations shall be conducted in compliance with the approved site plans. 
(2)  Before beginning construction activity, the intermediate regional floodplain elevation contours shall be identified on the property by staking or other identifying mechanisms no less than every one hundred (100) feet, and shall be identifiable throughout project development. 
(3)  Finish grade slopes on residential projects and lots shall not be steeper than three-to-one (3:1), unless absolutely impractical due to vegetation, topography, or soil conditions. Three-to-one (3:1) finish grade slopes shall transition to two-to-one (2:1) slopes at all perpendicular stream crossings. 
(4)  Large-scale general grading shall include installation of approved soil and erosion control measures and be limited to phases approved by the director and completed prior to commencing building construction. 
(5)  Prohibit grading and filling in floodplains, except for the construction and maintenance of perpendicular crossings of public utilities, drainage conveyances, roadways, sidewalks, and multi-purpose trails constructed in accordance with DeKalb County design standards and specifications. Any variance from the requirements of this section 14-37(b)(5) shall be in accordance with the requirements of section 14-34 and with the following requirements: 
a.  If the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the intermediate regional floodplain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, the development permit shall be denied unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the intermediate regional floodplain. Altered sections of the intermediate regional floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt buildup. 
b.  Excavation within floodplain areas shall not be permitted unless the excavation can be accomplished in such a manner that the existing low level drainage pattern through the floodplain shall be maintained. The area of compensation within the floodplain shall be considered as ineffective flow area for the purpose of calculating floodplain elevations to meet no-rise certification requirements. The amount of compensation shall be limited to three hundred (300) cubic yards per acre of floodplain area. 
(6)  The burying, piling, or concealing in any way of construction waste is prohibited, except where permitted within an M-2 (Industrial) District, as defined in Chapter 27 of this Code, and by a permit issued by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the county under Chapter 7 of this Code until the applicant provides a written certification to the director of development or designee, accompanied by a landfill receipt, that proves that all construction waste has been removed from the property. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Mo. of 1-23-01; Ord. No. 01-10, Pt. I, 6-26-01; Ord. No. 35-02, Pt. I, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 36-02, Pt. I, 9-10-02) 
Sec. 14-38. - Soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  Policies. It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Minimize the removal of vegetation; 
(2)  Minimize the exposure of bare earth to precipitation by encouraging the scheduling of land development in increments of workable size which can be completed within a single construction season or within a time period compatible with the type and size of the project; 
(3)  Provide for the reestablishment of vegetation within a reasonable period following completion of final grading and utility installation; 
(4)  Give priority to the paving of streets, parking lots and other areas within a reasonable time following completion of final grading; and 
(5)  Encourage the use of erosion control and sedimentation techniques found in the Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia, as published by the state soil and water conservation commission. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  [General requirements.] Any land-disturbing activity permitted under this chapter shall be carried out in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended; this chapter; and the permit conditions specified by the director. 
(2)  [Minimum requirements.] Nothing contained in state law or this chapter shall prevent the issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements contained in this section or in state law. 
(3)  Exemptions. This section 14-38 shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
a.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mine Act of 1968"; 
b.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
c.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
d.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in subsection 14-38(b)(4) and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the development director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection 14-38(b)(4) and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the development department; 
e.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "Definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
f.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; providing, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs 15. and 16. of subsection (b)(4)c. of this section, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
g.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
h.  Any project involving less than one (1) acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one (1) acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent DeKalb County from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (b)(3)a., b., c., d., e., f., g., i., or j. of this section; 
i.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one (1) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.2; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
j.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
k.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(4)  Minimum requirement for soil erosion and control and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
a.  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities that are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosions and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b)(4)b. and c. of this section and any other applicable provision of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, stormwater management facilities, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. The development director may require that land disturbance activity be phased. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall address appropriate measures to effectively control soil erosion during successive phases of construction. 
b.  Minimum requirements. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b)(4)b. and c. shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design by phases, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director of the environmental protection division (EPD) or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director of the EPD. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director of the EPD may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the BNR, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
c.  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations shall be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans shall conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented as provided in sections 14-39 and 14-42; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills shall not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills shall not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment shall cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediment on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(4)b.2.; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph 16. of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five-foot state buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director of the EPD determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director of the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director of the EPD as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
i.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quality to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
ii.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
16.  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the BNR, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director of the EPD may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
i.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
ii.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
d.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(5)  Application/permit process. 
a.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
b.  Application requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of DeKalb County without first obtaining a permit from the development director to perform such activity, and providing a copy of the notice of intent, if applicable, to the EPD. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the development director and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, at a minimum, the data specified in subsection (b)(5)c. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by eight (8) copies of the applicant's soil erosions and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD rule 391-3-7-.10.. 
3.  A permitting fee, as determined by the board of commissioners shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
4.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
5.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the development director. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection (b)(4)c.15. and 16. and bonding if required by subsection (b)(5)b.7. have been obtained. Such review will not be required if DeKalb County and the district enter into an agreement which allows DeKalb County to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
6.  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this chapter, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the development director may deny the permit application. 
7.  The development director may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the chief executive officer may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
c.  Plan requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection (b)(4) b. and c., or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. §12-7-20. 
2.  Data required for the Site Plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
d.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the development director of a completed application, provided variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary; no permit may be issued unless all applicable fees have been paid. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the development director unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the development director has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsection (b)(4)c.15. and 16. are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b.7. are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of DeKalb County are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activity by the governing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this section, and any other ordinances relating to land development as are applied to private persons, and the director shall enforce such requirements upon the governing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by DeKalb County, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  No permit shall be issued until the applicant files documents with the development director demonstrating compliance with all applicable local, state and federal requirements. 
(6)  Inspection and enforcement. 
a.  The development director will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, DeKalb County shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbance activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person by the development director. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
b.  The development director shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
c.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of DeKalb County, the commission, the district, or the division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
d.  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of the county. The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to DeKalb County for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if the county's program is found to be deficient or ineffective. 
e.  The division may periodically review the actions of DeKalb County which has been certified as a local issuing authority pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of DeKalb County's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and DeKalb County. If such review indicates that DeKalb County has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the DeKalb County governing authority in writing. Upon receipt of the notification, the governing authority shall have ninety (90) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If DeKalb County does not take necessary action within ninety (90) days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of DeKalb County as a local issuing authority. 
(7)  Penalties and incentives. 
a.  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within unincorporated DeKalb County. 
b.  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the development director or other county authorized representative, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his/her authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this section on a site, the development director shall issue a written notice of violation. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the development director shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state, the development director shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation on a site, the development director shall issue an immediate stop work order, and; 
3.  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of land disturbance without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the development director, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the development director. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
c.  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served by the development director upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection (b)(5)b.7. The chief executive officer may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
d.  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this section, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the development director issued as provided in this section hall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day, or the maximum amount authorized by section 1-10 of the Code of DeKalb County. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought under county ordinances approved under this section shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation; however the maximum assessment shall not exceed the amount authorized by section 1-10 of the Code. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(8)  Education and certification. 
a.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection of any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
b.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one (1) person who is in charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person; said person(s) shall meet the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission, and maintain evidence of the certification present whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on the site. A project shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site, or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale, permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
c.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit, but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site, may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this section. 
d.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(4), but shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(9)  Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
a.  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by DeKalb County upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to an appeal before the zoning board of appeals pursuant to the procedures and standards set forth in subsection 14-34(d). 
b.  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by administrative appeals from a decision or order of the zoning board of appeals authorized by subsection (b)(9)a. of this section shall be as provided for in section 14-34(d). 
(10)  Validity and liability. 
a.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this section shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this section. 
b.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this section nor the compliance with provisions of this section shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon DeKalb County, the district, its officers or employees for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this section shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Mo. of 1-23-01; Ord. of 1-23-01, Pt. 1; Ord. No. 04-04, Pt. I, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 11-05, Pt. I, 3-15-11) 
Sec. 14-39. - Tree protection. 
(a)  Statement of purpose. 
(1)  The purpose of these standards is to facilitate the preservation and/or replacement of trees as a part of land development in the county. 
(2)  The DeKalb County Board of Commissioners hereby finds that the preservation of existing trees is a public purpose that protects the public health, safety, general welfare and aesthetics of DeKalb County and all its citizens. 
(3)  The citizens of the county and their many communities enjoy many benefits that can be directly attributed to our trees. 
a.  Trees produce oxygen, which is essential to the well being of all animal life, including humans. 
b.  Trees help to reduce the amounts of airborne pollutants. For example, trees remove carbon dioxide, that is a major environmental concern due to its current high levels. 
c.  Trees and their foliage intercept dust and particulate matter, thereby helping to purify our air and limiting health risks. 
d.  Trees and their root systems reduce soil erosion and storm water runoff. This decreases sedimentation problems and improves water quality. 
e.  Trees provide food and shelter for desirable urban wildlife. 
f.  Trees provide screening, which in turns aids in the reduction of noise and glare. 
g.  Trees help moderate our air temperature to provide us with a comfortable environment. 
h.  Trees provide scenic amenities to soften the harshness of city buildings and streets. They are aesthetically pleasing to all that view them. 
i.  Trees may affect property values and can have a positive impact upon the economy of an area. 
j.  Trees can enhance the natural functions of streams and related buffers. 
(4)  Protect specimen and historical trees in a manner consistent with the DeKalb County Tree Protection Administrative Standards which shall be promulgated by the director. The director shall maintain a list and map of these trees in the office of the director through the assistance of the following offices: 
a.  DeKalb County Board of Education. 
b.  DeKalb County Extension Service. 
c.  Fernbank Science Center. 
d.  DeKalb Chapter, Georgia Conservancy. 
e.  Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(5)  Provide standards for the preservation of trees as part of the land development process. 
(6)  Prevent clear-cutting and mass grading of land that results in the loss of mature trees, and to ensure appropriate replanting when tree loss does occur. 
(7)  Protect trees during construction to enhance the quality of life in DeKalb County. 
(8)  Protect trees in construction of public facilities and utilities. 
(b)  General applicability. 
(1)  The terms and provisions of the tree protection ordinance shall apply to all real property in DeKalb County except as otherwise provided in this section 14-39. 
(2)  The terms and provisions of the tree protection ordinance shall further apply to any residential or non-residential development which requires the issuance of a land disturbance permit, development permit, or building permit, except as otherwise provided in this section 14-39. 
(3)  The terms and provisions of the tree protection ordinance shall also apply to development on any county-owned property, including property owned by county agencies, boards, and authorities, except as otherwise provided in this section 14-39. 
(c)  Exemptions. 
(1)  a.  The removal of five (5) or fewer trees, other than specimen trees, on any single-family residential property, within a single calendar year. 
b.  The removal of more than five (5) trees, other than specimen trees, from an owner-occupied, single-family lot may be approved by the county arborist if the owner must remove trees in order to build a newly permitted structure, or to build an addition to or make improvements to an existing structure, or to improve the health of other trees in the landscape. 
(2)  Zonings conditioned to a specific site plan prior to adoption of the tree protection ordinance on February 9, 1999, provided that said zoning contains specific conditions for both tree preservation and tree replacement. 
(3)  The removal of trees found to be diseased or insect infested by the county extension service, the state forestry commission, a certified arborist, the county arborist or urban forester. 
(4)  Grandfathered projects: 
a.  Section 14-39 shall not apply to any portion of a property included within the limits of a valid and complete application for a land disturbance permit or preliminary plat approval where said application has proceeded through and completed first round red line review by the development department nor to commercial site plans that have been reviewed and red lined by the development department and which were received by the director prior February 9, 1999, provided that all time constraints relating to the permit issued shall be observed. 
b.  The requirements of this section 14-39 may be waived by the director for a land disturbance permit which is to proceed with development of a larger project, at least seventy-five (75) percent of the land area of which has already received a permit or permits initiating clearing or grading activities prior to February 9, 1999. 
c.  In no event shall any grandfathered project be extended for a greater time period than twelve (12) months from February 9, 1999. 
d.  The board of commissioners may grandfather a project not specifically covered under the foregoing subsections upon application of an applicant or owner of property, provided that an applicant can demonstrate that: 1) failure to grandfather the applicant's project will cause the applicant substantial economic hardship; 2) the proposed development activity will not substantially harm the public health, safety, aesthetics and welfare of the citizens of DeKalb County; 3) the proposed development activity is otherwise consistent with all pertinent development standards and is compatible with surrounding land uses; and 4) applicant has on file with the county on the effective date of this article an application for a building permit, land disturbance permit or preliminary plat review or has submitted construction plans for development department review. Incomplete applications shall not be processed for hearing before the board of commissioners. Any application by an applicant for whom the department of public works did not have on file an application for a building permit, land disturbance permit preliminary plat review or construction plans on February 9, 1999, shall not be processed for hearing before the board. Such applications shall stand automatically denied. 
e.  Upon submission of a written application by the applicant or owner for a hardship waiver to the director, the board of commissioners shall, within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of such application, schedule a public hearing. At said public hearing, the applicant or owner and any other interested parties shall have the opportunity to be heard with regard to the application, and the board of commissioners shall render its decision either granting, with or without conditions, or denying the application prior to the succeeding regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners. 
f.  In the event a hardship waiver is granted by the board, the applicant shall be required to comply with the vegetation protection ordinance in effect immediately prior to February 9, 1999. 
(5)  The removal of trees from horticultural properties, such as farms, nurseries or orchards. This exemption shall not include tree harvesting. 
(6)  The removal of any tree which has become, or threatens to become, a danger to human life or property. 
(7)  Agricultural activities on land zoned R-200. 
(8)  Approved utility construction within permanent utility easements. 
(9)  Construction, expansion, and operation of county landfills. 
(10)  Building permits that do not require or authorize land disturbance. 
(d)  Definitions. See section 14-1. 
(e)  Procedures. 
(1)  Application requirements. 
a.  Pre-application conference. Prior to submission of an application for development, the applicant is encouraged to meet with the county arborist to discuss the tree protection ordinance as it relates to the applicant's property. The purpose of the pre-application conference is to clarify the provisions and procedures of the tree protection ordinance and review applicable standards and guidelines for the submittal of documents and required tree protection, replacement, and maintenance measures. 
b.  Tree survey. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, a tree survey shall be required as part of any application for a land disturbance permit, development permit, building permit or preliminary subdivision plat. Except as provided elsewhere in this section, all trees eighteen (18) inches (DBH) and larger shall be identified. Specimen trees shall be identified by size, species and location. Trees larger than two (2) inches (DBH) may be identified and counted for unit credit on the tree protection plan. Single residential lots on which the applicant intends to reside may be exempted from the tree survey requirements at the discretion of the director. With the prior approval of the county arborist sampling methods may be used to determine tree densities for forested areas. 
(2)  Tree protection plan. A tree protection plan shall be submitted with other permit drawings as part of the development permits process. This plan may either be a separate drawing, or part of a landscape plan, and shall include the following information: 
a.  Definition of spatial limits: 
1.  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading, and trenching; 
2.  Tree save areas; 
3.  Specimen trees; and 
4.  Areas of revegetation. 
b.  Detailed drawings of tree protection measures and their location: 
1.  Location, species and size (DBH) of existing significant trees and an indication of which significant trees would remain on the site. 
2.  Tree fences; 
3.  Erosion control fences; 
4.  Tree protection signs; 
5.  Tree wells; 
6.  Aeration systems; 
7.  Transplanting specifications; 
8.  Staking specifications; and 
9.  Other applicable drawings as determined by the director. 
c.  The tree protection plan shall show all utility lines existing and proposed, including irrigation and electric lighting lines. The applicant shall coordinate the location of these utility lines with the utility companies in order to prevent root damage within the critical root zones of protected trees, and to minimize damage to trees located in protected zones. 
d.  Procedures and schedules for the implementation, installation, and maintenance of tree protection measures. 
e.  Calculations of tree density proposed on site per subsection (g), tree preservation and replacement requirements. 
f.  Tree protection inspection. Following the receipt of a complete application, the county arborist shall schedule and conduct an inspection of the proposed development site. The applicant or applicant's designee shall be advised as to the date and time of the inspection and given an opportunity to participate. 
g.  Following inspection said plans shall be reviewed by the director for conformance with applicable zoning conditions, the tree protection ordinance, and any applicable administrative guidelines, and will either be approved or denied. Reasons for denial shall be noted on the tree protection plan or otherwise stated in writing. 
h.  No development or building permit shall be issued until the tree protection plan has been approved by the county arborist. 
i.  All tree protection measures shall be installed prior to land disturbance. 
j.  Single lots in platted residential subdivisions on which the applicant intends to reside may be exempted from the tree protection plan requirements at the discretion of the director. 
(3)  Final inspection. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the director with respect to any permit subject to this section 14-39 unless and until the county arborist shall have inspected the site and confirmed that all existing trees to remain are in healthy condition and all replacement trees have been planted in accordance with this section. 
(4)  Issuance of a building or land development permit shall be conditioned on the approved tree protection plan and conformance to the provisions of these regulations. Any permit may be voided if its terms are violated. 
(f)  Fees. ( Reserved ) 
(g)  Tree preservation and replacement requirements. The following tree preservation and replacement requirements are hereby established: 
(1)  If significant trees exist on a tract of land for which a permit subject to this section is sought, either one hundred twenty (120) inches (DBH) per acre or twenty-five (25) percent of existing significant trees per acre of such significant trees, whichever is less, shall be preserved on the site. Except for zoned C-1, C-2, M, or M-2 sites, trees and tree save areas counting toward this requirement shall not be located in required buffer zones. Trees and tree save areas counting toward this requirement on sites zoned C-1, C-2, M or M-2 may be located in stream buffers and state buffer zones, transitional buffer zones and designated floodplains. 
If the county arborist determines that special constraints of a site result in an inability to build or develop without removing significant trees on a site, where there are only one hundred twenty (120) inches (DBH) per acre or less of existing significant trees, the arborist may permit the removal of one or more significant trees. Trees removed pursuant to this section must be replaced with trees one (1.0) times the diameter inches of those removed. 
(2)  There shall be at least two (2) two-inch (DBH) over story trees in every front yard of properties zoned R-200, R-150, R-30,000, R-20,000, R-100, R-85, and R-75. There shall be at least one (1) two-inch (DBH) over story tree in every front yard of properties zoned R-A5, R-50, R-A8 and RDT. 
(3)  The applicant shall landscape the areas with trees and other plant materials in accordance with the following standards: 
a.  Residential developments: All residential subdivisions shall have an average density of fifteen (15) density units per acre. Required trees may be located on individual lots or in subdivisions in which there is commonly owned property may be located on such commonly owned property. 
b.  Non-residential and multifamily developments: The quantity of total existing/replacement trees on site must be sufficient so as to produce a total site density factor of no less than thirty (30) density units per acre. 
c.  With the exception of C-1, C-2, M, or M-2 zoned property, the total tree density units required for a parcel or lot shall be computed based on the area of the parcel or lot, excluding all area within the 100-year floodplain. Total tree density units required for C-1, C-2, M, or M-2 zoned property shall be computed based on the area of the parcel or lot, including all area within the one hundred-year floodplain. 
(4)  Procedures for calculating the required tree density are provided in Charts 1, 2 and 3 of this Section 14-39. Tree unit values are assigned as follows: 
_____
CHART 1.  Conversion From Diameter To Density Factor Units For Existing Deciduous Trees To Remain On Site 

 
CHART 2.  Conversion From Diameter To Density Factor Units For Evergreens And Conifers 

 
CHART 3.  Conversion From Caliper Diameter To Density Factor Units For Deciduous Replacement Trees. 

 
Container-grown pine trees are given replacement value as follows: 

 
The use of one- and three-gallon pines will be permitted only with prior approval. There will be no replacement value given for such trees. 
(5)  Nothing in these regulations shall be construed to allow the removal of any tree or vegetation in a required stream buffer, transitional buffer zone or state buffer zone except buffer improvements as authorized by the director. 
(6)  Tree relocation and credit for existing trees replacement units will be granted to trees relocated on site. Tree relocation is subject to approval of the county arborist. Existing trees between two (2) caliper inches and seven and nine-tenths (7.9) caliper inches may be used for credit on the tree replacement plan. 
(7)  Understory vegetation. Tree preservation areas shall leave intact the naturally occurring groundcover and understory vegetation except where directed otherwise by the county arborist in order to allow the removal of undesirable groundcover or understory vegetation. 
(8)  Specimen trees. 
a.  Specimen trees shall be identified by the county arborist, and shall be located on the tree protection plan. 
b.  Standards for the identification, preservation, and protection of specimen trees shall be as follows: Any tree in fair or better condition which equals or exceeds the following diameter sizes: 
1.  Large hardwoods, i.e. oaks, hickories, yellow poplars, and similar species: Thirty (30) inches DBH. 
2.  Large softwoods, e.g. pines, evergreens, and similar species: Thirty (30) inches DBH. 
3.  Small trees, e.g. dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, and similar species: Ten (10) inches DBH. 
c.  A tree in fair or better condition should meet the following minimum standards: 
1.  A life expectancy of greater than fifteen (15) years. 
2.  A relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay or hollow, and less than twenty (20) percent radial trunk dieback. 
3.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
d.  A lesser-sized tree can be considered a specimen if: 
1.  It is a rare or unusual species or of historical significance. 
2.  It is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a project or landscape. 
3.  It is a tree with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
e.  The county arborist may identify and require the preservation of a tree stand if it contains one (1) or more specimen trees and the specimen trees are interlocked with other members of the stand in such a way as to imperil the specimen tree if other members of the stand were to be removed. 
f.  It shall be prohibited to cut specimen trees existing on a tract of land that is the subject of a land disturbance permit, development permit or building permit without a special exception granted by the zoning board of appeals if removal of the specimen tree has not been approved by the county arborist. 
g.  Any specimen tree removed from a parcel shall be replaced by one and five-tenths (1.5) times the equivalent inches (DBH) of replacement trees or existing trees in excess of the requirements of subsection (g), tree preservation and replacement requirements, using species with potentials for comparable size and quality at maturity. 
(9)  Protection of trees during construction. Methods and standards for tree protection shall be established in administrative guidelines to this section 14-39. 
a.  Trees identified to be preserved and counted as credit for meeting required unit density shall have four-foot orange tree protection fencing installed at the critical root zones. 
b.  No person engaged in the construction of any structure(s) or improvement (s) or any activity shall encroach or place solvents, material, construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within six (6) feet of the area outside the critical root zone as defined herein, or any existing significant tree within a tree save area, transitional buffer zone, stream buffer, or state buffer zone. 
c.  All tree protection devices must remain in functioning condition until completion of the project or until the certificate of occupancy is issued. 
d.  Any tree, designated in the plan to be saved, which is negligently damaged during construction or as a result of negligent construction, as determined by the arborist, shall be treated according to accepted National Arborists Association standards. If fatally damaged, trees shall be replaced with four-inch caliper trees equal to the unit value of the tree removed. However, any specimen tree negligently damaged as described above shall be replaced with four-inch caliper trees equal to one and five-tenths (1.5) times the equivalent inches (DBH) of the tree removed or damaged. 
(10)  Removal of trees from floodplain not permitted. Trees shall not be cut or removed from the floodplain, except as follows: 
a.  Those trees found to be diseased or insect infested by the county extension service, the Georgia Forestry Commission, a certified arborist, or a certified forester. 
b.  As necessary for construction, repair or maintenance of public roads, utilities or stormwater management facilities. 
c.  As part of an approved wetland mitigation plan. 
d.  Trees in the one hundred-year floodplain or required stream buffer may not be cut nor shall they be counted, except as otherwise provided in subsection (g), tree preservation and replacement requirements, for C-1, C-2, M, and M-2 zoned property, to accomplish requirements of the tree protection ordinance. 
(11)  The county arborist shall be responsible for distribution of appropriate public educational materials concerning the procedures of the tree protection ordinance, the value of maintaining existing trees, and proper methods of tree planting, preservation, and care. 
(h)  Tree replacement standards. 
(1)  The tree protection plan shall include planting schedules with proposed tree names (botanical and common), quantity, size spacing, and any special planting notes. Trees used for credit on the tree replacement plan must be chosen from the preferred list attached hereto as Appendix A to this section 14-39. At least fifty (50) percent of replacement trees must be overstory trees; no more than twenty-five (25) percent may be of any single species, and no more than twenty-five (25) percent may be of evergreen species. 
(2)  Unless otherwise approved by the county arborist, trees selected for replanting must meet the minimum standards as provided in the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1, 1980) and must be on the tree species selection list found in Appendix A to this section 14-39. Trees selected must be free of injury, pests, disease, nutritional disorders or root defects, and must be in good vigor to assure a reasonable expectation of survival. Standards for transplanting shall be in keeping with those established in the International Society of Arboriculture publication Tree and Shrub Planting Manual or a similar publication. 
(3)  It is desirable that replanted trees be ecologically compatible with the site and neighboring sites. When practical, the replanted trees shall be of the same or similar species as those removed. 
(4)  Replacement trees shall be planted in manner that provides adequate space for nourishment, light, and maturation as recommended by the county arborist. 
(5)  Planting and staking details are addressed in the administrative guidelines and shall be specified in the required tree protection plan. 
(i)  Buffers. 
(1)  Stream buffers. Stream buffers shall be consistent with the requirements of section 14-42. 
(2)  Land use transition buffers. Buffers shall be provided between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, special land use permit or variance approval. 
a.  Buffer planting shall meet the minimum width requirements contained in Chapter 27 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances, except as authorized to be reduced by a condition of zoning, special land use permit or variance approval. 
b.  Disturbance or encroachments. 
1.  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, and any associated easements, shall not encroach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
2.  Supplemental plantings or replantings of vegetation or authorized non-vegetative screening devices shall be authorized to encroach into a buffer provided there is minimal disturbance of any existing vegetation. 
3.  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation may be removed from a buffer provided minimal disturbance occurs. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced where necessary to meet the screening requirements contained herein. 
c.  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
1.  During authorized land disturbing activities, transitional buffer zones, stream buffers, and state buffer zones shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to commencement of, and during, construction. 
2.  The method of demarcation and protection utilized shall be in accordance with best management practices or as required by the arborist. 
(j)  Parking lot landscaping. 
(1)  Off-street parking lots which contain more than twenty (20) off-street parking spaces on any single lot shall contain landscaping and plantings as provided in Chapter 27 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Variances to reduce required parking spaces may be granted by the zoning board of appeals when necessary to preserve a significant tree(s) that otherwise would be lost if the parking requirements were strictly applied. Such variance may only be granted if the arborist certifies to the zoning board of appeals that such tree(s) will be lost either by necessary removal for construction of the parking lot or as a consequence of construction having an adverse impact on the survivability of the tree by virtue of damage to the root system of the tree(s). 
(3)  Any variance granted under the provisions of this section shall include a condition that should the subject tree(s) die as a consequence, direct or indirect, of construction, despite granting of the variance, the tree or trees shall be replaced at the property owner's or applicant's expense, in accordance with a tree replacement plan approved by the arborist. 
(4)  The maximum variance allowed under this provision shall be four (4) parking spaces, or ten (10) percent of the total number of parking spaces required by the zoning ordinance, whichever is greater. 
(k)  Street trees. Street trees and continuous landscape strips shall be provided, in conformance with the design requirements specified in Chapter 27 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances, along newly constructed streets, and along existing streets which are widened or realigned subsequent to the adoption of this ordinance, in all office, commercial, and industrial developments and along newly constructed streets of residential developments with a net residential density exceeding three (3) dwelling units per acre or as otherwise directed by conditions of zoning or special land use permits. 
(l)  Maintenance. Trees which are used to meet the density requirements for this section 14-39, except on single family residential lots, shall be maintained for two (2) growing seasons after the date of final inspection. The property owner shall maintain required tree density. The applicant or builder will be responsible for identifying newly planted trees to the homeowner and to inform the homeowner as to their proper maintenance. 
(m)  Alternative compliance. The county arborist must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance shall one hundred (100) percent of the required site density be met through alternative compliance. Where the county arborist has determined that special constraints of a site result in an inability to provide the required tree density, the number of trees will be determined by the county arborist based on site review. Such site review shall require the developer to re-landscape each parcel using a density calculated as the maximum number of trees that can be sustained on the parcel less the impervious area of that parcel. The balance of trees shall be provided in common areas. If common areas are not sufficient, any remaining balance of trees may be provided for plantings on public grounds. Tree bank arrangements can be made through the director. The minimum size of trees replanted through the tree bank shall be two (2) caliper inches and shall be planted in accordance with the species list attached as appendix a hereto and in accordance with the requirements in subsection (h), tree replacement standards. 
(1)  Common area planting. If trees are to be planted at another location, the following note must appear on the approved tree protection plan: "A tree protection plan addendum for this project shall be submitted to the county arborist at least thirty (30) days prior to requesting a final inspection. This plan shall include the species, size and location of trees to be planted off-site to meet the tree density deficit shown. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy is subject to approval of this plan, as well as verification of the installation of the trees." 
(2)  Tree banking. If trees can not be planted on site and there is insufficient common area for replanting, the balance of trees will be accepted by the director for tree banking within unincorporated DeKalb County. Participants in the tree banking program administered by the director, including the signing of an off-site reforestation agreement. 
(n)  Tree harvesting. Selective tree harvesting may be permitted upon authorization by the zoning board of appeals in consultation with the arborist. Permits authorizing tree harvesting shall be in accordance with the following standards: 
(1)  A seventy-five-foot undisturbed buffer shall be provided and maintained along the entire perimeter of the property, including road frontages, during the land disturbing activity, except for authorized access crossings. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, no property owner shall be required to preserve an undisturbed buffer that covers more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total land area of the property, excluding area inside the one hundred-year floodplain. In any such case, an alternative buffer width shall be provided, as determined by the zoning board of appeals pursuant to its review of the application for a tree harvesting permit. 
(3)  The property shall be required to meet a tree density standard of thirty (30) units per acre, not including the seventy-five-foot buffer, upon completion of authorized land disturbing activities. 
(4)  The owner/applicant shall utilize the recommended best management practices as established by the Georgia Forestry Commission. 
(5)  No tree harvesting shall be allowed within the county except after approval of a special exception by the zoning board of appeals as is provided in Article V, Division 4 of Chapter 27 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances. Further, subsequent to such approval of a special exception, no such tree harvesting shall be undertaken on any nonresidential parcel of land unless the transitional buffer zones required by the zoning regulations of the district in which located, are preserved in a natural and undisturbed state. 
(6)  Once tree harvesting takes place in conformity with the above regulations, no development of the property shall be permitted that would require the cutting of trees preserved under subsection (n)(3) and (n)(5) for a period of five (5) years following authorization of tree harvesting. 
(o)  Utility company and public works guidelines. 
(1)  All utility companies shall be required to obtain an annual permit issued by the director. All applications for an annual permit shall include a list of subcontractors with names, addresses, and county business license numbers. 
(2)  Periodic work schedules are to be submitted to the arborist showing the proposed location and extent of tree work to be performed. 
a.  All tree trimming and pruning to be performed by public utilities, public agencies, and their subcontractors on trees growing on private or public rights-of-way shall be done according to the National Arborist Association Standards for Pruning of Shade Trees. 
b.  The routing of public and private utility easements shall be subject to review and comment by the county arborist. 
(p)  Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the director to enforce this tree protection ordinance. The director shall have the authority to, and the county arborist may recommend that, the director revoke, suspend or void any land disturbance permit, development permit or building permit or suspend all work on a site or portion thereof in order to effect compliance with this section. 
(1)  Violation and penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section, after having been first issued a warning, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in recorder's court shall be punished as is provided in section 1-10 of the Code of DeKalb County. Each tree removed or killed in violation of this section 14-39 shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any buildings or premises or parts thereof, where anything in violation of this section exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(2)  Any trees eight (8) inches (DBH) and over which have been removed in violation of this section shall be replaced by the violator with four-inch caliper replacement trees equal to the unit value of the trees removed. However, any specimen tree removed from a parcel shall be replaced with four-inch caliper trees one and five-tenths (1.5) times the equivalent inches (DBH) of replacement trees or existing trees in excess of the requirements of subsection (g), tree preservation and replacement requirements, using species with potentials for comparable size and quality at maturity. 
(3)  Additional legal remedies. In addition to all other actions and penalties authorized in this section, the department of law is hereby authorized to institute injunctive, abatement or any other appropriate judicial or administrative actions or proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate, or remove any violations of this section. 
(4)  Appeals; power and duty of the board to hear appeals of decisions of administrative officials. The zoning board of appeals shall have the power and duty to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by an aggrieved party that there is error in any final order, requirement, or decision made by the director based on or made in the enforcement of the tree protection ordinance. all such appeals shall be heard and decided following the notice requirements, criteria and procedural requirements in Chapter 27 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Administrative variances. Front, side and rear yard setbacks and parking requirements may be reduced by an amount not to exceed fifty (50) percent where it is determined by the county arborist to be necessary in order to preserve existing specimen or significant trees. Appropriate conditions to said administrative variances shall be imposed so as to ensure the continued health of said trees following the granting of such variances, including mandatory replacement requirements. Such administrative variances shall be considered and decided consistent with the procedures and criteria contained in Chapter 27 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances. Appeals of final decisions regarding administrative variances may be taken as provided in subsection (p)(4) above. 
(6)  Special exception. The zoning board of appeals is authorized to consider requests for special exception for the removal of an unauthorized specimen tree. All such requests shall be filed, notice given, and all procedures shall be as is required in the zoning ordinance. No such special exception for the unauthorized removal of a specimen tree shall be granted by the zoning board of appeals unless the applicant has demonstrated and the board has found that the property is not capable of earning a reasonable economic return absent the grant of the special exception. In making this determination the board shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Value of the trees in question, considering their age, size, health, and significance; 
b.  The current level of economic return on the property; 
c.  The marketability of the property; and the unfeasibility of alternate design or uses. Appeals from final decisions of the board shall be as provided for in Chapter 27 of the DeKalb County Code of Ordinances. 
_____ 
APPENDIX A 
DeKalb County Overstory Trees Acceptable for Replanting Credits 

 
DeKalb County Understory and Other Small Trees Acceptable for Replanting Credits 

 
DeKalb County Recommended Trees for Under Powerlines 

 
Recommended Trees for Parking Lots 

 
_____ 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Mo. of 1-23-01; Ord. of 1-23-01, Pt. 1) 
Sec. 14-40. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  The governing authority believes the county's stream systems are a valuable natural resource that requires joint and cooperative action by the county and the development industry to resolve existing stormwater management and flooding problems, prevention of their worsening or recurrence while utilizing this resource for the good of the entire county. 
The development industry and the county shall cooperate to control water quality and maintain the county's drainage and stream systems from stormwater runoff resulting from development activities. 
(b)  Standards. 
(1)  DeKalb County shall require all land development to comply with the criteria, technical specifications, and standards of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as may be hereafter amended. The rainfall intensities used in hydrologic and hydraulic computations shall be those published in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)  Applicability. A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all development and construction for the entire site which meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(A)  Increases the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one (1) cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm; 
(B)  Involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more; 
(C)  Includes the creation, addition or replacement in redevelopment of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
(D)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that meets the definition of a stormwater hotspot; or 
(E)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items (A) and (B) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(3)  Exemptions. The provisions of this article shall not apply to the following criteria: 
(A)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project unless they meet one (1) of the criteria listed above in (b)(2); 
(B)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures unless it meets one (1) of the criteria listed above in (b)(2); 
(C)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
(D)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director. 
(E)  The director may exempt the owner from those provisions of this article where complete compliance with those specific provisions is physically impossible. 
(F)  If the installation of a stormwater management facility would reduce downstream flood peaks by less than one (1) percent. 
(G)  The requirements, or portions thereof, of subsections (2) and (3) above shall not be waived if the director determines that such waiver would increase known flooding problems, or exceed the capacity of the downstream drainage system. 
(H)  A waiver of these minimum runoff quantity control requirements may be granted only after a written request is submitted by the applicant containing descriptions, drawings, and any other information that is necessary to evaluate the proposed land disturbing activity. A separate written waiver request shall be required if there are subsequent additions, extensions, or modifications, to the development which would alter the approved stormwater runoff characteristics of a land disturbing activity receiving a waiver. 
(I)  Appeals from said waiver decisions may be taken to the zoning board of appeals pursuant to the provisions of section 14-34(c). 
(4)  If forty (40) percent of a site is to be redeveloped, all stormwater requirements must be met for the redeveloped area only and the non-disturbed area will be treated as predeveloped prior to the redevelopment. But if more than forty (40) percent of the site is to be redeveloped, then the entire site must meet all stormwater requirements. 
(5)  A downstream peak flow analysis will include the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(6)  Detention designs may be rejected by the director if they incorporate structures and facilities that will demand considerable maintenance or will be difficult to maintain or will utilize numerous small structures if other alternatives are physically possible. 
(7)  Discharge velocities from detention facilities shall be reduced to provide a non-erosive velocity flow from a structure, channel, or other control measure as set forth in the approved Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(8)  Stormwater management and flood control facilities may include both structural and nonstructural components. Natural or planted vegetation as well as other natural runoff conduits are examples of these non-structural components and shall be retained where practicable. In addition, these components must provide for or enhance stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater benefits. 
(9)  The drainage system being developed shall have adequate capacity to accommodate the flow from all upstream areas for a one hundred-year storm event. 
(10)  The drainage system from a proposed development must discharge into an outfall that has adequate capacity to accommodate the runoff from the development. If the connecting downstream system is not able to accommodate the allowable design flows from the site, then the design engineer must design drainage facilities with the capacity to over-detain flows so they can be accommodated by the existing downstream conveyance structures whereby allowing the existing downstream system to operate correctly. If downstream easements are needed to extend the drainage system to an adequate outfall, the developer shall obtain these easements. 
(11)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted for all detention and other storage facilities as part of the overall drainage plan. 
(12)  Land uses within the intermediate regional floodplain shall not diminish or restrict the capacity of the channels or floodplains of the stream, its tributaries, drainage ditches or any other stormwater management facilities or systems and shall not increase the IRF elevation or velocity or concentration of flow in downstream areas. The development permit shall be denied if the required hydrologic studies reveal that a request for filling or grading within the intermediate regional floodplain would overload the capacity of the channel downstream or increase flood stages upstream, unless equivalent flow and storage capacity is replaced and maintained by the owner within the intermediate regional floodplain. Altered sections of the intermediate regional floodplain shall have a positive slope so as to provide positive drainage back to the stream flow line and this section must be maintained by the owners in perpetuity so as to prevent or remove silt buildup. 
(13)  Excavation within floodplain areas shall not be permitted unless the excavation can be accomplished in such a manner that the existing low level drainage pattern through the floodplain shall be maintained. The area of compensation within the floodplain shall be considered as ineffective flow area for the purpose of calculating floodplain elevations to meet no-rise certification requirements. The amount of compensation shall be limited to one hundred fifty (150) cubic yards per acre of floodplain area. 
(14)  The live detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the one hundred-year frequency rainfall as published in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. The detention system required shall be necessary to handle the runoff of a one hundred-year rainfall, for any and all durations from the post-development, with a release rate that does not exceed the pre-development release rate during the same duration storm. Detention control structures and other drainage improvements shall be located and designed to prevent erosion damage to adjacent property owners. 
(15)  When the applicant requests and the director determines that development and construction projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined detention or other stormwater management facilities more practical, the county may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two (2) or more properties by two (2) or more applicants. This authorization shall be granted by the zoning board of appeals upon application for approval being submitted through the director. Where joint detention facilities serving two (2) or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or occupancy of buildings within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the detention facility, except upon approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
(16)  The following requirements shall apply to the installation, development and maintenance of all stormwater and sedimentation control facilities designed for temporary storage of stormwater runoff: 
(A)  Permanent fencing at least four (4) feet in height shall be required around all facilities having a temporary water storage depth of greater than four (4) feet or those designated by the board of health as constituting a public health hazard. 
(B)  This fencing shall be designed, installed and maintained to allow the free flow of runoff and sediment into the facility. Fencing shall be established on the outside edge of a facility. The fence shall include a gate of sufficient size to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. The gate shall be placed in a manner such that the gate does not obstruct reasonable access or become obstructive. The director may waive fencing in nonresidential areas where a pond is more than five hundred (500) feet from a residential district and in residential districts when detention is provided in natural areas such as stream channels and fencing in the opinion of the director would damage the environment or affect stream flow. 
(C)  The access easement to the facility shall not have a profile slope steeper than thirty-three (33) percent and a cross slope of no more than ten (10) percent. The elevation of the maintenance easement around the facility shall be established at the top of the dam or wall elevation and be constructed with a cross slope of no more than ten (10) percent to the drainage facility. Fencing that complies with the requirement of section 14-40(b)(16)(B) shall be constructed on the outside edge of the maintenance easement. Gates that comply with the requirements of section 14-40(b)(16)(B) shall be constructed on each maintenance easement. 
(D)  Detention and sedimentation control facilities shall not be placed in any of the following: 
(i)  Transitional buffer zones as defined by Chapter 27. 
(ii)  Floodplains. 
(iii)  Wetlands. 
(iv)  Stream buffer zones. 
(v)  State buffer zones. 
(E)  Perforated standpipes or a French drain, in accordance with published design standards available from the director, or other methods which will achieve equal performance to prevent standing water and inadequate drainage shall be installed within all the detention and sedimentation control facilities. 
(F)  Except as provided in subparagraph (F) of this paragraph, the commercial and/or multifamily residential property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the stormwater management facilities during grading, construction, and following final approval of the completed project. This maintenance and certification obligation shall be binding on all future owners, successors and assigns of the property. 
(G)  In the case of single-family residential subdivisions approved after the date of adoption of this provision, and in accordance with the requirements of Article III of this chapter, the county shall assume maintenance responsibility one (1) year after the release of the performance bond for subdivision streets. A special drainage district as authorized by the Georgia Constitution, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI is established for property in a single-family residential subdivision at the time the plat is finally recorded, and will be so noted on the plat. Upon completion of developer maintenance, all detention ponds shall have a positive slope to the outlet in order to facilitate complete drainage. 
(H)  Stormwater management facilities in single-family residential subdivisions constructed under permits issued prior to the amendment of the county ordinance assigning maintenance responsibility will not be accepted for county maintenance unless individually approved by and at the discretion of the zoning board of appeals and suitable access easements are provided. At the time the director accepts a detention facility for county maintenance, a special drainage district will be established that includes all properties for which the detention facility is designed to compensate for increased peak runoff rates due to development. 
(17)  In residential districts, not less than seventy (70) percent of the minimum lot area, as established by applicable zoning district development standards, shall be above the intermediate regional flood elevation contours with the exception that lots in the R-150 district shall conform to requirements of the R-100 district. 
(18)  All buildings located adjacent to the intermediate regional floodplain shall be constructed so that all portions of the structure, including the basement floor or crawl areas, shall be not less than three (3) feet above the intermediate regional flood elevations; however, structural support units may be located within the intermediate regional floodplain, provided they do not conflict with the hydrologic design characteristics of the approved plans and do not conflict with other requirements of this article. Any structure or manufactured home so erected must be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure, and be constructed with flood-resistant materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. Floodproofing of residential construction will be in accordance with section 14-40(b)(10) of the Code of DeKalb County. When floodproofing is utilized for a nonresidential structure, the owner of the property shall obtain written certification from a registered professional engineer or architect and shall provide such certification to the director before the director approves such activity. 
(19)  The profile elevation of the centerline of all public streets shall be constructed a minimum of one (1) foot above the intermediate regional flood elevation contours. The director may grant exceptions to this provision in cases where construction of the street elevation is below the intermediate regional flood elevation and elevation contours would improve drainage or reduce the effects of flooding. 
(20)  Special drainage system maintenance requirements are as follows: 
(A)  Pursuant to Chapter 22.5 of the Code of DeKalb County, as amended, trash, garbage, construction materials, construction by-products or other debris shall not be deposited in any part of the drainage system. 
(B)  No restriction or barriers, including fences, may be placed in the drainage system or intermediate regional floodplain without first obtaining a development permit. When on-site or off-site debris has accumulated within an intermediate regional floodplain in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of water so as to increase the risk of hazardous inundation of upstream properties adjacent to the intermediate regional floodplain, the director shall require the owner of the property where this debris was generated, if its source can be identified, to clear and remove the debris so as to permit the free flow of water. 
(C)  No impoundment of water which retains in excess of five-tenths (0.5) acre (in feet) of runoff shall be removed without first obtaining a development permit, which shall only be issued after competent engineering studies provided by the applicant show that this removal will not adversely affect downstream properties. 
(D)  No permanent structures or additions shall be constructed within the intermediate regional floodplain other than those non-building facilities required or authorized by the director which will not conflict with the hydrologic design characteristics of the approved development and construction plans. Land within the intermediate regional floodplain may be used to meet setback, yard, open space and buffer requirements in accordance with applicable provisions of Chapter 27 and the buffer requirements of this chapter. 
(21)  Any proposal for development in a regulatory floodway as identified on the flood boundary-floodway map must be accompanied by engineering certifications assuring that no increase in the flood levels of the base flood would be caused by the proposed development. Such proposals include culverts and bridges. 
(22)  New construction or substantial improvements of elevated buildings that include fully enclosed areas formed by foundations and other exterior walls below the base flood elevation shall be designed to preclude finished living space and designed to allow for the entry and exit of floodwaters to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls, as follows: 
(A)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a currently state-registered professional engineer or currently state-registered professional architect and meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both directions. 
(B)  Electrical, plumbing and other utility connections are prohibited below the base flood elevation. 
(C)  Access to the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises (standard exterior door) or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). 
(D)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Mo. of 1-23-01; Ord. No. 24-03, Pt. I, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05) 
Sec. 14-41. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-42. - Water quality control. 
The following provisions are included in the land development regulations in order to control the water quality of storm runoff from all development and construction activities and all developed sites: 
(a)  Standards. 
(1)  New development and redevelopments in DeKalb County must use the stormwater quality site development review tool to facilitate the evaluation of the project in accordance with recommendations of this ordinance and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(2)  At a minimum, new projects shall include stormwater quality provisions and the BMPs necessary to accomplish each of the following. 
(A)  Water quality BMPs must be installed on all developments to improve the water quality of the storm runoff from the development site. Stormwater management systems (which can include both structural stormwater controls and better site design practices) must be designed to remove eighty (80) percent of the average annual post-development total suspended solids load. As a minimum, the runoff from the first one and two-tenths (1.2) inches of rainfall must be treated. Acceptable BMPs for treating stormwater runoff are set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(B)  BMPs shall be used to control discharges into the local drainage system of any organic or inorganic matter that cause or tend to cause pollution of such waters. 
(i)  Minimization of impervious areas within developments and minimization of impervious areas directly connected to the local drainage system is encouraged as a non-structural BMP for water quality and quantity control. 
(ii)  A plan shall be provided to protect all existing wetland/floodplain areas within the development site. 
(b)  Drainage plans. The following performance criteria shall be used by the county in evaluating all drainage plans, unless otherwise provided for in this section: 
(1)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(A)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(B)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(C)  Runoff from a stormwater hotspot and activities identified by DeKalb County are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(c)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(d)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(e)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one hundred-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(f)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the director before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. 
(g)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required. The applicant may, if approved by the director, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements that identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(h)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one (1) parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00; Mo. of 1-23-01; Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. I, 11-8-05; Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. I, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 14-43. - Groundwater recharge area. 
Development within groundwater recharge areas, as delineated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' (DNR) Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 Edition) and the DNR's Pollution Susceptibility Map, shall meet the criteria for the protection of groundwater recharge areas established in Chapter 391-3-16-.02 of the DNR's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria. 
(Ord. No. 85-00, Pt. I, 12-28-00) 
Sec. 14-44. - Reserved. 
Sec. 14-44.1. - Land development requirements and allowable stream buffer encroachments. 
(a)  Land development requirements. All land development activity shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Stream buffers shall consist of the contiguous undisturbed natural vegetative land a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from each stream bank measured horizontally on both banks of the stream from the top of the stream bank. Stream buffers shall preserve any existing mature riparian forest that can provide shade, leaf litter, woody debris and erosion protection to the stream. Land use in the stream buffer is limited to unpaved footpaths, and utility or roadway crossings, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(2)  The stormwater discharge crossing a stream buffer shall be designed to ensure that sheet flow is established through the stream buffer and prevent channelized flow through the stream buffer. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the stream buffer. 
(4)  Piping of streams shall not be allowed in a stream buffer except where a variance is granted as provided in section 14-44.1 et seq. However, perpendicular utility crossings such as sewer pipes and water pipes shall be allowed, but shall be kept to an absolute minimum. 
(5)  Within the stream buffer, a property owner may remove unwanted ground cover (e.g. poison ivy) using hand tools, and in conformance with subsection 14-38(b)(4)c.15. 
(b)  Authorized stream buffer encroachments. Encroachments within the stream buffer shall be allowed only in the following manner in the following areas: 
(1)  General requirements. No encroachments shall be allowed in the state buffer without a variance from the director of EPD. No stream buffer variances shall be granted by the director within the twenty-five (25) feet of the county buffer nearest the stream. No stream buffer variance shall be granted by the planning commission. Any sketch plat, preliminary plat or final plat, that contains a delineation, drawing or language construed to be a stream buffer variance shall be void and of no effect. The only method by which a stream buffer variance may be obtained by an applicant is to comply with the requirements of section 14-44.1 et seq. 
(2)  New construction/new development. No stream buffer variance shall be granted by the director within the county buffer if the applicant is constructing a structure on vacant land. However, vacant lots existing and validly platted in the real estate records of the Clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County prior to February 24, 2009, that would otherwise be unbuildable as a result of the stream buffer restrictions set forth in section 14-44.1 et seq. may obtain a stream buffer variance from the director to encroach into the county buffer so long as the applicant complies with all of the requirements for the variance as set forth in section 14-44.1 et seq. 
(3)  Lot coverage. No stream buffer variance shall be granted by the director if the proposed encroachment created by the variance shall allow an applicant to exceed the allowable maximum lot coverage for the property at issue. 
(4)  General variance requirements for redevelopment of any kind of existing structures. In all cases, where any kind of existing structure(s) encroaches into the stream buffer and any such existing structure(s) is to be demolished in whole or in part and replaced with a new structure or a new addition, no stream buffer variance shall be granted if the total size of the new encroachment exceeds twenty (20) percent of the total square footage of the existing encroachment of the structure prior to demolition. In such cases, the new encroachment shall be kept furthest from the stream. 
(5)  Redevelopment of existing multifamily residential, commercial or institutional structures. 
a.  No stream buffer variance shall be granted for the redevelopment of existing multifamily residential, commercial or institutional structures if the structure was constructed after December 28, 2000, the date of the initial enactment of the fifty-foot county stream buffer. 
b.  Existing multifamily structures, existing commercial structures and existing institutional structures erected prior to the enactment of the fifty-foot stream buffer may obtain a stream buffer variance within the outer twenty-five (25) feet of the county buffer, but such variance shall be limited to a maximum depth of ten (10) feet into the outer county twenty-five-foot stream buffer. The director shall verify that the subject multifamily residential, commercial or institutional structure possesses all required county permits before a variance may be issued. Existing multifamily residential, commercial or institutional structures which are proposed for redevelopment or enlargement may obtain a stream buffer variance provided that the encroachment remains the same and does not alter the existing building footprint resting in the stream buffer. 
c.  No stream buffer variance shall be granted by the director for additions or redevelopment of existing multifamily residential, commercial or institutional structures within the existing or year 2025 built-out condition flood plain. 
(6)  Redevelopment or addition to existing single-family residential structures. 
a.  No stream buffer variance shall be granted for the redevelopment or addition to an existing single-family residential structure if the structure was constructed after December 28, 2000, the date of the initial enactment of the fifty (50) foot county stream buffer. 
b.  In the case of redevelopment or addition to existing single-family residential structures erected prior to enactment of the fifty-foot stream buffer, no stream buffer variance shall be granted by the director in the state stream buffer or within the inner twenty-five (25) feet of the county stream buffer. Existing single-family residential structures erected prior to enactment of the fifty-foot stream buffer may obtain a stream buffer variance for no more than ten (10) feet into the outer county twenty-five-foot stream buffer. The director shall verify that the subject single-family residential structure possesses all required county permits before a variance may be issued. Existing single-family residential structures which are proposed for redevelopment or enlargement may obtain a stream buffer variance provided that the encroachment remains the same and does not alter the existing building footprint resting in the stream buffer. 
c.  No stream buffer variance shall be granted by the director for additions or redevelopment of existing single-family residential structures within the existing or year 2025 built-out condition flood plain. 
d.  The only exception to the requirements set forth in this subsection is as follows: the director may consider granting a stream buffer variance that allows an elevated deck to encroach up to twenty-five (25) feet into the outer twenty-five (25) feet of the county buffer so long as the applicant complies with all other requirements set forth in section 14-44.1 et seq. 
(7)  [Compliance.] No stream buffer variance shall be granted by the director if the applicant has not complied with all of the applicable requirements set forth in section 14-44.1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. 1, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 14-44.2. - Exemptions. 
The following specific activities and properties are exempt from having to comply with the provisions of section 14-44.1 and are not required to obtain a stream buffer variance: 
(1)  A stream crossing by utility line is not required to obtain a county stream buffer variance. 
(2)  Public water supply and public wastewater structures constructed by DeKalb County or by a contractor on behalf of DeKalb County. 
(3)  Any encroachment undertaken by the state, or a contractor on behalf of the state. 
(4)  Any county floodplain management home buyout project funded by GEMA or FEMA. 
(5)  Any perpendicular road crossing that is undertaken by the county or a subcontractor on behalf of the county. 
(6)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the director on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten (10) days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the director to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(7)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance activity in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices shall be allowed on the entire property for five (5) years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(8)  Public access facilities that must be on the water, including boat ramps. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. 1, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 14-44.3. - Administrative variance application requirements. 
Applications for variances shall be made in writing to the director and shall contain materials and documents required by the director that are necessary to demonstrate that said request meets the criteria for granting variances. The director may waive certain application requirements for variance requests associated with construction on an existing, single-family, owner occupied residential structure. At a minimum, and in order to be considered complete, a variance request shall include all of the following information in writing: 
(1)  A site map with graphic scale and north arrow that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey. 
(2)  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property. 
(3)  A detailed site plan that shows both the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious surfaces (both inside and outside the buffer), and the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance activity (both inside and outside the buffer). The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated. Site plan must clearly show justification for variance request. 
(4)  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained. 
(5)  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer intrusion, or an explanation of why such an alternative site plan is not possible. 
(6)  The maximum lot coverage allowed for the property according to its zoning category and a calculation of the existing and proposed lot coverage. 
(7)  A calculation of the total area, length and width of the proposed intrusion. 
(8)  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable. 
(9)  Delineation of all state waters located on or within two hundred (200) feet of the project site. 
(10)  Delineation of the twenty-five-foot undisturbed state buffer and the fifty-foot stream buffer along designated streams and measured horizontally on both banks of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(11)  Identification of the project receiving waters and description of adjacent areas such as streams, lakes, drainage ditches, residential areas, which might be affected. 
(12)  Variance from Georgia Environmental Protection Division required [requirements] for encroachment in the twenty-five-foot state buffer. 
(13)  Show double-row type C silt fence between land-disturbing activity and state waters, wetlands, and/or intermediate regional flood (IRF). 
(14)  File notice of intent and notice of termination with Georgia Environmental Protection Division and DeKalb County, if land-disturbance activity is one (1) acre or more or within two hundred (200) feet of state waters. Submission must be at least fourteen (14) days prior to start of any land disturbance activity. 
(15)  Illustration of soil series and their delineation. 
(16)  Show limits of disturbance on erosion and sediment control plans (E&SC plans). 
(17)  Name, address and phone number of applicant/owner or provide power of attorney, if applicant is not the owner. 
(18)  Provide name and phone number of twenty-four-hour local erosion and sediment control contact. 
(19)  Show certification number, signature and seal of qualified plan designer. 
(20)  Provide vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates and seeding. 
(21)  Proposed mitigation plan. All proposed mitigation plans shall be designed and stamped by Georgia-licensed design professionals. Proposed mitigation plans shall be nonstructural and designed to improve the quality of the stream and the associated buffer. Mitigation plans shall include planting schedule, channel protection design and enhancement/improvement as approved the director. Mitigation plans that relate to multiuse trials shall negate the impact of the trail and improve the quality of life of the affected stream. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. 1, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 14-44.4. - Administrative variance criteria, standard of review and process. 
(a)  Except as further limited herein, the director has the authority to grant stream buffer variances. 
(b)  An applicant may request a variance from the terms of the requirements of section 14-44.1 et seq. 
(c)  The director shall have no power to consider or to grant variances which are the responsibility of the director of the EPD pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 and other relevant state statutes and regulations. 
(d)  The director is only authorized to consider applications for variances within the twenty-five (25) feet of the county stream buffer farthest from the stream, but not within the twenty-five (25) feet of the state buffer adjacent to waters of the state or within the twenty-five feet (25) feet of the county stream buffer nearest the stream. 
(e)  Where variances involving the same project are requested from both the director of the EPD and the director, the director may take no action on any such request for variance until the director of the EPD grants the variance or otherwise approves the request pending before the EPD. 
(f)  Receiving a variance from the director of the EPD does not obligate the director to permit the project to proceed if the project does not also meet all the other requirements of this article. 
(g)  The director has the discretion to deny any variance application based on: 
(1)  The condition of the stream on the property; 
(2)  Upstream and downstream condition of the stream; and 
(3)  The steams that are listed in 303(d) registry of the state. 
(h)  No variance from the provisions of section 14-44.1 et seq. may be authorized except as specifically authorized herein or specifically authorized in another section of chapter 14. No stream buffer variance shall be approved within the existing or year 2025 built-out condition flood plain. 
(i)  In considering a request for a variance to the terms of this article, the director shall consider all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the request, while not strictly meeting the requirements of chapter 14, will, in the judgment of the director, be at least as protective of natural resources and the environment as would a plan which met the strict application of these requirements. In making such a judgment, the director shall examine whether the request will be at least as protective of the natural resources and the environment and shall consider the following factors: 
a.  Stream bank or soil stabilization. 
b.  Trapping of sediment in surface runoff. 
c.  Removal of nutrients, heavy metals, pesticides and other pollutants from surface runoff. 
d.  Terrestrial habitat, food chain, and migration corridor. 
e.  Buffering of flood flows. 
f.  Infiltration of surface runoff. 
g.  Noise and visual buffers. 
h.  Downstream water quality. 
i.  Impact on threatened and endangered species, as those species are designated by law or federal or state regulation. The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property. 
j.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries. 
k.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion. 
l.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion. 
m.  The long-term and construction water-quality impacts of the proposed variance. 
(2)  Whether by reason of exceptional topographic or other relevant physical conditions of the subject property that was not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for any development under any design configuration unless a variance is granted. 
(3)  Whether the request goes beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief and constitutes a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties that are similarly situated. 
(4)  Whether the grant of the variance will be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the area in which the property is located. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has provided a mitigation plan designed and stamped by Georgia-licensed design professionals and whether that proposed mitigation plan is: 
a.  Nonstructural; 
b.  Designed to improve the quality of the stream and the associated buffer; and 
c.  Includes a planting schedule and channel protection design. 
(6)  Whether the literal interpretation and strict application of the applicable provisions or requirements of chapter 14 would cause an extreme hardship, so long as the hardship is not created by the owner. The applicant is responsible for providing proof of hardship. The proof shall demonstrate the difficult site conditions and possible alternate designs. The director shall not grant any stream buffer variances if the actions of the property owner of a given property have created the conditions of hardship on the property. 
(j)  The director shall decide whether to grant or deny the variance and his decision shall be in writing, shall state the basis for the decision, and shall be made no more than forty-five (45) days following receipt of a complete application. In the decision, the director shall specifically reference and describe the factors listed in subsection (i) above that were considered and utilized in making the variance decision. 
(k)  Any county projects, other than those exempted in section 14-44.2, are required to obtain a stream buffer variance. For such projects, encroachments shall be limited to the minimum necessary to achieve the project goal and shall be limited to specific locations within the county fifty-foot buffer. Appeal of a variance approval or denial for a county project shall be made to the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. 1, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 14-44.5. - Notice requirements and appeals of stream buffer administrative variance decisions. 
(a)  Commissioner notification. District and super district commissioners of the districts within which the property is located shall be notified in writing or by email by the director within three (3) working days of receipt of a complete variance application. 
(b)  Posting. Property where an administrative stream buffer variance is requested shall be posted with a sign within forty-eight (48) hours of submittal of a complete stream buffer variance application request to the director. The sign shall be posted by the applicant. The posted sign shall be a minimum of twenty-two (22) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size and shall contain the following information: address, nature of variance request, date of submittal of application; and planning and development department contact information. Applicants shall notify the director of the completed posting and shall provide the director with a dated photograph of the posted notice as evidence of the posting within forty-eight (48) hours of posting. 
(c)  Written notification of initial decision. The director shall send written notification of the stream buffer variance application and the director's written decision to the applicant and to abutting property owners. Abutting property owners are those persons listed in the tax records of DeKalb County as the owners of such abutting property on the date such notifications are required to be sent by the director. 
(d)  Appeals. Appeals shall be made to the zoning board of appeals and shall be administered in accordance with the notice requirements, criteria and procedural requirements set forth in section 27-901 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. 1, 2-24-09) 
Sec. 14-44.6. - Validity of previously issued stream buffer variances. 
Any stream buffer variance issued by the county prior to February 24, 2009, is and shall remain valid. Stream buffer variances granted by the county prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be repealed or deemed invalid by the adoption or approval of Ordinance No. 09-05. 
(Ord. No. 09-05, Pt. 1, 2-24-09) 
Secs. 14-45—14-54. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISIONS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, deleted former Art. III of this chapter in its entirety and added new provisions as Art. III as herein set out. Former Art. III, §§ 14-56—14-59, 14-76, 14-96—14-106, 14-121—14-134, 14-146—14-14-154, 14-166, 14-167, 14-181—14-199, 14-216—14-218, 14-236—14-239, 14-256—14-260, 14-276—14-281, 14-296, 14-311—14-333, 14-351—14-360, 14-376—14-384, 14-396—14-406, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 11-1001, 11-1002, 11-1021—11-1031, 11-1051—11-1064, 11-1081—11-1089, 11-1101—11-1121, 11-1131, 11-1132, 11-1141—11-1144, 11-1151—11-1155, 11-1161—11-1166, 11-1171—11-1172, 11-1193—11-1213, 11-1221—11-1229, and 11-1231—11-1249. Former Art. III also derived from the following ordinances: 

 

 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-55. - Title. 
This article shall be known, cited, and referred to as the subdivision regulations of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-56. - Effective date. 
These subdivision regulations shall become effective on July 15, 2002. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-57. - Policies and purposes. 
(a)  Policies. 
(1)  It is declared to be the policy of DeKalb County to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided land as subject to the control of the county pursuant to the county's official comprehensive plan in order to promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the county. 
(2)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(3)  The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the proposals shown in the comprehensive plan, official map, and the capital budget and program of the county, and it is intended that these regulations shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, zoning ordinances, the comprehensive plan, official map and land use plan, and the capital budget and program of the county. 
(b)  These regulations are adopted for the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of DeKalb County. 
(2)  To guide the future growth and development of the county in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  To protect and conserve the value of land and the economic stability of all communities in the county and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the county through appropriate growth management techniques, including consideration of the timing and sequencing of development, consideration of infill development in existing neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with adequate public facilities. 
(4)  To guide public policy and both public and private actions in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and public services and support facilities. 
(5)  To provide for the safe and efficient circulation of traffic throughout the county, having particular regard to avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and the pedestrians and bicycle traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of lands and buildings, and to provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines. 
(6)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments. 
(7)  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land. 
(8)  To ensure to the extent legally possible that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision. 
(9)  To protect and restore the highest quality of the county's air and water resources; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the county in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the county and the value of the land. 
(10)  To preserve the natural beauty, environment, and topography of the county and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-58. - Public purpose. 
Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable regulations to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to this county. A developer of land has the duty of compliance with the regulations set forth herein for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development of the county and to the health, safety, and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-59. - Interpretation. 
In their interpretation and application, these regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. These regulations shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted. Any conflict between provisions should be resolved in the way that best serves the purposes of the regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-60. - Scope and applicability. 
These regulations shall apply to all subdivision of land, as defined in section 14-1, located within the unincorporated portion of DeKalb County and within the corporate limits of a municipality within DeKalb County as may be provided by law and agreement between the county and municipality. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-61. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to a lot or parcel of land established by deed or plat recorded among the land records of the county prior to the effective date of these subdivision regulations or the division or sale of land by judicial decree. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, the division of land into two (2) lots shall be considered a subdivision but exempt from the plat review procedures provided that: 
(1)  Each proposed lot complies with the requirements of chapter 27 and all conditions of zoning; 
(2)  Each proposed lot fronts an existing paved public street, which contains the necessary right-of-way width required by this chapter; 
(3)  All such plats are drawn to final plat standards in this chapter; and 
(4)  The lot being divided is not a lot which resulted from a subdivision of property that was exempt from these regulations in the immediately preceding twenty-four (24) months. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-62. - Plats not to be recorded until accepted; lots not to be sold in unaccepted subdivision. 
No person shall record any subdivision plat until it has been approved and accepted by the chief executive officer, as the governing authority's designee, nor shall any lot be sold by reference to any subdivision plat whether recorded or not, if the plat is made after the effective date of this chapter, unless it shall have been approved and accepted by the chief executive officer. The recording of a plat shall be based on an approved plat and shall not be recorded solely on the basis of a metes and bounds description. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-63. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy; extension of services. 
No development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of these regulations, nor shall the county have any obligation to extend services to any parcel created in violation of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-64. - Power and duty of planning commission to hear variances, criteria to be used in deciding variances, and appeals. 
(a)  The planning commission shall hear and decide applications for variances from the strict application of Division 3 of Article III of this Chapter 14, known as the subdivision regulations of DeKalb County, where strict application of any regulation enacted in Division 3 of Article III would result in exceptional and undue hardship to the owner of such property. These regulations provide the minimum necessary requirements for subdivisions in DeKalb County; thus, variances from the requirements of Division 3 of Article III shall be authorized only upon the planning commission making all of the following findings: 
(1)  By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, the strict application of Division 3 of Article III would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other similarly situated property owners in the same zoning district; 
(2)  By reason of the shape or topographical conditions of a parcel of property which were not created by the owner or applicant, there is no opportunity for development under any design configuration allowed by these subdivision regulations unless a variance is granted; 
(3)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute the grant of a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other property owners in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; 
(4)  The requested variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements in the zoning district in which the subject property is located; and 
(5)  The requested variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of Chapter 27, the DeKalb County Comprehensive Plan or the zoning map of DeKalb County. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted by the planning commission to: 
(1)  Allow any variance which conflicts with or changes any requirement enacted as a condition of zoning or of a special land use permit by the board of commissioners; 
(2)  Increase the density allowed on the property; or 
(3)  Vary the requirements set forth in sections 14-256 through 14-260. 
(c)  Applications for variances must be submitted in writing to the planning director along with the application for sketch plat approval or if a variance becomes necessary after the planning commission has approved the sketch plat, within thirty (30) days of discovery of the condition(s) requiring such a variance from the preliminary plat. Applications shall contain all those materials and documents required by the planning director or the development director that are necessary to demonstrate the necessity for the variance and compliance with the requirements of this Code. At a minimum, the variance application must contain a full explanation of the reasons for the variance and must include a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed without the variance and a plat that shows the proposed subdivision designed with the variance. 
(d)  When the variance application is first considered by the planning commission, the development director and the planning director shall provide the planning commission with written findings of fact and a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the variance. 
(e)  Applications for variances that accompany the application for sketch plat approval shall be heard by the planning commission contemporaneously with the public hearing on the sketch plat. 
(f)  Applications for variances from the preliminary plat shall be heard at a public hearing by the planning commission at the next meeting of the planning commission held after the filing of a complete application for variance from the preliminary plat. All land development activity associated with a proposed variance from a preliminary plat shall cease until a final decision on the variance is made by the planning commission. Land development activity that is not related to the proposed variance may continue unabated. 
(g)  All decisions by the planning commission approving or disapproving a variance must be issued in writing and must provide the grounds for the decision of the planning commission. The planning commission shall issue a final decision on a variance submitted with the application for a sketch plat at the same time that it issues the final decision approving or disapproving the sketch plat. The planning commission shall issue a final decision on a variance from the preliminary plat within fifty (50) days after the first meeting at which the planning commission considers the variance. If a final decision is not made on a subdivision plat variance in accordance with the time constraints set forth in this section, the variance shall stand disapproved. 
(h)  Appeals of variances that accompany applications for sketch plat approval shall be made by writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County. Any person or entity (i.e., an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor or a neighbor whose property line is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the nearest property line of the proposed subdivision) aggrieved by a variance decision of the planning commission affecting a preliminary plat, may appeal such decision by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. I, 4-13-04) 
Sec. 14-65. - Enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
(a)  General. It shall be the duty of the chief executive officer to enforce this chapter. 
(b)  Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction in recorder's court shall be punished as is provided in section 1-10 of the Code of DeKalb County. Each violation of these regulations shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any structures, buildings, lots or parcels or parts thereof, where anything in violation of these regulations exists, and any architect, builder, contractor or any other agent of the owner, or any tenant, who commits or assists in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(c)  Enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings, including the issuance of stop work orders and actions in a court of law, may be taken by DeKalb County in law or in equity to prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-66—14-86. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLAT APPROVAL PROCEDURE 
Part A. - Conference 

Sec. 14-87. - Conference with county officials. 
Before filing the sketch plat for a subdivision for review and approval, the applicant shall meet with the planning director to discuss the procedure for approval of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets, reservations of open space, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services, including schools. The planning director may advise the applicant, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision plat coming within their jurisdiction. This conference will allow early evaluation of the applicant's intentions and coordination with the comprehensive plan and the zoning ordinance. This conference will also allow county officials to discuss with the applicant the necessary regulations that will properly accomplish the project. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Part B. - Sketch Plat 

Sec. 14-88. - Application and sketch plat required. 
The owner of the land where the proposed development is to occur, or his authorized agent, shall file a sketch plat with the planning department along with an application for approval. The application shall: 
(1)  Be made on forms prepared by the planning department; 
(2)  Be accompanied by minimum of eighteen (18) copies of the sketch plat, which must be prepared by a registered civil engineer, surveyor, architect, or landscape architect, as described in these regulations and complying in all respects with these regulations; 
(3)  Be accompanied by an application fee in the amount set by the board of commissioners; and 
(4)  Include the name, address and telephone number of an agent who is authorized to receive all notices required by these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-89. - Required information. 
The following existing conditions shall be shown on a sketch plat: 
(1)  Boundary lines. Perimeter boundary of the overall tract, bearings and distances, referred the legal point of beginning; 
(2)  Streets on or adjacent to tract. Name, right-of-way width, and location of streets on and adjacent to the tract, and any existing railroad, sidewalk, trail, or bike lane; 
(3)  Contour data. Topographic contour data at no more than two-foot elevation intervals. The source of this data shall be written on the plat. Existing contour data from the DeKalb County Geographic Information System Department may be used where available; 
(4)  Tree survey. A tree survey in compliance with section 14-39 or tree sample calculations where allowed by the county arborist which may be submitted as a separate plan; 
(5)  Historic resources. Any building, structure, site or district identified as historic by the DeKalb County Historic Preservation Commission, the DeKalb County Historic Resources Survey, the comprehensive plan, by listing on the Georgia or National Register of Historic Places, or by listing as a National Historic Landmark. 
(6)  Natural features on tract. Other conditions on the tract such as stream buffers, state waters, cemeteries, wetlands, existing structures, intermediate regional floodplain boundary (where available), rock outcroppings, and archeological resources; 
(7)  Soils. Location of soils as shown on Soil Survey of DeKalb County, Georgia by the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Geographical data. Numerical and graphic scales, north arrow, land lot and district numbers and lines, city and county names and limit lines; 
(9)  Prior subdivisions. Name and reference of any formerly recorded subdivision crossing any of the land shown on the plat; 
(10)  Zoning district. Show zoning district, case number and conditions of zoning; 
(11)  Permits. Show any special administrative permit number, special land use permit number, or board of appeals case number and conditions; 
(12)  Variances. Show any administrative variance approvals; 
(13)  Septic tanks. Show existing septic tank and drain field location or note absence; 
(14)  Sewers. Show size and location of sanitary sewer main(s) available; 
(15)  Sewer easements. Show a sanitary sewer easement with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet of for all county maintained lines not within county right-of-way, unless otherwise required by water and sewer department; 
(16)  Water mains. Show size and location of water main(s) and fire hydrants; 
(17)  Water main easements. Show a water main easement with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet for all county maintained lines not within right-of-way; 
(18)  IRF. Show on plan whether FEMA or county benchmark used to establish IRF also identify location of Benchmark; 
(19)  Wetlands. Provide wetlands determination from U.S. Army corps of engineers; 
(20)  Receiving waters. Provide distance to and name of receiving waters; 
(21)  Certificate of conformity. Certification by the applicant that no lots platted are non-conforming or will result in any non-conforming lots. 
(22)  Bury pits. Show location of any existing inert waste bury pits. 
(23)  Seal. All sheets of plats must be sealed by a professional engineer, architect, surveyor, or landscape architect currently registered in the state of Georgia; 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-90. - Depiction of proposed physical layout. 
The following proposed features shall be shown on the sketch plat: 
(1)  Title. The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, if known, with the name of the property owner(s) and designers and the date of the plat; 
(2)  Street names. The name of all proposed streets. 
(3)  Rights-of-way. Street rights-of-way and widths indicated, including any necessary right-of-way required for improvements as shown on the thoroughfare plan; 
(4)  Sidewalks. All proposed sidewalk and bike lane locations; 
(5)  Lots. Lot lines, lot numbers, block letters, and the total number of proposed lots within the development; 
(6)  Dedications. Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for common areas, public parks, open space, schools, playgrounds, multi-use trails, or other public uses, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of these dedications, if any; 
(7)  Yards. Minimum building setback lines as required under the yard requirements of zoning ordinance; 
(8)  Zoning conditions. All conditions of zoning and proposed deed restrictions shall be recited on the sketch plat; 
(9)  Corner lots. Show that corner lots shall have an extra width of not less than fifteen (15) feet more than required for interior lots for the zoning district within which they are located; 
(10)  Transitional buffers. Show transitional buffers, if any and any required screening fencing; 
(11)  BMPs. Show conceptual location of storm water management and water quality BMP facilities on sketch plat; 
(12)  IRF. Show proposed IRF contour, spot elevation (if available) and source; 
(13)  Covenants. Indicate whether the proposed subdivision will be subject to private covenants and whether a homeowner's association will be established; 
(14)  Sewer easements. Show a sanitary sewer easement with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet for all county maintained lines not within county right-of-way; 
(15)  Water main easements. Show a water main easement with a minimum width of fifteen (15) feet for all county maintained lines not within right-of-way; 
(16)  Fire hydrants. Show new fire hydrant(s) and eight-inch fireline(s); and 
(17)  Fencing. Show any required fencing around detention ponds, if required. 
(18)  Electrical service. Show whether electrical service will be above ground or underground. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-91. - Additional information to be filed with the sketch plat. 
The following additional information shall be submitted with the sketch plat: 
(1)  Owner consent. The property owner must consent in writing to the proposed development in a consent affidavit provided by the planning director with the application; 
(2)  Taxes. Provide statement from tax commissioner certifying that all ad valorem taxes on the property have been paid; 
(3)  Location. A small map of DeKalb County depicting the subdivision location within the county; 
(4)  Vicinity map. Vicinity map at a scale of four hundred (400) feet to one (1) inch showing the location of the tract with reference to surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries, and streams within five hundred (500) feet of the tract show zoning districts of adjoining property; 
(5)  Adjacent properties. Names of adjoining property owners and the zoning classification of adjacent properties; and 
(6)  Engineer. Name, address and phone of developer and engineer on plat. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-92. - Scale. 
Sketch plats shall be prepared at an appropriate scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch. Maximum sheet size shall be twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-93. - Official acceptance of application and sketch plat. 
(a)  The planning department shall give written notice to the applicant within seven (7) days from the date the sketch plat and application are submitted whether the sketch plat application is accepted for review and the official date of such official acceptance. An application shall be accepted when it fully complies with the requirements of sections 14-88 through 14-92. 
(b)  If the application and sketch plat are not accepted, the planning director shall inform the applicant of the deficiencies and request the applicant to resubmit the application and sketch plat with the additional information. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-94. - Referral of sketch plat for review. 
(a)  Upon official acceptance of the application and the sketch plat, the planning director shall provide copies of the sketch plat to the development department, the public works divisions of water and sewer, roads and drainage, transportation, and sanitation, police department, the department of parks and recreation, the geographic information system department, economic development department, the board of education, and any other department the planning director determines should be consulted for the particularities of the proposed subdivision. Each such department and receiving entity shall review the sketch plat and shall make comments and recommendations regarding any required changes necessary to comply with all applicable regulations. Each department shall return its annotated copy of the sketch plat and written comments and recommendations to the planning director within fourteen (14) days from the date of receipt. 
(b)  Once the planning director has received each department's comments and recommendations, the planning director shall either notify the applicant that the sketch plat has been referred to the planning commission with a recommendation by staff for approval or notify the applicant that revisions to the sketch plat are required. Such initial notification shall be given within thirty-five (35) days of the official acceptance of the application and the sketch plat. 
(c)  In the event that any revisions to the sketch plat are required, the applicant may submit a revised sketch plat to the planning director and if the applicant submits a revised sketch plat, the planning director shall have fourteen (14) days to review the revisions and determine whether such revisions are sufficient for a recommendation of approval and referral to the planning commission. If the revisions are insufficient, the planning director shall notify the applicant that further revisions to the sketch plat are required and for each set of revisions submitted by the applicant the planning director shall have fourteen (14) days for review as described in this section. 
(d)  If a sketch plat is not referred to the planning commission within one hundred eighty (180) days of the official acceptance of the application, the application and sketch plat shall be considered withdrawn without further action by the county. At any time during this one hundred eighty-day period, the applicant may refuse to make further revisions and request that the planning director refer the sketch plat to the planning commission for approval or disapproval at a public hearing. The applicant must request such a referral in writing to the planning director that must be received during this one hundred eighty-day period. The planning director, without an applicant's request, is also authorized to refer the sketch plat to the planning commission for approval or disapproval at a public hearing. If the referral is based upon the applicant's request, the planning director shall refer the sketch plat to the planning commission to be considered at the next appropriately advertised and scheduled meeting of the planning commission. However, in any referral the planning director is authorized to recommend approval or disapproval. The planning director shall recommend approval if the application and sketch plat conform to all requested revisions, the requirements of this Code and state law and shall recommend disapproval if the application and sketch plat do not conform to all requested revisions, the requirements of this Code or state law. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-95. - Public hearing for sketch plats; and procedure for appeal. 
(a)  When the date for the sketch plat public hearing has been determined, the planning director shall notify the applicant in writing of the date of the hearing in accordance with the requirements of section 1139 of appendix B of this Code. The applicant shall place a public notification sign on the site of the proposed subdivision at least fifteen (15) days prior to the initial public hearing. At the same time as the sign is posted, the applicant shall also place in a box, on site of the proposed subdivision, in a place which is accessible to the public, fifty (50) 11"×17" copies of the proposed sketch plat. The planning director shall verify that the sign has been posted. If applicant fails to properly post the required sign, the sketch plat shall be removed from the planning commission's agenda and shall not be rescheduled until the applicant has properly posted the required notification sign and made copies of the plat available to the public in a box on the site in accordance with requirements set forth in this Code. 
(b)  At the initial public hearing, the applicant and members of the public shall be allowed to submit written comments to the planning commission that support or oppose the sketch plat. The planning commission shall allow a maximum of ten (10) minutes of oral comments to be shared between persons who support the approval of the plat and those opposed. Each side shall be allowed a maximum of five (5) minutes. 
(c)  The planning commission may approve or disapprove the proposed sketch plat in accordance with the approval standards contained in section 14-96. The planning commission may also have a one-time return of the sketch plat to the applicant with required revisions to be made to the plat in accordance with the approval standards contained in section 14-96. The sketch plat containing the required revisions shall be returned to the planning director within fifteen (15) days of the planning commission's decision that such revisions are required, for consideration at a scheduled public hearing of the planning commission. If the revisions are not made and resubmitted to the planning director within fifteen (15) days, the sketch plat shall be automatically disapproved without further action by the planning commission. However, the fifteen (15) day planning commission revision process shall not extend the one hundred eighty (180) day limitation set forth in section 14-94. 
(d)  The planning commission shall issue a final decision on the sketch plat, in accordance with the requirements of section 1139 of appendix B of this Code, within fifty (50) days after the first hearing at which the planning commission considers the sketch plat. If the planning commission does not make a final decision within fifty (50) days, then the sketch plat shall stand approved if so recommended by the planning director pursuant to requirements of section 14-94(d) or shall stand disapproved if so recommended by the planning director pursuant to the requirements of section 14-94(d). 
(e)  Any person or entity (i.e., an owner, applicant, adjoining neighbor or a neighbor whose property line is within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of the nearest property line of the proposed subdivision) aggrieved by a denial or approval of a sketch plat, may appeal by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. I, 4-13-04) 
Sec. 14-96. - Standards for approval of sketch plats; approved preliminary plats. 
(a)  The planning commission shall not approve a sketch plat unless it is found that: 
(1)  Provisions have been made for a water supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality for purposes of health, emergency, and adequate fire protection for the subdivision proposed; 
(2)  If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate provision has been made for such a system and, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that such systems will comply with federal, state, and local laws and regulations; 
(3)  Adequate areas have been allocated within a subdivision to meet the regulations in this chapter for the long-term collection, management, and treatment of stormwater; 
(4)  The proposed subdivision is designed to avoid areas of flood plains, watercourses, wetlands, exceptional or specimen trees or woodlands; 
(5)  No platting of lots within the subdivision will create any non-conforming lots or increase the non-conformity of existing non-conforming lots on property within or adjacent to the subdivision; 
(6)  If the subdivision abuts a state designed highway, all applicable statutory provisions are followed, including the rules of Georgia Department of Transportation; 
(7)  The proposed subdivision meets all the requirements of this chapter, Chapter 27, the official comprehensive plan, the official thoroughfare map, and all other standards and regulations adopted by all boards, commissions, agencies, and officials of DeKalb County and all other applicable laws from other, relevant jurisdictions; 
(8)  A properly issued certificate of appropriateness, when the subdivision or portions thereof lie within a designated historic area that required such a certificate as may be required by state law or this Code; and 
(9)  Lot lines have been laid out so as to minimize crossing municipal or county boundaries; 
(10)  All requirements of section 14-89 and section 14-90 have been fulfilled. 
(b)  The development director, planning director, or a planning commissioner may require the applicant to submit a site plan for any lot to demonstrate that the lot contains adequate buildable area that is suitable for the intended use. 
(c)  After review of the sketch plat and related comments, and where, in the judgment of the planning commission, the sketch plat conforms to all of the requirements of this chapter and Chapter 27 of this Code, all conditions of zoning, and any other applicable county regulations or law, the planning commission chairman shall approve said sketch plat. The following wording for approval shall be shown on the sketch plat: 
This sketch plat has been submitted to and approved by the planning commission of DeKalb County, on this _____ day of ________. 
By: ___________ (By Dir.)  Planning Commission Chairman  DeKalb County, Georgia 
(d)  A sketch plat shall become and will be known as a preliminary plat upon its approval by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-97. - Scope of approval approved preliminary plat; digital submission of preliminary plat. 
The preliminary plat shall not constitute nor provide assurance of approval of the final plat, but is to be used as the development design for the subdivision and for the acquisition of a development permit as provided for in section 27-960 of the Code. The preliminary plat shall be submitted to the development department in a digital format acceptable to the county, prior to or simultaneous with an application for a development permit. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. I, 4-13-04) 
Sec. 14-98. - Expiration. 
The preliminary plat shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat. If fifty-one (51) percent of linear feet of total road in the entire development shown on the preliminary plat is complete at the expiration of twenty-four (24) months from the date of the approval of the preliminary plat, then the chief executive officer is authorized to grant a one-time, one year extension of the approval of the preliminary plat. An expired preliminary plat is null and void and is of no effect. An expired preliminary plat may not be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-99. - Revised preliminary plat. 
If the approved sketch plat, which becomes the preliminary plat, is amended or altered by the applicant, without an approved variance, after approval as a sketch plat, then the applicant shall be required to re-submit the revised preliminary plat as a new sketch plat and begin anew the application process contained in Part B (Sketch Plat) of this division (Plat Approval Procedure). 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-100—14-120. - Reserved. 
Part C. - Final Plat 

Sec. 14-121. - Preparation. 
The applicant shall have a registered surveyor prepare the final plat of the subdivision. An application for final plat approval may be made when a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been approved and construction of all required infrastructure is complete to ascertain its location as built. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-122. - Filing; digital submission of final plat; fee. 
The final plat and a fee in the amount established by the board of commissioners shall be filed with the county. The final plat and as-built drawings shall also be submitted in a digital format acceptable to the county. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. I, 4-13-04) 
Sec. 14-123. - Review, certification by county departments. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the final plat, the planning director shall forward copies of the final plat to the following county departments for certification that the improvements are complete and in conformity with the preliminary plat: 
(1)  Development department; 
(2)  Geographic information system department; 
(3)  Police and fire department; 
(4)  Transportation division, public works department; 
(5)  Water and sewer division, public works department; 
(6)  Roads and drainage division, public works department; 
(7)  Board of education; and 
(8)  Any other department or entity the planning director deems appropriate. 
(b)  Any department to which the final plat is submitted shall note on the plat whether the development meets or fails to meet the requirements of this Code and of that department, specifically, whether all improvements were properly completed and whether the improvements are in conformity with the preliminary plat. If the improvements are incomplete or if the improvements are not in conformity with the preliminary plat, the department shall note on the plat the manner in which the plat fails to meet these requirements. Each department must return its copy of the final plat with notations made within twenty-one (21) calendar days of receipt thereof. 
(c)  Upon receipt of the annotated copies from all of the departments which received the final plat for notation, the planning director and development director shall independently review the final plat and determine whether it complies with all county zoning, environmental, and subdivision ordinances and regulations and all applicable state and federal laws. The planning director and development director shall certify in writing on the final plat their finding of whether the final plat complies with all county zoning, environmental, and subdivision ordinances and regulations and all applicable state and federal laws. 
(d)  The final plat shall conform to the approved preliminary plat on file with the county and shall comply with the county zoning ordinance including conditions of zoning. 
(e)  The final plat shall not be forwarded to the chief executive officer until such time as the planning director or designee certifies that the final plat conforms to the approved preliminary plat and that it complies with all county zoning, environmental and subdivision ordinances and regulations, including the requirements contained in section 14-298, and all applicable state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 18-06 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 14-124. - Referral to the chief executive officer. 
(a)  No later than fourteen (14) calendar days after receiving the annotated copies from all of the departments which received the final plat for notation, the planning director and the development director shall transmit the final plat, containing the certification required in section 14-123(c) and any necessary supplemental materials to the chief executive officer for decision. 
(b)  The chief executive officer as the designee for the governing authority of the county shall approve or disapprove the final plat within ten (10) days of receiving the final plat, as indicted by a receipt stamp on the final plat. If the final plat is not approved or denied within ten (10) days of receipt, the final plat shall be approved automatically and the chief executive officer shall acknowledge and certify such approval. If the final plat is denied, the chief executive officer shall provide the reason(s) for denial in writing and such writing shall be given to the applicant with the denied plat. If the final plat is approved, the chief executive officer shall place the following wording on the original as follows: 
This plat has been submitted to and accepted by the chief executive officer of DeKalb County, Georgia, and has been approved as required by state law and county codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the superior court of this circuit. 
Dated this _____ day of ________, ________. 
By:___________  [Chief Executive Officer as designee of the governing authority] 
(c)  Final plat acknowledgement and approval by the chief executive officer shall constitute that approval, if any, required in order to file subdivision plats with the clerk of the superior court of DeKalb County pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-125. - Appeal of final plat decision. 
The decision of the chief executive officer to approve or disapprove the final plat may be appealed only by a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-126. - Recording. 
The approved final plat shall be recorded with the clerk of the superior court of DeKalb County by the planning director and returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-127. - Dedication offers. 
The filing and recording of the final plat by the planning director shall, upon completion of the improvements by the applicant and compliance with all procedures of this chapter, be deemed an acceptance of the dedication of the streets and other public land as shown upon said plat on behalf of the public. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-128. - Material specifications for drawing. 
The final plat shall be composed of mylar, or other durable, stable, and reproducible drafting medium approved by the planning director and must meet all provisions of the Georgia Plat Act. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-129. - Scale. 
Final plats shall be prepared at a scale of not more than one hundred (100) feet to one (1) inch and shall have a maximum sheet size of not more than twenty-four (24) inches in width and thirty-six (36) inches in length, and a minimum sheet size of not less than seventeen (17) inches in width and twenty-one (21) inches in length. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-130. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
The final plat shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 27 and all conditions of zoning for the subject property to be shown in the upper right corner of the final plat with text height at a minimum of .18 inches for 24" × 36" sheet size and .09 inches for 17" × 21" sheet size. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-131. - Required information. 
The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearings and lengths of every right-of-way, street line, lot line, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight; 
(2)  Tract boundary lines, land lot and district lines, city and county limit lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; 
(3)  All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one hundredth of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest second; 
(4)  Name and right-of-way width of each street including necessary right-of-way required for present or future widening of major, minor, collector, residential or other streets as shown on the thoroughfare plan; 
(5)  Sidewalk and bike path locations and width; 
(6)  House numbers: numbers will be assigned by the geographic information system department and placed on the final plat by the planning department; 
(7)  Title, north arrow, date, scale, land lot numbers and district numbers; 
(8)  Location, dimensions and purpose of easements and areas to be dedicated to public use, common areas or sites for other than residential use with notices stating their purpose and limitations; 
(9)  Intermediate regional floodplain contour line and setback line required by this chapter, state waters/state streams, wetlands, and required stream buffers; 
(10)  Water and sewer utility locations, and the location and type of permanent stormwater management facilities and water quality facilities; 
(11)  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically; all lot and block numerals shall be kept in a uniform sequence on all plats and units of the subdivision; 
(12)  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers; within each subdivision set one (1) monument on two (2) front corners of the property adjacent to existing rights-of-way on interior streets, or as otherwise approved by the development director; each monument shall be a minimum four-inch diameter disk by twenty-four-inch high concrete monument with brass caps set flush with finished grade; and 
(13)  Lots which shall not be built upon until detailed plans for grading and drainage have been approved by the development director. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-132. - Space for comments, certifications. 
A blank space of fifty (50) square inches shall be provided on the final plat to allow room for any stamps, notes, approval or denials as required to be placed thereon by county agencies and for the joint certification of the planning and development directors and approval or denial by the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-133. - Surveyor's and owner's acknowledgments. 
The following wording for the engineer's [surveyor's] and owner's acknowledgments shall be shown and certified on the final plat: 
(1)  Surveyor's acknowledgment. 
In my opinion, this plat, drawn by me or under my supervision, was made from an actual survey, and is a correct representation of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law. 
_____R.L.S. No._____ 
(2)  Owner's acknowledgment. 
I, ___________, the owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and for value received the sufficiency of which is hereby acknowledged, do hereby convey all streets and rights-of-way, water mains and sewer lines shown hereon in fee simple to DeKalb County, and further dedicate to the use of the public forever all alleys, parks, watercourses, drains, easements and public places hereon shown for the purposes and considerations herein expressed. In consideration of the approval of this development plan and other valuable considerations, the owner further releases and holds harmless DeKalb County from any and all claims, damages or demands arising on account of the design, construction and maintenance of the property shown hereon; on account of the roads, fills, embankments, ditches, cross-drains, culverts, water mains, sewer lines, and bridges within the proposed rights-of-way and easements shown; and on account of backwater, the collection and discharge of surface water, or the changing of courses of streams. 
And further the owner warrants that he owns fee simple title to the property shown hereon and agrees that DeKalb County shall not be liable to him/her, his/her heirs, successors or assigns for any claims or damages resulting from the construction or maintenance of cross-drain extensions, drives, structures, streets, culverts, curbs or sidewalks, the changing of courses of streams and rivers, flooding from natural creeks and rivers, surface waters and any other matter whatsoever. I further warrant that I have the right to sell and convey the land according to this plat and do hereby bind myself and owners subsequent in title to defend by virtue of these present. 
All single-family residential lots on this plat are included in a special taxing district for funding the maintenance of stormwater detention facilities required because of this development. [Note: This paragraph is only required in single-family residential subdivisions.] 
All roads have been properly designed and dedicated to accommodate any required parking in the right-of-way. 
In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand this _____ day of ________, ________. 
 (SEAL) 
 (Owner)___________ 
 Witness:___________ 
 Notary Public. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-134. - Protective covenants to meet minimum zoning requirements. 
The final plat shall not contain protective covenants stipulating lower standards than the minimum restrictions required by the county zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-135. - Disclosure statement required for residential subdivisions and multi-phase residential developments. 
(a)  Before any final plat for any residential subdivision and any multi-phase residential development, may be submitted for review by the county, a disclosure statement, sworn to by the applicant under penalty of perjury before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths, must be filed with the planning director. The disclosure statement shall be in a form promulgated by the planning director and approved by the county attorney. 
(b)  Any applicant for the final plat, intending to make written or oral representations to potential purchasers of homes in any residential subdivision and any multi-phase residential development must submit the information specified herein on the disclosure statement which shall be made available to members of the public by the planning director: 
(1)  An estimated date of completion of the entire residential subdivision; 
(2)  A statement of the average size of homes to be constructed in the subdivision, any specified style of architecture, landscaping, the type of construction materials to be used (i.e. brick, stone, stucco, pressboard, etc.), and the average size of lots; 
(3)  A statement of the applicant's commitment to build any community amenities within the subdivision, including but not limited to a clubhouse, tennis courts or swimming pool; 
(4)  A statement of the general terms and conditions at which the applicant proposes to dispose of the lots and/or homes in the residential subdivision; 
(5)  Copies of all forms of conveyance to be used in selling lots to potential purchasers; 
(6)  A statement of all deed restrictions, easements and covenants applicable to the residential subdivision; 
(7)  Copies of instruments creating any deed restrictions, easements and covenants applicable to the residential subdivision; 
(8)  A statement regarding whether there will be a mandatory membership in any homeowners association and if so, a copy of the budget for the association for its first year of operation including the estimated amount of the first year's assessments and the estimated amount of revenue to be subsidized by the developer; and 
(9)  An explanation of the timing and method of transfer of control of the association to the homeowners where there is a mandatory membership in the homeowner's association governing the residential subdivision. 
(c)  With respect to the first phase and subsequent phases of a multi-phase residential development, the applicant must also submit the following information: 
(1)  An estimated date of completion of each phase of a multi-phase residential development and estimated date of completion of all phases of the development; 
(2)  A statement of the average size of homes to be constructed in the future phases of the development, any specified type of architecture, landscaping, the type of construction materials to be used (i.e. brick, stone, stucco, pressboard, etc), and the average size of lots; 
(3)  A statement of any community amenities to be built within the development currently or in the future, including but not limited to a clubhouse, tennis courts or swimming pools the applicant is committed to constructing in future phases; and 
(4)  A statement of the general terms and conditions at which the applicant proposes to dispose of the lots and/or homes in the future phases of the development. 
(d)  If the applicant intends to make no representations or commitments to potential purchasers concerning each of the representations set forth in subsection (b) and (c), the applicant shall note the same in the disclosure statement filed with the planning director which statement shall be made available by the planning director to the public. 
(e)  After the required disclosure statement has been submitted, the planning director shall examine the information provided and determine whether the information submitted is consistent with the final plat and if the information is consistent, the planning director shall approve the disclosure statement in writing within thirty-five (35) days of submission of the statement. 
(f)  If it appears to the planning director that a disclosure statement is incomplete or fraudulent, the planning director shall disapprove the disclosure statement and notify the applicant for the final plat in writing within fourteen (14) days after the initial submission of the statement. Such notification shall serve to suspend the review of the final plat by any county employee or official until the applicant files such additional information, as the planning director shall require. No final plat may be certified by the planning director until such time as the planning director approves the applicant's disclosure statement. 
(g)  If at any time after approval of the disclosure statement the planning director becomes aware that the disclosure statement contains false or misleading information, or that the applicant is developing in a manner inconsistent with the approved disclosure statement, the planning director shall disapprove the disclosure statement and notify the applicant in writing that the disclosure statement has been disapproved. 
(h)  Subsequent to the recording of the final plat for a residential subdivision and for each phase of a multi-phase residential development, the approved disclosure statement on file with the county shall be provided by any seller to potential purchasers at the execution of the purchase and sales contract or if no such contract is executed, ten (10) days prior to the real estate closing on any property governed by this section. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, Pt. I, 7-22-03) 
Sec. 14-136. - Violations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell property in a residential subdivision or a multi-phase residential development without providing a potential purchaser with a copy of an approved disclosure statement as required by section 14-135. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide the planning director with false or misleading information in an approved disclosure statement as required by section 14-135. It shall be unlawful for any person to develop in a manner inconsistent with the approved disclosure statement. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of violating this section shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, Pt. I, 7-22-03) 
Secs. 14-137—14-145. - Reserved. 
Part D. - Revised Final Plat 

Sec. 14-146. - Procedure. 
(a)  The original recorded plat shall be used for all revisions. 
(b)  When it becomes necessary to revise an original recorded final plat due to some error, required adjustment or desired adjustment, the applicant shall confer with the planning director to determine if the revision is a minor or major revision. The applicant's surveyor shall make the necessary corrections on the original final plat or prepare a new tracing of that portion of the subdivision involved. The subdivision name, date and book and page number of the original recording shall be noted on the new plat. If the original final plat is not available, then any proposed revision to the final plat shall be considered a major change. 
(c)  A minor change is one that corrects a drafting or scrivener's error or is otherwise administrative in nature and does not affect how the subdivision will be developed or built. A major change is any other change, including changes that alter how the subdivision will be developed or built, such as, but not limited to, changing or moving lot lines, increasing or decreasing the number of lots, changing the location of any public facilities or utilities, and revising protective covenants applying to the property. 
(d)  If the planning director determines the change is minor, then the planning director will obtain the chief executive officer's acknowledgement, approval, and acceptance of the revised final plat, and shall file such revised plat with the clerk of superior court. 
(e)  If the planning director determines the change is major, the revised plat must proceed through the approval process for final plats described in this Code. 
(f)  The basis for the planning director's characterization of the change as either major or minor shall be recorded in black ink on the revised plat. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-147. - When new tracing required. 
If the original final plat is not available, the applicant shall prepare a new mylar or other durable, stable, and reproducible drafting medium approved by the planning department, in accordance with section 14-146(b) above. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-148. - Revisions and explanation to be in black ink. 
Revisions and a notation explaining the revisions shall be shown in black ink on the revised plat. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-149. - Space for certifications. 
A blank space consisting of not less than fifty (50) square inches shall be provided on the revised plat to accommodate required certifications. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-150. - Scale. 
Revised plats shall be prepared at a scale of not less than fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-151. - Compliance with zoning ordinance. 
The revised plat shall comply with the regulations of the county zoning ordinance, including all conditions of zoning, which are to be shown in the upper right hand corner of the revised plat. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-152. - Inclusion of required wording. 
The revised plat shall show the following wording in black ink: 
This revised plat has been submitted to the chief executive officer of DeKalb County, Georgia, and has been approved as required by state law and county codes as meeting all conditions precedent to recording in the superior court of this circuit. This plat is hereby approved subject to any protective covenants shown hereon. 
 Dated this _____ day of________ 
 ___________   Chief Executive Officer   DeKalb County, Georgia 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-153. - Original protective covenants not to be changed. 
All revisions to original plats shall be bound by the protective covenants on the original final plat and a statement to that effect shall be noted in black ink on the revised plat unless noted otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-154. - County may require additional data. 
Other data which may be required in support of a revised final plat are: a final engineering design report on proposed revisions and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or dedications as may be required by county officials in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-155—14-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
Part A. - General Provisions 

Sec. 14-166. - Adequate public facilities. 
The applicant shall submit sufficient information and data with the application on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate compliance with the following: 
(1)  Comprehensive plan consistency required. Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly related to the DeKalb County Comprehensive Plan and all applicable capital improvement plans. 
(2)  Water. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
(3)  Wastewater. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
(4)  Stormwater management. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding as required under section 14-40 stormwater management. Stormwater quality management facilities shall be adequate as required by section 14-42. DeKalb County may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and or the construction of offsite drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed developments. 
(5)  Roads. Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation, shall be properly related to the comprehensive plan, and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. 
(6)  Extension policies. All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, water lines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-167. - Conservation of natural resources. 
(a)  To better implement the policies and purposes of this chapter, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of DeKalb County and to minimize the negative environmental effects of development, subdivisions shall be designed and developed to avoid areas of environmental sensitivity. The following land areas shall be preserved in their natural state or not subject to any development or land disturbance activity, and shall not be part of the buildable area: 
(1)  Wetlands; and 
(2)  The intermediate regional floodplain; 
(b)  Subdivisions shall be also laid out to: 
(1)  Avoid adversely affecting watercourses, ground water, and aquifer recharge; 
(2)  Minimize cut and fill; 
(3)  Minimize impervious cover and the environmental impacts of roads and access points; 
(4)  Minimize flooding; and 
(5)  Minimize adverse effects of noise, odor, traffic, drainage, and utilities on neighboring properties. 
(c)  The planning director shall not recommend approval for a sketch plat or parts thereof if the director determines that: 
(1)  The areas listed in subsection (a) above have not been set aside and protected from development; 
(2)  The proposed subdivision does not comply with the requirements of subsection (b) above; or 
(3)  If the proposed subdivision is not in the best interest of the public health, safety, and general welfare of the county. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-168. - Recycled concrete aggregate allowed uses. 
Recycled concrete aggregate shall be permitted for use as structural fill material and soil stabilizer. Recycled concrete aggregate used as structural fill material to support a road or parking area may only reach a maximum depth of forty-eight (48) inches below the paved surface of the road or parking area. 
Nothing in this Code section shall be construed as permitting the burial of construction waste as set forth in section 14-37(b)(6). 
( Ord. No. 16-08 , Pt. I, 7-19-16) 
Sec. 14-169. - Standards. 
Recycled concrete aggregate used in accordance with this article must conform to minimum quality and gradation standards as set forth in state law and Georgia Department of Transportation Specification 815.2.03 "Crushed Concrete Base" as it now exists or may be hereafter amended. 
( Ord. No. 16-08 , Pt. I, 7-19-16) 
Sec. 14-170. - Crushing facilities; on-site crushing. 
Contractors may use recycled concrete aggregate that has been cleaned and crushed: 
(1)  At a facility approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation; or 
(2)  On site. 
On-site cleaning and crushing equipment shall be located at a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any residential property line. On-site crushing shall comply with all other applicable federal, state, and county laws including, but not limited to, hazardous waste abatement, erosion control, air control, and noise ordinances. Construction activity and deliveries shall be limited to the hours set forth in section 7-31.1. 
( Ord. No. 16-08 , Pt. I, 7-19-16) 
Sec. 14-171. - Quality control; testing. 
Recycled concrete aggregate materials shall be tested for compliance with applicable Georgia Department of Transportation standards as set forth in section 14-169 and such testing shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All material samples and tests shall be collected and completed by a third-party geotechnical material or environmental testing laboratory approved by the director; 
(2)  Field test reports shall be prepared under the supervision of a Georgia Registered Professional Engineer and a copy of each report shall be submitted to the director; 
(3)  If any tested area fails to meet relevant standards set forth in the Georgia Department of Transportation Specifications, the contractor must take immediate remedial action to ensure compliance prior to proceeding to the next layer; 
(4)  Gradation and moisture density relationship testing shall be performed at least once per day of crushing or once per five hundred (500) tons of delivered material, whichever occurs first; 
(5)  In place density and moisture testing shall be performed for each fill layer prior to proceeding to the next layer; 
(6)  Proof roll testing shall be performed for each lift as directed by the geotechnical engineer; 
(7)  The director may require additional material sampling and laboratory tests to ensure compliance with applicable environmental contamination standards. 
All quality control testing costs shall be paid by the contractor. 
( Ord. No. 16-08 , Pt. I, 7-19-16) 
Sec. 14-172. - Disclaimer. 
By enacting this part, the county is assuming an undertaking to promote the general welfare of its citizens. The county, its officers, agents and employees shall not be liable to any person who claims that the enactment, enforcement or violation of this ordinance caused injury or loss of any kind. 
( Ord. No. 16-08 , Pt. I, 7-19-16) 
Secs. 14-173—14-180. - Reserved. 
Part B. - Streets 

Sec. 14-181. - Generally. 
(a)  The provisions of this part apply to streets in subdivisions and in other projects requiring a development or land disturbance permit from DeKalb County. 
(b)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all subdivision streets shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and to the thoroughfare plan. New streets shall be designed and located with consideration of their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by the streets. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-182. - Arrangement where not shown on thoroughfare plan. 
Where not shown in the thoroughfare plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the board of commissioners to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-183. - Minor streets/minor arterials. 
(a)  Local residential streets shall be so designed to discourage speeding and encourage safe environment for pedestrians and bicyclists. They shall be designed to discourage high speed through traffic by the use of traffic calming devices. 
(b)  Within historic districts, the platting of lots and streets shall be compatible with the historic patterns that exist within the historic district except for numbered state or federal routes. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-184. - Thoroughfare plan. 
The planning director, development director and public works director shall review changes in the patterns of traffic, land development, and subdivisions, and prepare a report to the board of commissioners with recommendations concerning appropriate revisions to the thoroughfare plan. Such review shall: 
(1)  Ensure safe and efficient access between neighborhoods and local services; 
(2)  Ensure the continuity and adequacy of local streets, collector streets and arterial streets to form a coherent and continuous system of routes; 
(3)  Identify applications of appropriate traffic calming and traffic management strategies to discourage unnecessary traffic and travel speeds in neighborhoods; and 
(4)  Ensure a coherent and continuous system for pedestrian and bicycle travel. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-185. - Subdivisions bordering on or containing arterial streets, railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an arterial street (major thoroughfares, and minor thoroughfares), a railroad right-of-way or limited-access highway right-of-way, the planning director may require the following: 
(1)  Rear service alleys to facilitate traffic flow, safety and public services; 
(2)  Provision of one (1) or a pair of smaller marginal access streets approximately parallel to and on each side of this right-of-way at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as park or open space and to provide for multipurpose trails. These distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations; or 
(3)  In the case of limited-access highways only, reverse frontage lots may be created with landscape buffers and a non-access reserve strip along the rear property line. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-186. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips that separate developed or developable land from necessary access to streets shall be prohibited except when such access is controlled by DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-187. - Street intersection spacing. 
Street intersections with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet as shown in the DeKalb County Standards for Construction and Design shall be prohibited in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-188. - Intersections—Right angles. 
Street intersections in subdivisions shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. No interior angle shall be less than seventy-five (75) degrees. Intersections or more than two (2) streets shall be designed according to the specific types illustrated in the DeKalb County Standards for Construction and Design. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-189. - Same—Property line to be curved or mitered. 
At each street intersection in a subdivision the property line at each block corner shall either be mitered or rounded. A mitered property line shall be located on the interior chord of a convex curve or located fifteen (15) feet inside the tangent of a concave curve. A rounded property line shall be established with a curve of radius R varying with the interior angle as specified in the following table, unless sufficient data is presented to show that strict adherence to this requirement is impractical due to topographical or engineering considerations. 
Table of Intersection Returns 

 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-189.1. - Traffic improvements, street improvements, curb cuts, visibility requirements, and private street construction standards. 
(a)  Each building shall be located on a lot or parcel that abuts a public street or private street. Private streets shall only be allowed if the development seeking to have a private street(s) is ten (10) acres or larger in size. The planning commission shall have the authority to waive this minimum acreage requirement if all real property owners that abut the proposed private street agree to such waiver. 
(b)  Where this chapter measures minimum building setback lines and frontages, or imposes development standards in connection with, or with reference to public streets, such measurements or standards set forth in the district regulations and supplemental regulations of chapter 27, in this chapter or elsewhere in the Code of DeKalb County shall apply similarly for property abutting a private street where such private street has been approved by the planning commission. Nothing in this article is intended to authorize any kind of development on a private street that would not be authorized where there was public right of way. 
(c)  Private streets within any zoning district shall not be used to satisfy the off-street parking requirements of the Code. Private streets within any district shall be assigned names and locations. The names of these streets shall be shown on plans required for the issuance of building and development permits as provided in this chapter and chapters 7 and 27 of the Code of DeKalb County. The geographical information services department shall approve all private street names and addresses, thereby avoiding conflicting names and addresses. 
(d)  Lots may front on a public street or private street constructed to the standards found in this chapter. 
(e)  Where sewer lines are constructed underneath a private street, the developer is required to grant an easement to the county for installation, maintenance and repair of such sewer lines. 
(f)  Private streets shall not be eligible for participation in the county's traffic calming program as provided for in chapter 17 of this Code. 
(g)  Private streets shall not be eligible for participation in the county's residential sidewalk district program as provided for in chapter 23 of this Code. 
(h)  Developers and property owners' associations shall ensure access to all private streets by emergency and law enforcement vehicles and shall ensure that private streets are constructed to allow access by all emergency vehicles and law enforcement vehicles. 
(i)  The use of private streets may not result in an increase in permitted density above that which would otherwise be permitted by the applicable district regulations. Density calculations shall be made based on a public street system and the preliminary plat that provides for a private street shall be density neutral Additionally, a utility easement(s) is not to be included in any plat as a part of an individual lot and thus such land that comprises the utility easement(s) cannot be used to calculate the required minimum lot size, or minimum front yard size. 
(j)  Private streets shall comply with requirements for public streets found in this chapter and all other applicable sections of the Code of DeKalb County. Private streets shall be surfaced with the same type of materials that are used by the county's department of public works for the surfacing and resurfacing of public streets or with materials that are as protective as those used by the county to surface and resurface streets so long as such alternative materials are approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 07-17, Pt. I, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 14-189.2. - Planning commission approval to create a private street. 
(a)  The planning commission shall authorize a private street where the planning department has certified that the applicant has submitted all required documentation as set forth herein and where the planning commission finds that: 
(1)  The location of the proposed private street(s) will not adversely impact use of any existing surrounding public street(s); and 
(2)  The location of the proposed private street will not adversely impact adjacent existing communities or neighborhoods; and 
(3)  The applicant has shown that there is the requisite legal mechanism for the maintenance of the proposed private street(s); and 
(4)  The applicant has provided written evidence that the proposed private street system is acceptable to the county departments or divisions responsible for law enforcement, sanitation, transportation and fire and rescue; and 
(b)  If the private street is to be located in a historic district as that term is defined in chapter 13.5 of this Code, then the applicant must provide the planning commission with a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the private street from the historic preservation commission. If no such certificate of appropriateness is provided to the planning commission then the planning commission shall deny the application for a private street. 
(c)  Street rights-of-way shall be owned by the mandatory homeowners' association as required by section 14-189.3. Street rights-of-way shall comply with all the requirements set forth in this Code, including but not limited to the requirements set forth in this chapter and in chapter 27 of this Code. An access easement and a utility easement shall entirely overlay the rights-of-way and shall be dedicated to DeKalb County for public use. All applicable setbacks, lot widths and lot areas shall be measured from the homeowner's association right of way. 
(Ord. No. 07-17, Pt. I, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 14-189.3 - Legal mechanism for maintenance of private streets, resurfacing fund. 
(a)  Maintenance of private streets. 
(1)  Each developer that chooses to include private streets within a condominium, as that term is defined by state law, or any other residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or office development shall organize and establish a property owners' association prior to recording of the final plat. Membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit within the development. The property owners' association shall be organized so that it has clear legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private street(s) and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. The declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association shall provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. Said streets shall be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the county. The recorded declaration of covenants and articles of association shall specifically require the property owners' association to repair and maintain each private street in the same manner as similar public streets are maintained by the county and such maintenance and repair shall be performed in compliance with all county standards and all applicable provisions of law. 
(2)  Prior to any final plat approval, the developer shall submit articles of incorporation, declaration of covenants and bylaws for the property owners' association to the planning department. Those documents must thereafter be reviewed and approved by the county attorney. 
(b)  Maintenance fund. The declaration of covenants and articles of association shall provide for a street maintenance fund the proceeds of which shall be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the street(s), whether for resurfacing or a similar purpose. For the purposes of further providing further assurance that county funds shall not be used for maintenance of private streets, the developer shall submit proof of deposit of fifty (50) percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the planning and development director or designee, in an interest bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(c)  Maintenance bond At the end of the twelve-month maintenance period provided for in section 14-381, a developer must provide a maintenance bond renewable annually to cover the cost of maintenance and repair for any private streets within a subdivision. The bond shall be for an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the planning and development director or designee. The developer may avoid securing the maintenance bond set forth in this subsection if the developer submits proof to the planning department that one hundred (100) percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the planning and development director or designee, has been deposited in an interest-bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. If the developer chooses this alternative, the declarations of covenants and articles of association shall specifically require the property owners' association to continuously maintain one hundred (100) percent of the then-current estimate of resurfacing costs of the private streets in this maintenance fund. 
(d)  Assessment and liens. The property owners' association must be empowered to levy assessments against owners within the development for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and other items set forth in subsection (a) herein. At least fifteen (15) percent of all fees or assessments paid shall be set aside in the maintenance fund. Any unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building or unit of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 07-17, Pt. I, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 14-189.4 - Inspection of private streets within nine months of approval of the final plat; failure to correct deficiencies. 
(a)  Within nine (9) months following approval of the final plat, the county's development director or designee shall inspect the private street(s) to ensure compliance with all county standards and all applicable provisions of this Code including, but not limited to, the requirements set forth in law for public streets, curbs, sidewalks, signage and street lighting. The developer shall be notified of any deficiencies in writing and such deficiencies shall be corrected within sixty (60) days of the written notice of deficiencies unless the county agrees to extension of that period in writing. 
(b)  Failure to correct the complete list of deficiencies shall be a violation of this section and shall subject the developer to prosecution for a code violation in the Recorders Court of DeKalb County. Any person found to have violated this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue any such violation. 
(c)  The planning and development department director or designee shall deny the issuance of certificates of occupancy until all deficiencies have been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 07-17, Pt. I, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 14-189.5. - Abandonment of existing public streets. 
(a)  Any abandonment of a public street by the County pursuant to this section must comply with the applicable requirements set forth in state law and this code, including but not limited to the requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 32-7-2(b) and 32-7-4 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
(b)  A property owner(s) may petition the governing authority to abandon an existing public street that abuts the owner(s)' property. The petition must include documents that comply with all of the following requirements set forth in this section. 
(c)  The petition shall contain evidence that each abutting landowner to the public street seeks to have the street abandoned. 
(d)  The petition shall contain evidence that once abandoned pursuant to the requirements of state law, all property owners that abut the street agree that ownership of the street shall be placed in a property owners' association. The petition shall include evidence that one hundred (100) percent of all property owners in the property owners' association have agreed that the street at issue may become private and have agreed to maintain and exercise control over the private street as required by this ordinance. 
(e)  The petition shall contain evidence that the property owners' association has the financial ability to maintain the street and associated improvements in perpetuity. 
(f)  The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association or other legal instrument(s) creating the property owners' association provide or have been amended to provide that membership in the property owners' association shall be mandatory for each original and successive purchaser of a lot, building or unit on the street. 
(g)  The petition shall include evidence that the property owners' association shall be organized so that it has absolute legal authority to maintain and exercise control over the private street(s) and required improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses. 
(h)  The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants creating the property owners' association shall be recorded with the clerk of the Superior Court of DeKalb County and the recorded declaration of covenants and articles of incorporation creating the property owners' association shall provide that all private streets and associated improvements are owned by the property owners' association or are held in common by the property owners within the development. Said streets shall be properly maintained and insured with no liability or maintenance responsibilities accruing to the county. 
(i)  The petition shall include evidence that the declaration of covenants and articles of association shall provide for a maintenance fund, the proceeds of which shall be used solely for the purpose of regular maintenance of the street(s), whether for resurfacing or similar purpose. For the purposes of further providing further assurances that county funds shall not be used for maintenance of private streets, the property owners' association shall submit proof of a maintenance fund equal to fifty (50) percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the planning and development director or designee, in an interest bearing account on behalf of the property owners' association. 
(j)  The petition shall include evidence that the property owners have a maintenance bond renewable annually in an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the current estimate of resurfacing costs, as determined by the planning and development director or designee. 
(k)  The petition shall include evidence that the property owners' association is empowered to levy assessments against owners on the street(s) for the payment of expenditures made by the association for maintenance of the private streets and improvements associated with private streets, including, but not limited to, sidewalks, bikeways, curbs and gutters, traffic signs and markings, associated landscaping and lighting, entry signs, monuments, perimeter walls and fences, entry gates and gatehouses and evidence that any unpaid assessments shall constitute a lien in favor of the property owners' association on the lot, building, or unit of the owner. At least fifteen (15) percent of all fees or assessments paid shall be set aside in the maintenance fund. 
(l)  The governing authority shall not consider a petition for abandonment unless it: 
(1)  Contains all of the evidence and documents required by this ordinance and has been reviewed by the planning commission; and 
(2)  Is supported by an analysis by the transportation division of the department of public works that shows that the street is no longer used by the public to the extent that it serves no substantial public purpose and that the public at large will benefit from its closure since the public will no longer be responsible for any costs to maintain and repair the street; and 
(3)  Is supported by an analysis by the planning department that shows that the abandonment of the street shall not negatively impact adjacent neighboring communities and the public at large. 
Deferral of a petition and/or failure to provide a recommendation by the planning commission shall not prevent the governing authority from taking any and all appropriate action with respect to the petition identified in this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-17, Pt. I, 7-24-07) 
Sec. 14-190. - Street classification and right-of-way width. 
All streets shall be classified according to the table in this section. Street construction standards shall be no less than as follows: 

 
Paving Width = travel lanes + bike lanes 
Property Right-of-way = paving width + curb & gutter width + utility strip + bike lanes + other (median or shoulder) 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 06-07, Pt. II, 4-27-06) 
Sec. 14-191. - Improvements, right-of-way dedication. 
(a)  All proposed new streets shall be designed and built according to one of the standards listed in section 14-190 and as shown in the DeKalb County Standards for Construction and Design. 
(b)  Where a proposed subdivision or project requiring a land development permit has frontage on an existing public street, right-of-way shall be dedicated along that frontage so as to meet the standards of that street's classification in the county thoroughfare plan. The right-of-way shall be improved wherever required as further provided in this section. For existing streets on which a proposed subdivision or project requiring a land development permit has frontage, the applicant shall: 
(1)  Dedicate a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required right-of-way width as measured from the centerline of the existing street right-of-way; 
(2)  Install all required sidewalks, street trees, streetlights, and place utilities according to the standards in section 14-190; and 
(3)  Provide a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the roadway pavement required in section 14-190 and install it to the right-of-way centerline. 
(c)  Land reserved for any road purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or area requirements on the DeKalb County Zoning Ordinance where the land is to be dedicated to the public in fee simple or an easement associated with the road is granted to DeKalb County. 
(d)  Right-of-way dedication and road widening shall extend for the full length of road frontage of the property under development and shall conform the standards in these regulations. Flares at pavement ends may be required to extend beyond property under development. 
(e)  The board of commissioners, after considering all related factors, may authorize deviations from this section as follows: 
(1)  Right-of-way dedication may be waived or modified if: 
a.  Existing use of property is not to be substantially changed as a result of proposed development or construction; 
b.  Existing government construction plans for the roadway indicate lesser right-of-way would be required for dedication; or 
c.  The adjoining frontage is developed and the predominate existing right-of-way meets county standards. 
(2)  Road improvements may be waived or modified if: 
a.  Existing use of property not to be substantially changed (i.e., traffic generation and ingress/egress would remain the same); 
b.  Governmental construction plans for the road indicate a pavement width less than county standards (only the planned pavement width shall be required); 
c.  No more than five (5) percent of average daily traffic generation would occur between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays; 
d.  The existing road meets current county standards; or 
e.  Widening would create a hazard to traffic, pedestrians, or bicyclists along the thoroughfare. 
(3)  The applicant may, with written concurrence of the development director and the county attorney, provide payment to the county in lieu of road improvements when: 
a.  Road improvements by state or local action are scheduled within twenty-four (24) months; 
b.  Existing utility companies' improvements are situated so as to require their removal or relocation before road improvements should be accomplished; 
c.  Improvements would be economically unfeasible or would cause unreasonable land development hardships because of topography, soils, bridges, grades, etc., and delay of improvements would not adversely impact the county's road system; and 
d.  Payment for road improvements shall be in accordance with a schedule adopted by the board of commissioners in January of each year and based on current street construction costs for the required section. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-192. - Half streets. 
Half streets are prohibited. The applicant shall be required to pave the full standard width of any existing unpaved public right-of-way or any proposed public street on which the proposed subdivision has frontage and access. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-193. - Temporary dead-end streets. 
Temporary dead-end streets may be platted, if recommended by the planning director and development director and approved by the chief executive officer, where the proposed subdivision adjoins property not yet subdivided or property that may be redevelopment. A temporary dead end street shall end in a temporary turn-around. The right-of-way of any temporary dead end street shall be carried to the boundary of the properties being subdivided. Street signs shall be posted stating: "No Exit — temporary dead-end street." 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-194. - Permanent dead-end streets; cul-de-sac required. 
(a)  Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently shall be provided with a cul-de-sac at the closed end and shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1200) feet. 
(b)  The minimum outside radius of a cul-de-sac on a public street shall be forty (40) feet, measured to the inside face of the outside curb. Each cul-de-sac shall provide a landscaped island at the center, and the clear width of the paved roadway measured from the outside of the landscaped island to the inside face of the outside curb shall not be less than twenty-four (24) feet. The radius of the right of way for the cul-de-sac shall not be less than fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-195. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be required wherever topography or the presence of arterial roads or other features makes vehicular access from the front of the lot impractical or unsafe. Where the alley serves as the primary means of vehicular access to the lot, it shall be dedicated as a public right-of-way and built to the standards required in these regulations/this chapter. 
(b)  Alleys may be permitted as private streets providing secondary or service access and where the principal buildings have adequate access for emergency vehicles from a public street on their frontage. Private alleys may end in a turn-around. All alleys dedicated to the public shall provide a continuous connection between one (1) or more public streets. Alleys shall be paved and constructed to the same standards as the connecting public streets except that: 
(1)  The paved width of an alley shall be not less than twelve (12) feet; 
(2)  Alleys shall be constructed with flush curbs; 
(3)  Buildings shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the back of curb of an alley. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-196. - Street grades. 
(a)  Subdivision street grades shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 

 
(b)  A sixteen (16) percent grade on local residential streets may be approved by the development director where a sight distance in feet of ten (10) times the speed limit is maintained. An as built street profile may be required. 
(c)  No street grade shall be less than one (1) percent and no one (1) percent grade shall be longer than three hundred (300) feet. 
(d)  Up to a twelve (12) percent grade on alleys may be allowed, provided the development director approves any required drainage plan. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-197. - Minimum horizontal curve radius. 
Subdivision streets with design speeds of twenty (20) miles per hour may not have a minimum centerline horizontal curve radius less than ninety (90) feet. No other subdivision street shall have a horizontal curve radius less than one hundred fifty (150) feet. Radius shall be measured from the centerline of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-198. - Minimum sight distance. 
All subdivision streets shall have a minimum sight distance of at least two hundred (200) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-199. - Design of intersections. 
Subdivision intersections shall not be designed in such a manner as to create a traffic hazard. A minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet clear sight distance in each direction from the intersection shall be provided. Where a subdivision street enters an existing major or minor arterial, a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) feet sight distance in each direction shall be maintained. If, due to other restrictions, this minimum sight distance cannot be maintained, the applicant shall, at the applicant's expense, provide adequate traffic-control devices or other physical improvements subject to the approval and installation by the county. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-200. - Access management. 
The following standards shall apply to all subdivisions and all projects requiring a land development permit where the primary access is from a state or federal highway or an arterial classified as a major, minor or residential arterial or collector street in the DeKalb County Transportation and Thoroughfare Plan. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the Georgia Department of Transportation: 
(1)  Commercial or office properties may be required, based on site conditions as determined by the development director, to provide a cross access drive and pedestrian access to allow circulation between sites. Cross access is not required between non-residential uses and single-family uses. 
(2)  Joint driveways, cross access easements and pedestrian access shall be established wherever feasible along a major or minor arterial or collector street. The building site shall incorporate the following: 
a.  Continuous service drive or cross access corridor extending the entire length of each block served to provide for driveway separation of at least 1,000 feet of linear frontage along the thoroughfare. 
b.  A design speed of ten (10) mph and a two-way travel aisle width of twenty-four (24) feet to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles, and loading vehicles. 
c.  Stub-outs and other design features to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross access via a service drive. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  The development director may reduce the required separation distance of access points where they prove impractical, provided all of the following requirements are met: 
a.  Joint access driveways and cross access easements are provided in accordance with this section. 
b.  The site plan incorporates a unified vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation system in accordance with this section. 
c.  The property owner shall enter a written agreement with DeKalb County, recorded with the deed, that pre-existing connections on the site that do not meet the requirements of section 14-200 will be closed and eliminated after construction of each side of the joint use driveway. 
(5)  All developments shall have access to a public right-of-way. The number of access points shall be as follows: 
Minimum Number of Access Points 

 
(6)  The separation of access points on a major or minor arterial or collector street shall be determined by the speed limit of the road with the following minimum spacing requirements: 

 
a.  The distance between access points shall be measured from the centerline of the proposed driveway or public street to the centerline of the nearest existing adjacent driveway or public street. 
b.  Driveway spacing at intersections and corners shall provide adequate sight distance, response time, and permit adequate queuing space. 
c.  No driveway, except residential access, shall be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of the centerline of an intersecting arterial or collector street. 
d.  No non-residential access except right in/right out channelized access shall be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of the centerline of any other major or minor arterial. 
e.  The requirements of this section are not intended to eliminate all access to a parcel of land that was legally subdivided prior to the enactment of this section. 
(7)  Where major or minor arterials or collector streets include medians, directional median openings shall be separated by a minimum of three hundred thirty (330) feet and full median openings shall be separated by a minimum of six hundred sixty (660) feet. 
(h)  All street design and other development activities, including landscaping, shall be arranged on site so as to provide safe and convenient access for emergency vehicles. 
(i)  Along major or minor arterials, residential arterials, or collector streets, a deceleration lane, a turn lane, larger or reduced turning radius, traffic islands or other devices or designs, including traffic claming devices and designs, may be required to avoid specific traffic hazards which would otherwise be created by the proposed driveway location. 
(j)  Deceleration lanes are required for subdivision entrances of subdivisions of twenty (20) or more units that provide less sight distance (in feet) than ten (10) times the posted speed limit (in miles per hour). The minimum deceleration lengths shall be as specified below. The director may vary length requirements based upon a consideration of available sight distances. 
Deceleration Lanes 

 
Deceleration lanes located within 75' of an intersection radius may be extended to the intersection. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 07-19, Pt. I, 11-19-07) 
Sec. 14-201. - Planting strips. 
The county arborist shall maintain a list of trees that are appropriate for the planting strips, and no trees other than those on the list shall be placed in the planting strips. The county arborist shall also maintain specifications regarding spacing trees, and the appropriate time for planting. The trees may not count toward the fulfillment of the requirement to plant front yard trees but may fulfill any remaining density tree requirements under the tree protection ordinance, provided the requirements for tree type for planting strips are met. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-202. - Access management areas; purpose and intent. 
The purpose and intent in enacting these regulations is as follows: 
(a)  To promote policies for the uniform improvement of safe and efficient movement of traffic, both vehicular and pedestrian, throughout DeKalb County; 
(b)  To maximize the benefit of transportation investments by maintaining a high level of functionality along major roadways; 
(c)  To encourage efficient development plans that enable individuals to fulfill their daily activities through minimal use of single-occupancy vehicles, and through increased use of alternative transportation modes such as public transit, walking, and bicycling; 
(d)  To provide for uniform control of the location, spacing, design, and operation of driveways, median openings, interchanges, and street connections to a roadway throughout DeKalb County; 
(e)  To support the goals stated in the DeKalb County Comprehensive Transportation Plan, including improved multimodal transportation, increased accessibility, and improved travel safety and efficiency; and 
(f)  To provide a transportation system that results in less congestion and increased use of alternative modes of travel. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 14-202.1. - Scope and applicability of regulations. 
These regulations apply to each application for the development, use, alteration, parking, open space, building or modification of any structure where the subject property is, in whole or in part, contained within the boundaries of an access management area. The procedures, standards, and criteria herein apply only to that portion of the subject property within the boundaries of the access management area. Access management area regulations are supplemental to the underlying zoning district regulations. No development or building permit shall be issued to any applicant for permits for property or portions of property within an access management area until such time as the application complies with all applicable access management area regulations and underlying zoning district regulations. Where there is a conflict between an access management area regulation and another regulation contained in the Code, the access management area regulation shall govern. Where an access management area regulation is equally restrictive with other regulations in the Code, the access management area regulation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 14-202.2. - Definitions. 
Continuous service drive means a privately owned and maintained continuous drive providing for ingress and egress to a public road. 
Lower functional classification means those areas the Georgia Department of Transportation designates as lower functional classification on the current Functional Classification Map for DeKalb County. 
Throat length means the distance between the edge of the street and the end of the driveway within a development. The fifty-foot throat length will allow three (3) cars to stack up waiting to leave without interfering with the internal circulation of the parking lot. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 14-202.3. - Driveways. 
The following standards for driveway access and spacing shall apply to all properties included in an access management area. These standards shall apply unless a more restrictive standard is required by the Georgia Department of Transportation: 
(a)  Where roadways include medians, median openings shall be separated by a minimum of six hundred sixty (660) feet, except in the Lithonia Industrial Boulevard Access Management Area, where median openings shall be separated by a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet; 
(b)  Right-turn lanes shall be required at all driveways where the right-turning volume exceeds three hundred (300) vehicles per day; 
(c)  The following driveway spacing shall be required for all driveways along the corridor between median openings or intersections with public roadways (measured center line to center line): 
(1)  The minimum distance of an upstream driveway from a median opening or intersection with a public roadway shall be three hundred (300) feet in addition to the storage length required for the driveway. 
(2)  The minimum distance of a downstream driveway from a median opening or intersection with a public roadway shall be three hundred (300) feet; 
(d)  All developments shall have access to a public right-of-way. Access to a public right-of-way may be obtained via an adjacent public roadway with a lower functional classification. The maximum number of driveways per parcel depends upon the length of frontage along the corridor: 
(1)  For parcels with less than six hundred (600) feet of frontage, there shall be a maximum of one (1) driveway allowed per parcel. 
(2)  For parcels with at least six hundred (600) feet of frontage, there shall be a maximum of two (2) driveways per parcel. 
(3)  For parcels which have frontage along an adjacent public roadway with a lower functional classification, the maximum number of driveways will be unchanged, but the first driveway shall be located on the adjacent public roadway. 
(e)  All driveways serving a single parcel must be at least one hundred (100) feet (measured from the centerline) from the property line that is perpendicular to the property frontage, and all deceleration lanes must be contained entirely within the property frontage. For parcels with insufficient frontage to accommodate these requirements, exceptions will be allowed, but driveway locations must be approved by the chief executive officer or his or her designee. Access to a public right-of-way may be obtained through a shared driveway, which provides access to more than one (1) parcel. Shared driveways are exempt from the requirement regarding distance of the driveway from the property line. 
(f)  There shall be a minimum driveway throat length of fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 12-04, Pt. I, 3-27-12) 
Sec. 14-202.4. - Interparcel access. 
To the maximum extent possible, sidewalks and parking lots serving adjacent lots shall be interconnected to provide continuous driveway connections and pedestrian connections between adjoining lots and streets, except that this requirement shall not apply to lots zoned for single family or duplex residential units. Where necessary, the chief executive officer or his or her designee may require access easements be provided to ensure continuous access and egress routes connecting commercial, office, and multifamily lots. Stub-outs shall be provided to indicate that abutting properties may be connected to provide cross-access via a continuous service drive. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 14-202.5. - Pedestrian and bicycle access. 
Connections to available transportation modes, such as driveways, sidewalks, and bike paths shall be constructed along adjacent streets and those entering adjoining properties. Safe, convenient, and handicap-accessible pedestrian ways shall be provided from sidewalks along streets to each building entrance, including pedestrian access routes across parking lots and between adjacent buildings within the same development. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 2-22-11) 
Sec. 14-202.6 - Area boundaries. 
The boundaries of each access management area are as follows: 
(a)  Turner Hill Road. All properties adjacent to Turner Hill Road, from the south side of Mall Parkway to the north side of Rockland Road, and all properties adjacent to Rockland Road, from Turner Hill Road to McDaniel Mill Road (on the southeast side of Rockland Road) and eight hundred twenty (820) feet from the intersection of Turner Hill Road and Rockland Road on the northwest side of Rockland Road. 
(b)  Lithonia Industrial Boulevard. All properties adjacent to Lithonia Industrial Boulevard, from the south side of Hillandale Road to the north side of Rock Springs Road. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, Pt. I, 2-22-11; Ord. No. 12-04, Pt. I, 3-27-12) 
Secs. 14-203—14-215. - Reserved. 
Part C. - Easements 

Sec. 14-216. - Scope. 
The provisions of this division apply to easements for or in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-217. - Permission for dedication required. 
The applicant must obtain permission from the development director for the dedication of utility easements prior to the submission of the dedication. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-218. - Floodplain easements—On-site. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream, or floodplain, a floodplain easement shall be dedicated to the county. The easement shall conform to the requirements of section 14-41 and shall conform substantially to the limits of such stream or floodplain plus additional width as necessary to accommodate future access, but shall not exceed five (5) feet outside the edge of the floodplain. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-219. - Drainage easements—Off-site. 
Where drainage system improvements are required on private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage rights must be secured by the applicant and indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-220. - Pedestrian and bicycle easements and paths. 
Pedestrian and bicycle easements and paths shall be required in subdivision or projects requiring a land development permit to provide circulation or access to schools, parks, libraries, shopping centers, transportation centers and other community facilities. Such easements shall have a paving width of five (5) feet. Such paths shall be constructed according to the specifications set forth in the DeKalb County Standards for Construction and Design Drawings. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-221—14-235. - Reserved. 
Part D. - Blocks 

Sec. 14-236. - Generally. 
The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks in subdivisions shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated or for the conservation of open space or existing historic features; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access by pedestrians and bicyclists to public transit, nearby schools, or commercial districts, vehicular circulation at safe speeds and adequate access for emergency vehicles; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography to minimize land disturbance and erosion. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-237. - Desirable maximum and minimum lengths. 
The dimensions of blocks shall be designed to accommodate and promote vehicular circulation at safe speeds. The desirable maximum block length in a subdivision is one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet and the desirable minimum length is three hundred (300) feet. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-238. - Mid-block easements and pedestrian paths. 
In blocks of eight hundred (800) feet or more, the planning director may require the reservation of a ten-foot easement and the paving of a five-foot wide path through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage-facilities, or pedestrian traffic. Such paths shall be constructed according to-the specifications set forth in the DeKalb County Standards of Construction and Design Drawings. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-239—14-255. - Reserved. 
Part E. - Lots 

Sec. 14-256. - Generally. 
The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation and the minimum building, setback, side yard, and rear yard lines in subdivisions shall be in accordance with requirements of the county zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-257. - Corner lots. 
Corner lots for residential use in a subdivision shall have an extra width of not less than fifteen (15) feet more than required for interior lots by the zoning ordinance for the zoning district within which they are located in order to provide appropriate front building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-258. - Frontage. 
Each subdivision lot shall front upon a publicly maintained street. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-259. - Through lots and reverse frontage lots prohibited. 
Through lots and reverse frontage lots shall be prohibited in subdivisions except along limited access highways, such as interstate highways. Where it is necessary to provide separation of residential development from major arterials or to overcome-specific disadvantages of topography and orientation, the lots fronting such features may be platted in greater depth so that dwellings may be set back an appropriate distance from the major arterial or other feature. Such lots may obtain vehicular access from a rear alley. Lots having access from a public alley shall not constitute a prohibited through lot. A landscape reservation of at least ten (10) feet in width, and across which there shall be no right of vehicular access, may be required-along the lot lines of lots abutting any disadvantageous feature or land use where access should be restricted in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-260. - Side lot lines. 
Side lot lines in subdivisions shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines as they extend from the front lot line to the front building line. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-261—14-274. - Reserved. 
Part F. - Reservation of Open Spaces 

Sec. 14-275. - Open space required; purposes. 
(a)  All residential subdivisions under five (5) acres or consisting of thirty-six (36) or less dwelling units may, and all residential subdivisions greater than five (5) acres or consisting of more than thirty-six (36) dwelling units shall be required to provide open space, in order to achieve the following public purposes: 
(1)  Conserve open land, including those areas containing historic or cultural resources, or sensitive natural features and wildlife habitats; 
(2)  Reduce erosion and sedimentation by minimizing land disturbance; and 
(3)  Preserve and develop an adequate-tree cover. 
(b)  Open space shall be a minimum of twenty (20) percent of the land in all new subdivision developments. 
(c)  Open space required by this section may be used in a variety of ways, including natural areas for wildlife and ecological functions, parks, gardens, landscaped medians, squares, village greens, courtyards, recreational space, or recreational facilities, provided the use is consistent with the requirements of this part. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-276. - Restrictions on open space. 
No more than twenty (20) percent of the open space area may be covered with an impervious surface. Impervious surfaces may include paved trails, bike paths or multi-use paths, buildings, plazas, swimming pools, or athletic courts. Impervious surfaces in open space may not include sidewalks along public rights of way or parking lots, streets, or other areas for motorized vehicular use. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-277. - Dedication of parks, open space, recreation areas and conservation easements. 
Parks, open space, multi-use trails, recreation areas and conservation easements may be offered for dedication to the county by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-278—14-285. - Reserved. 
Part G. - Sites for Civic Uses 

Sec. 14-286. - Reservation of sites for civic uses. 
A developer may reserve and offer property within a subdivision as a site for a civic use, including but not limited to public schools, fire stations, police stations, or recreation centers. The developer shall allow a minimum period of one (1) year from the date of submittal of submittal of the preliminary plat during which time the proper authorities may authorize acquisition of the property for its intended civic purposes. If the reserved site has not been authorized for acquisition by the proper authorities within one (1) year, the reservation shall terminate unless extended by the developer. If not extended, development of the formerly reserved site must follow the standard plat approval process. An amended final plat for the entire subdivision shall then be processed in the required manner when submitted by the developer. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-287—14-295. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
Part A. - General Provisions 

Sec. 14-296. - Scope. 
This division applies to required improvements for or in subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-297. - Location of required utilities in public rights of way. 
All required utilities within county rights of way shall be located as shown in DeKalb County Standards of Drawings and Specifications maintained by the development department and as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-298. - Performance guarantee, maintenance guarantee, performance security, and maintenance security requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated in this section, all subdivision improvements required in this article shall be fully completed to the specifications contained in this article by the developer, applicant or owner before the final plat shall be forwarded to the chief executive officer. 
(2)  The subdivision improvements required in this article shall not be accepted by the county until they are fully completed to the specifications contained in this article (by the developer, applicant or owner). 
(b)  Performance guarantee requirements. 
(1)  The developer, applicant or owner shall execute a performance guarantee and provide the original signed copy thereof to the planning director or designee before the final plat shall be forwarded to the chief executive officer. The performance guarantee shall be executed upon forms provided by the planning director or designee, and shall include a unilateral assurance that the developer, applicant or owner will satisfactorily complete to county standards the remaining items identified in the performance guarantee. 
(2)  The performance guarantee shall be executed only after the planning director or designee conducts an inspection of the subdivision improvements and certifies that all necessary subdivision improvements indicated in the approved plans, except the remaining items identified in the performance guarantee, have been satisfactorily completed to county standards. The performance guarantee shall be executed at least seven (7) calendar days before recordation of the final plat. 
(3)  The performance guarantee shall state the date(s) by which the identified improvements will be completed. All identified improvements shall be completed within one (1) year of executing the performance guarantee unless an extension is approved per section 14-298(b)(4). If the developer, applicant or owner fails to timely complete the identified improvements, the county may take action to correct the deficient items, including performing the work itself or retaining a third party to do so, and the county may seek reimbursement from the developer, applicant or owner by making a demand under any applicable surety bond, deducting the county's expenses from any applicable escrow funds held by the county, or by exercising any other means available under law. 
(4)  A developer, applicant, or owner may apply for an extension of the performance guarantee to the planning director or designee, who shall have discretion to extend the performance guarantee for up to one (1) year. Such an extension of a performance guarantee must be accompanied by new or extended performance security to cover the duration of the extended performance guarantee period. 
(5)  The planning director or designee shall not issue any new land disturbance permits, and shall place a stop work order on any existing land disturbance permits, pertaining to any subdivision wherein: (1) the developer, applicant or owner has missed a deadline for satisfactory installation of improvements as required in the Code or applicable performance guarantee, or (2) the county has directed or made repairs of identified improvements but has not yet been fully reimbursed by the developer, applicant or owner. 
(c)  Performance security requirements. 
(1)  At the time the final plat is submitted by the developer, applicant or owner to the planning director or designee for approval, and before the final plat shall be forwarded to the chief executive officer, the developer, applicant or owner must provide the planning director or designee with security in the form of funds to be held in escrow or security bonds, guaranteeing satisfactory completion of all improvements covered in the performance guarantee. All improvements covered in the performance guarantee must be secured by funds to be held in escrow or security bonds. Letters of credit shall not be accepted by the planning director or designee to satisfy any portion of this security requirement. 
(2)  The performance security amount shall be calculated by the planning director or designee, and shall amount to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the estimated construction costs (labor and materials) of the improvement(s) to be secured by the performance guarantee, based on the most recent edition of Gordian's "Site Work & Landscape Costs with RSMeans Data" annual publication's (or equivalent publication's) industry standard unit prices at the time the final plat is tendered by the developer, applicant or owner for review. 
(3)  Escrow funds shall be held by the director of finance. Surety bonds shall be executed by a surety company actively licensed to transact business in Georgia by the Georgia Secretary of State, on forms provided by the planning director or designee. In addition, the bonding company must hold an A.M. Best's rating of not less than "A" (excellent) with Financial Size Category of VII or better. The surety company should also hold a sufficient treasury listing as reflected on the department of the treasury's listing (Department circular 570) such that the bond limit for any prescribed bond does not exceed the surety's underwriting limitation. The planning director or designee shall only accept the signed original of the surety bond, and shall not accept any photocopied, altered or modified bond documentation. 
(4)  In lieu of extending performance security where a subdivision's improvements are incomplete or deficient, and based on the discretion of the planning director or designee, a developer, applicant, or owner may elect to provide new performance security in an amount equal to one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the value of the incomplete infrastructure improvements (labor and materials) for a duration of one (1) year. No extension or new performance security shall be allowed under this section for street topping. 
(d)  Maintenance guarantee requirements. 
(1)  Before the performance security is released, the developer, applicant, or owner must execute a maintenance guarantee and provide the original signed copy thereof to the planning director or designee. The maintenance guarantee shall be executed upon forms provided by the planning director or designee and shall include unilateral assurance that the developer, applicant or owner will maintain all of the subdivision's streets, drainage facilities, best management practices for water quality, water and sanitary sewer systems, and rights-of-way to the specifications required by the Code of DeKalb County for a period of twelve (12) months, commencing on the date that the final plat is recorded or the performance security is released by the planning director or designee, whichever occurs last. 
(2)  The planning director or designee may conduct periodic inspections during the twelve-month maintenance period described above, and shall advise the developer, applicant or owner in writing of any subdivision improvements that are deficient, have been damaged, or otherwise require repair or maintenance. Any such warning notice shall be sent by U.S. mail to the developer's, applicant's or owner's address as indicated on the final plat. The developer, applicant or owner must provide the planning director or designee with an acceptable corrective plan within thirty (30) days of the date of the warning notice, and must satisfactorily complete the repairs or maintenance within sixty (60) days after the date of the warning notice, unless otherwise agreed in writing. If the developer, applicant or owner fails to timely make the repairs or complete the maintenance, the county may take action to correct the deficient items, including performing the work itself or retaining a third party to do so, and the county shall seek reimbursement from the developer, applicant or owner by making a demand under any applicable surety bond, deducting the county's expenses from any applicable escrow funds held by the county, or by exercising any other means available under law. In the case of emergency situations posing imminent risk to the health or safety of person or property, the county may direct or make any necessary repairs without providing any notice to the developer, applicant or owner, and may seek reimbursement for the county's expenses in the manner described in this subsection. 
(3)  The planning director or designee shall not issue any new land disturbance permits, and shall place a stop work order on any existing land disturbance permits, pertaining to any subdivision wherein: (1) the developer, applicant or owner has missed a deadline for satisfactory correction or repair of improvements as required in the Code or applicable maintenance guarantee, or (2) the county has directed or made repairs of maintenance items but has not yet been fully reimbursed by the developer, applicant or owner. 
(4)  If repairs or maintenance are required under subsection (2) above and notice is sent or repairs are made within three (3) months of the maintenance period's scheduled date of expiration as indicated in the maintenance guarantee, the maintenance period shall extend another twelve (12) months, and the developer, applicant or owner shall also extend any surety bond for an additional twelve-month period, both extensions to commence on the date the repairs are completed and approved by the planning director or designee. The developer, applicant or owner shall provide original documentation to the planning director or designee evidencing the surety bond's extension for the required period of time, as determined by the planning director or designee. 
(e)  Maintenance security requirements. 
(1)  At the time the executed maintenance guarantee is provided to the planning director or designee, the developer, applicant or owner must provide the planning director or designee with security in the form of a surety bond or funds to be held in escrow guaranteeing maintenance of the subdivision's streets, drainage facilities, best management practices for water quality, water and sanitary sewer systems, and rights-of-way during the twelve-month maintenance period. Letters of credit shall not be accepted by the planning director or designee to satisfy this security requirement. 
(2)  The maintenance security amount shall be calculated by the planning director or designee, and shall amount to twenty-five (25) percent of the actual construction costs (labor and materials) of the public improvement(s) covered by the maintenance guarantee,, based on the most recent edition of Gordian's "Site Work & Landscape Costs with RSMeans Data" annual publication's (or equivalent publication's) industry standard unit prices at the time the final plat is tendered by the developer, applicant or owner for review. However, in no case shall any maintenance security be less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
(3)  Where subsequent phase(s) of an interdependent project are anticipated to damage or otherwise decrease the useful life of an improvement or infrastructure system covered under existing maintenance security, the planning director or designee may require an extension of the existing maintenance security for the potentially impacted improvement(s) or infrastructure system. The developer, applicant, or owner may elect to obtain new maintenance security in lieu of extending the existing maintenance security in an amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the actual construction costs (labor and materials) of the affected interdependent infrastructure improvement(s) or system(s), as determined by the planning director or designee. 
(4)  Escrow funds shall be held by the director of finance. Surety bonds shall be executed by a surety company actively licensed to transact business in Georgia by the Georgia Secretary of State, on forms provided by the planning director or designee. In addition, the bonding company must hold an A.M. Best's rating of not less than "A" (excellent) with Financial Size Category of VII or better. The surety company should also hold a sufficient treasury listing as reflected on the department of the treasury's listing (Department circular 570) such that the bond limit for any prescribed bond does not exceed the surety's underwriting limitation. The planning director or designee shall only accept the signed original of the surety bond, and shall not accept any photocopied, altered or modified bond documentation. 
(5)  In lieu of extending maintenance security where a subdivision's improvements are damaged or deficient, and based on the discretion of the planning director or designee, a developer, applicant, or owner may elect to provide new maintenance security in an amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the value (labor and materials) of the damaged or otherwise substandard infrastructure improvements for a duration of one (1) year. 
(f)  Return of security. 
(1)  Performance security may only be released upon satisfactory completion of all subdivision improvements by the developer, applicant or owner and execution of a maintenance guarantee. Escrow funds shall be returned only to the same person who or entity that submitted the funds on behalf of the developer, applicant or owner. Release of surety bonds shall not be effective until the original bond is returned to the developer, applicant or owner, accompanied by a letter signed by the planning director or designee indicating that the improvements have been satisfactorily completed and that the bond has therefore been released. 
(2)  Maintenance security may only be released upon satisfactory maintenance of all subdivision improvements by the developer, applicant or owner as evidenced by expiration of the maintenance period without issuance of any deficiency notice(s) by the planning director or designee. Escrow funds shall be returned only to same person who or entity that submitted the funds on behalf of the developer, applicant or owner. Release of surety bonds shall not be effective until the original bond is returned to the developer, applicant or owner, accompanied by a letter signed by the planning director or designee indicating that the improvements have been satisfactorily completed and that the bond has therefore been released. 
( Ord. No. 18-06 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Secs. 14-299—14-311. - Reserved. 
Part B. - Water 

Sec. 14-312. - Certification of final plat. 
There shall be a certification placed upon the final plat from the chief engineer of the water system after the applicant has complied with the requirements of this part. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-313. - Right of county to design water mains. 
The county shall have the right and privilege to design water mains and appurtenances of the right size and materials in subdivisions. The design will include necessary improvements to the water system, including extensions along the entire roadway frontage of the development. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-314. - Materials, location of mains. 
(a)  All materials for water mains in subdivisions will conform to specifications of the American Water Works Association. 
(b)  Water mains will be laid a minimum distance of four (4) feet back of the curbline. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-315. - Fire hydrants. 
Fire hydrants will be installed in subdivisions so that all residential property will meet the requirements of the fire prevention code of the county. The location of fire hydrants shall be reviewed and approved by the public works director. Additional fire hydrant locations may be required to ensure water quality and air release standards. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-316. - Valves. 
Water valves will be installed in subdivisions to affect a minimum cutoff of mains in case of shutdowns. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-317. - Stub-out services. 
Stub-out services will be installed in all cases where necessary to avoid cutting of pavement or sidewalks and will be placed on the lot as specified by the county. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-318. - Determination of size of mains. 
Sizes of water mains in subdivisions will be determined by the county to ensure adequate domestic supply and fire protection for the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-319. - Submission of water service data for location of water system. 
(a)  The applicant shall furnish data on the final subdivision plat in digitized form, and/or as required, to the development director. 
(b)  The county shall design on this plat the location and size of all pipe, valves, fire hydrants, fittings and stubs to lots, consistent with design regulations promulgated by the development director. It will then furnish to the owner/applicant copies of this plat with a list of materials that will include the total linear feet of main to be extended. 
(c)  With this information the applicant will take bids from contractors and when the contract is awarded, furnish the county with a copy of the contract. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-320. - Engineer's or surveyor's certification. 
The applicant's engineer or surveyor shall furnish the county with an engineer's certificate. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-321. - Prerequisites to delivery of materials to contractor. 
(a)  No materials to be used for subdivision water improvements will be delivered to the job site until the requirements of sections 14-319 and 14-320 have been complied with. 
(b)  No work will commence on the water improvements until DeKalb County water and sewer division inspectors have inspected and approved all materials on the site for compliance with the materials specifications as published by the water and sewer division of the public works department. 
(c)  Any water line material or appurtenances found not to meet specifications shall be removed from the job site by the contractor prior to commencement of any water line construction activity. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-322. - Final inspection; cost of labor information to be supplied. 
Upon completion of the job of installing water improvements in a subdivision, the owner/applicant's engineer and the county will measure the work done showing station numbers to all valves, fire hydrants and other pertinent fittings including stub locations. The owner/applicant will furnish the county a copy of this report showing the work done. The owner/applicant will furnish the county with a final cost of the labor to install the materials. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-323. - Material storage and responsibility. 
It shall be the contractor's responsibility to acquire, properly handle, store and protect all materials. DeKalb County shall not be held responsible for loss or damage to any materials. No damaged material shall be utilized in the water line construction. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-324. - Excavation. 
(a)  Depth. Trenches shall be excavated to a depth sufficient to provide a minimum of three (3) feet of cover over subdivision water mains, and two and one-half (2½) feet over subdivision water service lines. In rock cuts, the excavation shall be of sufficient depth and width to provide a minimum of six (6) inches' earth cushion below and along the sides of the mains. 
(b)  Sheeting. The contractor shall install sheeting and bracing where necessary to prevent caving, to protect new work and to protect adjacent utility lines, and public and private property. 
(c)  Blasting. Blasting shall be permitted only with the written approval of the county for each location. The contractor shall provide adequate protection, such as mats, and permit only qualified, experienced personnel to supervise blasting. Approval by the county in no way relieves the contractor from any liability for any damages whatsoever resulting from the blasting operations. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-325. - Pipe laying. 
Pipe laying shall conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the development department in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the development department. The development director is authorized to promulgate specifications and regulations to govern and implement this provision. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-326. - Backfilling. 
(a)  All backfilling in subdivisions shall be done with material free from roots, stumps and other foreign material. No rock will be permitted within a distance of six (6) inches from the pipe or ground surface. Rock larger than twelve (12) inches in greatest dimension will not be allowed in any part of the trench. All rock larger than twelve (12) inches shall be disposed of by the contractor. 
(b)  The placing and compaction of all backfill material shall be as follows: 
(1)  Backfill from bottom of trench to one (1) foot above the top of the pipe shall be compacted in layers not exceeding six (6) inches, after compaction. Backfill along the sides and to the top of the pipe shall be hand tamped with acceptable hand tamps or mechanically operated hand-tampers, vibrators, etc. 
(2)  From a point one (1) foot above the top of the pipe to the surface of the trench, backfill shall be placed and compacted in layers not exceeding twelve (12) inches in thickness after compaction. The method of compaction in this section of the trench may be by any reasonable method that will give required compaction. After compaction, the dry weight per cubic foot of any six-inch depth of backfill shall be at least ninety-five (95) percent of the maximum dry weight per cubic foot, as determined by the American Association of State Highway Official Method T-99. 
(3)  The contractor shall restore to the original condition as at the start of the job, all shrubbery, grass, sod, fences, etc., disturbed during the contractor's operations. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-327. - Pavement replacement. 
Cuts in existing street pavement and driveways will be patched by the applicant/owner. The applicant/owner shall maintain the cuts in good condition until a permanent patch is made. When necessary to abate dust, mud or potholing, the contractor shall furnish and install crushed rock or cold patch asphaltic concrete to the surface of the trench. Appropriate utility permits must be obtained from the public works director prior to work being initiated. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-328. - Barricades and lights. 
The contractor shall furnish and place sufficient barricades and lights to adequately protect the work on subdivision water improvements, and to protect all vehicular and pedestrian traffic. No street shall be completely blocked, without the permission of the public works department. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-329. - Testing. 
(a)  All subdivision mains, including fire hydrants and service laterals, shall be subject to a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) pounds per square inch, hydrostatic test, for a period of three (3) hours. When static pressure exceeds one hundred (100) pounds per square inch, the test pressures shall be equal to static pressure plus fifty (50) pounds per square inch. 
(b)  The contractor shall fill the line slowly, taking care to blow off air at fire hydrants or service laterals at high points of line. If a fire hydrant or service lateral is not available at high points, the contractor shall furnish all materials and install one-and-one-half-inch blowoffs to relieve trapped air. After the line has been filled, pressure shall be increased to test pressure with a pump. 
(c)  A pressure gauge shall be installed on the discharge side of the pump. The pressure shall be maintained for three (3) hours; and during the last hour of the test period, the volume of water required to maintain the pressure will be measured. The leakage, or volume of water required, shall not exceed the requirements of the American Water Works Association Standard Specifications, C-600.87, or latest revision thereof. No line will be accepted until it has passed leakage test requirements. The contractor, at the contractor's option, may cover all joints prior to testing. However, if the water mains do not pass the leakage requirements, the contractor will be required to uncover joints and pipe until all leaks have been located and repaired. All visible leaks shall be repaired, regardless of results of leakage tests. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-330. - Sterilization of mains. 
The contractor will furnish all chemicals, feeding equipment and manpower for the sterilization of water mains. The contractor is responsible for the disposal of dose water in accordance with Environmental Protection Division regulations. The contractor must employ a hydric meter to record the quantity of water used and reimburse the county for the appropriate amount. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-331. - Cleanup. 
A thorough cleanup shall be made before final acceptance of subdivision water improvements. All excess rock shall be removed; private and public property shall be restored to original condition, and all excess water line materials removed from the job site. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-332. - Service lateral locations. 
The contractor shall submit an as-built drawing showing the location, lot number and street address for each service lateral installed in a subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-333. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The owner/applicant shall maintain all water mains, appurtenances, trenches and other disturbed surfaces for a period of twelve (12) months after approval and acceptance by the county. 
(b)  The contractor shall be responsible for repairs to any leaking pipe, fittings, etc. Should any trench settle, the contractor shall promptly furnish and place fill to original grade. Should any leak or trench settlement occur under any pavement, the contractor will be held responsible for the cost of replacing pavement. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-334—14-350. - Reserved. 
Part C. - Sewers 

Sec. 14-351. - Where laid; exceptions. 
(a)  Sanitary sewers shall be laid in all streets, service connections installed to property lines, and connections made to trunk line sewers in all subdivisions including subdivisions with private disposal systems. 
(b)  The developer of a property adjacent to undeveloped and unserved land lying upgradient from the subject property, shall extend the sewer main to the outside boundary of the property being developed in order to allow for the future provision of sewer service to such unserved adjacent property unless waived by the development director. 
(c)  In all developments with private disposal systems, lines shall be laid and temporarily plugged or capped at the points of service connections to the proposed trunk sewer line and individual lot lines in accordance with county requirements and specifications. 
(d)  Corresponding service connections shall be installed and temporarily plugged or capped from each principal structure in such a manner that a proper service connection can be made when permanent sewer service is available. This subsection may be waived by the development director based upon service feasibility to the principal structure as determined by the elevation of the structure with reference to the elevation of the proposed sewer line. 
(e)  The requirements of this section may be waived by the board of commissioners. Applications for this waiver shall be submitted to the board through the development director, who shall schedule the request for a public meeting before the board. The waiver may be granted by the board if it finds that the property for which a waiver is sought is in accordance with applicable provisions of this Code and the county board of health regulations concerning the minimum lot size for private disposal systems, and if the property is located in any of the following areas: 
(1)  An area of the county where, due to topographic or soil conditions, public sewer service is not feasible. 
(2)  An area of the county where the installation of sewer service is not scheduled under the approved capital improvements program of the county. 
(3)  An area of the county where the installation of sewer service is not planned to be accomplished within a six-year period. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-352. - Design. 
Design of the proposed sewer system within a development shall conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the development department in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the development department. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-353. - Filing of plan. 
Filing of plans shall conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the development department in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the development department. The lowest minimum finished floor elevation shall be noted for each lot. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-354. - Materials. 
Materials shall conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the development department in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the development department. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-355. - Construction. 
Construction shall conform to the specifications prepared and approved by the development department in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the development department. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-356. - Comments, recommendations to be marked on preliminary plat. 
Upon receiving the preliminary plat the development director will compare the proposed subdivision in relation to existing and proposed sewer systems. Comments, recommendations and changes deemed advisable will be marked on the preliminary plat and returned to the development director and the planning director. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-357. - Certification on final plat. 
The development director shall place certification upon the final plat after the applicant has complied with the sewer system requirements of the county. Such certification is required prior to final approval by the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-358. - Acceptance by county. 
The chief executive officer shall not accept the subdivision sewer project until the applicant has complied with all the requirements of the county. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-359. - Maintenance. 
(a)  The owner/applicant shall maintain all sewer lines, appurtenances, trenches and other disturbed surfaces for a period of twelve (12) months after approval and acceptance by the chief executive officer. 
(b)  The owner/applicant shall be responsible for repairs to sewer system. Should any trenches settle, the owner/applicant shall promptly furnish and place fill to original grade. Should any leaks or trench settlement occur under any pavement, the contractor will be held responsible for the cost of replacing pavement. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-360—14-375. - Reserved. 
Part D. - Streets 

Sec. 14-376. - Standards. 
(a)  Generally. Street improvements shall be provided in each subdivision in accordance with the specifications in this part and the standard plans and specifications available from the county. The term "state transportation department specifications'" shall refer to the state department of transportation specifications in effect at the time the work is placed under contract. The references made to these specifications shall control the materials and equipment as well as the construction method of every class of work so applicable unless otherwise noted. 
(b)  Grading. The construction limits shall be cleared of all trees, stumps, brush and rubbish before grading operations are begun. No trees, stumps, brush or rubbish shall be placed in fill sections within the construction limits. Such debris shall be disposed of in a manner satisfactory to the development director. Fill sections shall be placed in six-inch layers with each layer thoroughly compacted with a sheep foot roller or by other approved methods before the next layer is placed, compaction to be not less than ninety-five (95) percent as determined by AASHO, section T-99. Where unsatisfactory material is encountered (namely any material that will not compact properly, including solid rock) an additional twelve (12) inches shall be excavated below the subgrade elevation and backfilled with a select material. Where unstable material is used in fills, the fill shall be left twelve (12) inches below the subgrade elevation. This twelve-inch fill section shall be filled with select material. Streets shall be graded to width of not less than forty-two (42) feet in the center of the right-of-way to provide eight-foot shoulders in accordance with county's standard plan. 
(c)  Curbing. Header curbing shall be required on all streets and shall be furnished and installed by the applicant unless grassed swales are used for water quality control and approved by the development director. The minimum classes and types of curbing permitted will be as follows: 
(1)  Granite curbing, class D or better. 
(2)  Other as approved by the development director. All curbing shall be placed in firm well-compacted subgrade, and curbing displaced prior to acceptance for maintenance by the county shall be reset or replaced. Specifications for the granite curbing are available from the DeKalb County Development Department. 
(d)  Base and paving. All roadways shall be paved according to the specifications prepared and approved by the development director in effect at the time a development permit application is received by the development department. 
(e)  As-built drawings for all new streets shall be submitted to the development department depicting a street profile based on the centerline and fifty (50) foot stations. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-377. - Street signs. 
(a)  The county's standard steel post with horizontal reflectorized street nameplates with four-inch letters shall be furnished and set by the county at all subdivision street intersections. 
(b)  Street name signs shall have four-inch black letters on reflectorized silver background with black border. Nameplates shall be mounted parallel or nearly parallel to the street. The names shall be marked and visible from both sides. Signposts shall be ten-foot poles with at least three (3) feet well-embedded in the ground. 
(c)  The applicant shall pay to the county for each street name sign a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(d)  To ensure that all street markers are paid for by the applicant and installed at the proper time, the required street markers will be paid for by the applicant at the time of recording. 
(1)  For subdivisions recorded under a performance bond, the street marker will not be installed until the paving has been completed. 
(2)  For subdivisions recorded under a maintenance bond, the public works department will be furnished a plat and a memo requesting that street markers be installed at the time of recording. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-378. - Road hazards prohibited. 
Subdivision signs, planter boxes, and other similar permanent structures shall not be located on street rights-of-way and shall not be constructed in a manner which, in the opinion of the county, obstructs driveway sight distance or creates a traffic hazard; detailed plans for these structures shall be submitted to development director. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-379. - Surface drainage specifications. 
(a)  The size, length and location of all surface drainage pipe or structures shall be shown on the final subdivision plats and shall be subject to the approval of the public works department. All storm drain pipes or culverts carrying stormwater from the street and adjacent property between or through lots shall be extended to at least thirty (30) feet behind the rear of the house. Stormwater must be released into a channel without causing scouring, erosion or resulting sedimentation to the receiving channel. When necessary, the outlet channel shall include structural and vegetative measures to assure nonerosion velocities. This requirement for pipe extension shall only apply to the discharge ends of piped systems. 
(1)  An exception to extending pipes thirty (30) feet behind the rear of the house may be made for pipes fifty-four (54) inches and larger where the house site is proposed to be more than thirty (30) feet from the center of the drainageway. 
(2)  An exception to extending pipes thirty (30) feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the county when soil conditions prohibit erosion. 
(3)  An exception to extending pipes thirty (30) feet behind the rear of the house may be granted by the county where lots are at least one (1) acre in size, open channels are provided, and neither ponding nor erosion control will result. 
(b)  Installation, backfilling and compaction shall be in accordance with state transportation department specifications, sections 106 and 520. All pipes shall have a minimum cover of one (1) foot and headwalls or inlet basins constructed at the end of each pipe. 
(c)  The design of drainage structures shall be based on recognized hydrological formulas as outlined in the approved DeKalb County Stormwater Management Manual. 
(d)  A contour map with an interval of two (2) feet shall be submitted as part of preliminary plats; where available, the county two-foot topographic map shall be used. As determined by the development director, any lots within the subdivision which are undesirable for building due to bad drainage conditions shall be excluded, and no building shall be permitted thereon until these conditions have been corrected as specified by the department. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-380. - Plans, profiles to be approved. 
Four (4) copies of the complete plans and profiles for subdivision street improvements shall be submitted for review and recommendation of approval or denial by the public works department of subdivision streets prior to approval of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-381. - Bonds or escrow required. 
(a)  If, at the time the final plat is submitted for approval, the construction of the street improvements has not been accomplished, then the final plat shall be disapproved. No performance bonds shall be allowed or authorized except the chief executive officer shall require a performance bond to be filed with the county to ensure that all final road improvements required by this Code are made by the owner or applicant. The county shall accept no road until such time as all road improvements required by the county are made. 
(b)  After the work has been completed according to the county specifications and duly inspected by the county, then a maintenance bond shall be required equal to ten (10) percent of the estimated construction cost. The proposed maintenance bond shall be reviewed and approved as to form by the county attorney prior to acceptance by the county. The maintenance bond shall cover the street improvements, drainage system, water system and sewer system. Funds may be placed in escrow with the county in lieu of maintenance bonds. 
(c)  The applicant shall be required to sign a maintenance agreement with the county, by which the applicant shall agree to maintain the streets, drainage, water quality BMPs, water and sewer systems, and rights-of-way for a period of twelve (12) months. During the applicant maintenance period, the county shall make inspections and instruct the applicant by letter as to what correction must be made. 
(d)  In case of emergency repairs, which must be made immediately, or required corrections, which are not made within thirty (30) days of notice, the county shall have the authority to make these corrections and recover costs from the applicant. In cases where funds are being held in escrow by the county, the cost of making these corrections shall be deducted from these funds, and the applicant charged with any costs above the amount of escrow funds. 
(e)  At the end of the twelve-month applicant maintenance period, the county shall make a final inspection and notify the applicant and the bonding company of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable the development director shall recommend to the county attorney that all remaining escrow funds be released. 
(f)  Provided, however, in the discretion of the chief executive officer based upon: 
(1)  Weather conditions; 
(2)  Labor market; 
(3)  Material market; or 
(4)  Circumstances beyond the control of the applicant or the county unforeseen by either party. 
(g)  The maintenance period may be extended for a definite period of time sufficient to make the necessary corrections by an agreement in writing executed by the county, the applicant and his/her surety. Provided further, that the applicant shall be responsible for any damages done to work already completed by him to the time of the extension agreement whether or not the county had accepted it. 
(h)  Maintenance bonds and acceptance by the county of any dedicated improvements shall be as one (1) package upon completion of all improvements, even though the final plat may have been approved prior to completion. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-382. - Standard plans and specifications available. 
Standard county plans and specifications referred to in this part are on file and may be obtained from the development department. The plans are cross sections and construction drawings for a graded street, paved street, driveway section for curbed streets, brick catch basin, barricade for dead-end streets, twenty-four-inch concrete curb and gutter section and standard street marker. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-383. - Sidewalks and bicycle lanes. 
(a)  Sidewalks shall be required on all sides of street frontage on all new and improved local residential streets in all subdivisions and along the street frontage of all new and improved non-residential developments and as set forth in section 14-190 of this article, unless determined by the planning commission to be infeasible only due to severe cross-slopes, shallow rock, soil or topographic conditions. At a minimum, however, continuous sidewalks shall be required on at least one (1) side of all new and improved local residential streets in all new and improved. No other variances or exceptions are allowed. 
(b)  The development director or planning commission may require that sidewalks required pursuant to 14-383(a) be continued to the nearest major or minor arterial or collector street. 
(c)  A grassed, planted or landscaped strip, as set forth in section 14-190 of this article, shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs, bridges excepted. The development director may approve a variable sidewalk location and landscape strip width based on site conditions and future road expansions. Where sidewalks currently exist, new sidewalk construction or re-construction shall be continuous with existing sidewalks. 
(d)  Sidewalks shall be concrete and a minimum of five (5) feet wide and four (4) inches thick. In non-residential districts, where the development director may approve sidewalks to be located immediately behind the curb, such sidewalks shall be six (6) feet in width. Concrete shall be Class "B", as defined by the Georgia Department of Transportation, and have strength of two thousand five hundred (2,500) psi at twenty-eight (28) days. Disturbed areas along sidewalks shall be backfilled, stabilized, and grassed. The required width of a sidewalk may be increased, as determined by the development director, based on site conditions to ensure pedestrian safety. See also, section 14-190. 
(e)  Sidewalks shall be installed at the same time as the building construction, unless an alternative method is approved by the development director. Sidewalks shall be completed prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy for property on which the sidewalk fronts. The sidewalk plan shall be recorded on the final plat and all sidewalks completely installed prior to approval of the final plat. 
(f)  Sidewalks shall not be cut, removed or closed temporarily without a permit from the public works department. Such permit shall not be issued unless safe, adequate, and convenient provision is made for pedestrian travel through the area that is disrupted. Damage to sidewalks caused during construction or development activity shall be repaired at no cost to the county within thirty (30) days or prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever is earlier. 
(g)  In any "landmark district" or "historic district", as defined by the county, where replacement or reconstruction of the sidewalk is deemed necessary, the sidewalk shall be replaced or reconstructed using materials, widths, and designs that are compatible with the historic materials and designs, if any, that exist within the historic district. Design compatibility shall be determined by the DeKalb County Historic Preservation Commission. 
(h)  All sidewalk construction and repairs shall provide for wheelchair ramps to and from sidewalks at the intersection of each street corner and crosswalk. Access ramps shall be constructed pursuant to standards approved by the public works department. 
(i)  No person shall construct a sidewalk on any street in the county without first having obtained a permit to do so from the public works department. Any person constructing a sidewalk on a street, without first obtaining a permit, shall be in violation of this Code, and the public works department shall be authorized to condemn the sidewalk and have it removed and replaced at no cost to the county. 
(j)  Bicycle lanes shall be required on new or substantially improved major or minor arterials, parkways, or collector streets where the posted speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour or greater. Bicycle lanes may also be required by the development director where necessary to provide connections to bikeways in concert with the county bikeway master plan. Bicycle lanes shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be at least four (4) feet wide and placed in the outside lane of a roadway, adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle lane shall be at least five (5) feet wide and located between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Bicycle pavement widths shall be in addition to the minimum pavement width required for the road. See also section 14-190. 
(2)  Bicycle lanes shall be delineated with signs and striping consistent with the latest edition of the manual for uniform traffic control devices, and approved by the development director. 
(3)  Bikeways and bicycle lanes shall be constructed according to the most recent specifications set forth in American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines. 
(4)  The design, striping and sign system for bicycle lanes shall be coordinated with that of the vehicular road system to provide a safe and continuous route for bicycles. Deceleration lanes shall be striped so that bicycles can safely remain in a lane marked between the deceleration lane and the through traffic lane. 
(k)  No wall, fence, sign or other structure shall obstruct passage along a sidewalk or bicycle lane. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-384. - Parking on public right-of-way. 
(a)  For residential projects constructed under the provisions of the zoning ordinance as single-family attached residential projects, wherein title to the single-family unit is held by fee simple ownership, the county shall assume maintenance responsibility one (1) year after the release of the subdivision bonds for parking constructed on public rights-of-way, in accordance with minimum county standards. A special parking maintenance district, as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VI, comprised of all property within such single-family attached residential subdivision, is established for the maintenance of such parking constructed on the public right-of-way at the time the subdivision plat is finally recorded, provided such plat is so noted as required by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Final subdivision plats for single-family attached residential projects shall have the following notation when a special district is to be established for county maintenance of parking within the public right-of-way: 
All single-family residential lots on this plat are included in a special taxing district for funding the maintenance of parking provided in the development. 
(c)  Pursuant to the creation of special parking districts by the county, as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VI, revenue to fund county parking maintenance will be obtained by an ad valorem tax levied on all properties within such parking district. Such ad valorem millage will be set annually by the board of commissioners when other ad valorem millage rates are set. No assessment will be made in a special parking district in the calendar year in which it is established. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-385. - Underground utilities. 
All utilities are required to be placed underground in all new subdivisions of two (2) or more lots except where no utility improvements are required by this chapter, or where the development director determines underground utilities are infeasible due to shallow rock, high water table, or other similar geologic or hydrologic conditions. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-386. - Streetlights. 
Streetlights consistent with Georgia Power specifications, are required in all new subdivisions of two (2) or more lots except where no utility improvements are required by this chapter. Streetlights shall be provided on the same side of the street as sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Secs. 14-387—14-395. - Reserved. 
Part E. - Private Sewage Disposal 

Sec. 14-396. - Submission of information with preliminary plat. 
At the time of submittal of the preliminary subdivision plat and application to the planning director, the applicant shall submit to the board of health the following information when public sewers are not available to the proposed subdivision: 
(1)  Four (4) copies of a sewer feasibility report; 
(2)  Four (4) copies of soil data records on forms provided by the board of health; and 
(3)  Four (4) copies of the subdivision analysis record on forms provided by the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-397. - Contour intervals. 
Topographic data submitted to the county pursuant to the provisions of this division shall show contour intervals of two (2) feet; where available, the county two-foot topographic map shall be used. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-398. - Soil analysis. 
Soil analysis shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 13 Health Regulations, Article 9 On-site Sewage Disposal of the DeKalb County Code. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-399. - Analysis of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Upon receiving the preliminary plat from the planning department and data required in sections 14-396 through 14-398 from the applicant, the board of health personnel shall make an overall analysis of the subdivision and shall indicate in writing on the preliminary plat the results of this analysis. The plat shall then be returned to the planning department. 
(b)  Regarding the preliminary analysis, each lot shall have sufficient area and topographic features to accommodate the installation of an individual sewage disposal system in accordance with regulations applicable to these installations. 
(c)  Any condition in the area to be subdivided found to be in violation of any health regulation shall be sufficient grounds for disapproval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-400. - Inspection of lots; signing of final plat. 
(a)  Upon receiving the final plat from the county and when streets have been cut and individual lots are staked and identified, the board of health personnel will inspect each lot for adaptability to individual sewage disposal systems. 
(b)  After the above inspection has been completed, the board of health shall render a written report to the planning director that shall include changes or recommendations or deletions. The final plat shall be signed by the authorized representative of the board of health, written report attached, and returned to the county. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-401. - Issuance of septic tank permits. 
No septic tank permits shall be issued until four (4) copies of the approved final plat, signed by chief executive officer, have been submitted to the board of health. The four (4) copies of the approved plat shall be provided by the county. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-402. - Drainage between lots. 
Where drainage between subdivision lots is involved and pipe is required, a watertight pipe shall be used and shall extend for a sufficient depth of the lot and not terminate at some point just behind the building line causing pools to be formed or stormwater flooding the area of the septic tank drain field. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-403. - Facilities discharging into public waters; review of plans. 
The state department of natural resources is authorized by the Georgia Water Quality Control Act to review plans and specifications of all sewage treatment facilities discharging into any waters of the state. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-404. - Board of health recommendations. 
The board of health may reject any or all domestic sewage disposal systems and may recommend in lieu thereof the extension of the public sewerage system or the installation of any approved temporary community sewerage system conforming to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-405. - Impoundment permit. 
Where ponds one-tenth ( 1/10 ) of an acre or larger are located in a subdivision or adjoin a subdivision, an impoundment permit shall be obtained in compliance with the impounded water regulations of the state board of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
Sec. 14-406. - Compliance with board of health requirements. 
All septic tank systems shall conform to the requirements of the board of health. 
(Ord. No. 30-02, Pt. II, 7-9-02) 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - FINDINGS OF FACT AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE 

Sec. 14-407. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the county are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effects of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contribute to the flood loss. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-408. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Protect, maintain and enhance human life and health; 
(b)  Minimize the expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(c)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(d)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(e)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(f)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
(g)  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; 
(h)  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions; and 
(i)  Improve the stormwater management, water quality, stream bank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-409. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and provisions that: 
(a)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
(b)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(c)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(d)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(e)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers, which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(f)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 14-410. - Specific definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory use means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
Adversely affects means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point. 
Apex means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain coordinator's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard. See "Special flood hazard area." 
Base flood means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). Base flood is the term used throughout this article. It is equivalent to the "intermediate regional floodplain" (IRF), previously used in the county. 
Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given point during the base flood. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade i.e., below ground level on all sides. 
Basin means a region or land area drained by a single river system. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
County Code section 1-10 means an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or thirty (30) days imprisonment in the county jail or both per violation for each day of violation. 
Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Director means the director of planning and development or designee. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before May 15, 1980, (the initial flood insurance map date). 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the instillation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 6, 1974. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Flood, flooding, or flood water means: 
(1)  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
(2)  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards ant he risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
Floodplain coordinator is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents (Refer to FEMA technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93). 
Floodway means the channel of river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the future-conditions flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one (1) foot, also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
Floodway fringe is the area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where encroachment may be permitted. 
Fraud and victimization as related to Division 6, Variances, of this article, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the board of commissioners will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purposes unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The terms include only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and do not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the one-hundred-year future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions floodplain means any land susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions flood elevation means the flood standard equal to or higher than the base flood elevation. The future-conditions flood elevation is defined as the highest water surface anticipated at any given point during the future-conditions flood. 
Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning map, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of flood detention structures or projected future hydraulic modifications, within a stream or other waterway, such as a bridge or culvert construction, fill and excavation. 
Governing body is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
Hardship as related to Division 6, Variances, of this article means the exceptional hardship that could result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The board of commissioners requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Increased costs of compliance coverage means the National Flood Insurance Program coverage used to mitigate repetitive flood loss properties, where the cumulative flood damage over a ten-year period is such that the cost of repairing the damage is more than half of the building's fair market value. 
The intermediate regional flood (IRF) means a one-hundred-year frequency flood as defined on the flood hazard map which has a probability of occurring once every one hundred (100) years or having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeding in any given year, also known as the base flood, or one-hundred-year flood. 
Land development means any land change, including but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Land Development Activities means those actions or activities that comprise or facilitate a result in land development. 
Land development project means a specific land development undertaking. 
Levee means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such a closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement"), which includes the following: 
(a)  An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  The wet floodproofing standard in subsection 14-432(b)(3). 
(2)  The anchoring standards in subsection 14-432(b)(1). 
(3)  The construction materials and method standards in subsection 14-432(b)(1). 
(4)  The standards for utilities in section 14-433. 
(b)  For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are considered to be basements, including below-grade garages and storage areas. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) or land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) and/or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
Minimum necessary means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this article. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, means the vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within a floodplain. 
New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 15, 1980, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For the purposes of determining insurance rates, new construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after May 15, 1980 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the instillation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 6, 1974. 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
One-hundred-year flood or 100-year flood. See "Base flood." 
Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
Permit means the permit issued by the director to the applicant that is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
Public safety and nuisance, as the term is used in division 6, Variances, of this article means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
Repetitive loss structure means a building covered by a contract for flood insurance that has incurred flood-related damages on two (2) occasions during a ten-year period ending on the date of the event for which a second claim is made, in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), streams, brooks, etc. 
Sheet flow area. See "Area of shallow flooding." 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area in the floodplain subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH. 
Start of construction includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab for footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures that have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads when the cost of such repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this article. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 14-411. - Lands and structures to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the county, and all new or substantially improved residential units, all subdivisions, nonresidential structures, manufactured homes, recreational vehicles, and utilities. This article will be enforced in areas outside the floodplain where runoff poses a risk similar to the special flood hazard areas. In addition, all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or more are assumed to have an area of special flood hazard. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-412. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard currently identified by the Federal Insurance Administration of FEMA in the flood insurance study and accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps, currently dated May 7, 2001, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(b)  The flood insurance study and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this article and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this article and which are recommended to the governing authority by the floodplain coordinator. The Flood Insurance Study, Federal Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps are on file with DeKalb County. 
(c)  For those land areas acquired by county annexation, the flood insurance study and data in effect at the time of approval of this ordinance by the chief executive officer for unincorporated areas are hereby adopted by reference. 
(d)  The areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a flood insurance study. 
(e)  Studies which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the one-hundred-year floodplain include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States [Army] Corps of Engineers or the United States Geological Survey applicable to DeKalb County; or 
(2)  Any flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been approved by DeKalb County. 
(f)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain, include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States [Army] Corps of Engineers or the United States Geological Survey applicable to DeKalb County; or 
(2)  Any regulatory flood study authored by a registered professional engineer in the state which has been approved by DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-413. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10 of the DeKalb County Code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. nothing herein shall prevent the board of commissioners from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-414. - Repetitive loss structure and cumulative substantial damage. 
A building must be brought into compliance with requirements for new construction if it has incurred flood-related damages on two (2) occasions during a ten-year period in which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equaled or exceeded twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the building at the time of each such flood event, or damage of any origin is sustained whereby the cost of restoring the building to its before damage condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building before the damage occurred. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-415. - Mandatory purchase of flood insurance. 
In the event that a property owner chooses not to purchase flood insurance on property at risk, or does not comply with a notice to bring a building into compliance, reducing the community efforts for flood protection, the insurance premium discount for the community's property owners as a community rating system participant, may not apply. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-416. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenant, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-417. - Interpretation. 
(a)  In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-418. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the board of commissioners, any officer or employee thereof, the State of Georgia, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-419. - Severability. 
This article and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, adopted July 22, 2008, amended Div. 4 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Div. 4 derived from Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, adopted May 8, 2001. 

Sec. 14-420. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction of other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in section 14-412. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms promulgated by the director and may include, but not be limited to, floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials drainage facilities; and location of the foregoing. Specifically, all of the following information is required before the director will consider the application for a development permit: 
(a)  Application stage: 
(1)  Site plan, including but not limited to: 
a.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and twenty-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprints, or one-foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and 
b.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; and 
c.  If available, the base flood elevation from the flood insurance study and/or flood insurance rate map; and 
d.  If applicable, the location of the regulatory floodway; and 
e.  Existing and proposed elevation of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material and storage of materials or equipment; and 
f.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; and 
g.  Proposed grading plan; and 
h.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; and 
i.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; and 
j.  Certification of the site plan by a registered professional engineer in the state. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all structures; and 
b.  For a crawl space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in subsection 14-432(b)(3) and FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93; and 
c.  For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to ninety-five (95) percent using the Standard Proctor Test Method); and 
d.  Certification that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in 14-432; and 
e.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in 14-432c.(i). 
f.  Certification that the foundation design detail is by a registered professional engineer in the state. 
(3)  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in subsection 14-432(b)(3)b. and FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93; and 
(4)  All appropriate certifications listed in subsection 14-432(b)(3); and 
(5)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
(6)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodway widths, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; and 
(7)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits and certifications necessary for proposed development. 
(b)  Construction stage: 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the floodplain coordinator a certified as-built elevation certificate for nonresidential construction, including the lowest floor elevation, immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a currently state-registered land surveyor or currently state-registered professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a currently state-registered professional engineer or architect and certified by the same. 
(2)  Any work undertaken prior to submission of the certifications identified in subsection 14-420(b)(1) shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain coordinator shall review the above-referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required herein, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(3)  Copies of permits issued for construction in the floodplain shall be forwarded to the floodplain coordinator. 
(c)  The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved regions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(d)  A development permit will not be approved for any construction or other development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-421. - Designation of the floodplain coordinator. 
The director is hereby appointed as the floodplain coordinator and is authorized to administer, implement, and enforce this article by granting or denying permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-422. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain coordinator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain coordinator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(a)  Review all development permits to determine that: 
(1)  The permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Copies for all necessary permits from any governmental agencies from which approval is required are on file; 
(3)  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
(4)  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; and 
(5)  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. 
(b)  Review, use and develop base flood data: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 14-412, the floodplain coordinator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation, future conditions flood elevation, floodway or future conditions floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Any such information shall be submitted to the zoning board of appeals for adoption; or 
(2)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to the mean sea level, or highest adjacent grade, of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures. 
(c)  Notify other government agencies of an alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(1)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Water Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse; and 
(2)  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration and FEMA; and 
(3)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(d)  Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available, as needed, the following: 
(1)  Certification required by subsection 14-432(b)(3) and section 14-435 (lowest floor elevations); 
(2)  Certification required by subsection 14-432(b)(3)b. (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
(3)  Certification required by subsection 14-432(b)(3)b. (wet floodproofing standard); 
(4)  Certification of elevation required by section 14-434 (subdivision standards); and 
(5)  Certification required by section 14-442 (floodway encroachments). 
(e)  Make map determinations and interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard. Where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, grade and base flood elevations shall be used to determine the boundaries of the special flood hazard area. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation of the floodplain coordinator. 
(f)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed. 
(g)  Take action to remedy violations of this article as specified in section 14-413. 
(h)  Respond to requests for listings of properties in the floodplain. The adopted method for disclosure at the time of sale or rental of a property is accomplished by providing to the interested parties, general public, realtor, insurance, mortgage and engineering consulting firms with an electronic database listing all properties in the floodplain, annually updated, and free of charge. 
(i)  Duties for variances. 
(1)  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(2)  Maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to FEMA upon request. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-423. - Appeals. 
The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when an applicant alleges there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain coordinator within one thousand (1,000) feet of the property in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
DIVISION 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 14-424. - Floodplain management planning and public information. 
(a)  To comply with requirements of the community rating system, the county adopts the following: 
(1)  A floodplain management plan and progress that will be reported in the annual re-certification process. This plan will be updated for each subsequent two-year period. 
(2)  Public information shall include, but it is not limited to elevation certificate repository, map information, outreach projects, hazard disclosure, flood protection, and flood protection assistance. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-425. - Geographical information system. 
For all final floodplain determinations the county adopts the geographical information system's maps compiled using the aerial photography taken February 22, 1995 which are available to the public in the GIS's department products office, including, but not limited to: 1" = 200' planimetric/topographic maps, 1" = 600' aerial photograph contact print copies, and 1" = 3000' comprehensive land use plan, survey control monument locations and thoroughfare plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-426. - Flood threat recognition and early warning dissemination. 
The county adopts as standard the flood early warning system operational since February 1999 by monitoring the National Weather Service for precipitation with two (2) real time terminals getting satellite data, recording creeks/rivers water surface elevation at thirty stations across the county, and reaching the general population through mass media communication, and helping the mobilization of the flood response team. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-427. - Stream dumping penalties. 
Any natural growth or human-made debris that reduces the carrying and storage capacity of the county drainage system may be a violation of this article. Any person who dumps log, trash, trees, and similar debris, shall, upon conviction, is subject to a fine and/or imprisonment according to section 1-10 of the DeKalb County Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-428. - Plan review and field inspections of structures. 
The building code effectiveness grading used by the community rating system required from the county, in October 1999, to perform plan review and field inspections of one- and two-family dwellings to obtain additional insurance benefits for its citizenry. Plan review and field inspections of one- and two-family dwellings in the floodplain, as they relate to flood prevention and protection, will be effective [and] start upon approval of this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-429. - Definitions of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the flood insurance study, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the floodplain coordinator. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the floodplain coordinator, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the floodplain coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-430. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on a site, whenever a development proposes to disturb the regulatory floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodways for which the provisions of section 14-439 shall apply. This study shall be prepared by a currently state-registered professional engineer and made a part of the application for a development permit pursuant to section 14-420. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the floodplain coordinator prior to the approval of any permit that would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(a)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(b)  Step-backwater analysis, using a method approved by the floodplain coordinator. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating the flood insurance study results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood and regulatory flood profiles; 
(c)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one (1) every one hundred (100) feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that regulatory floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(d)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-431. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within the future-conditions floodplain that could result in the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than 0.01 foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or, 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within the future-conditions floodplain allowed under (a) above shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average groundwater table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average groundwater table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the top of the natural (predevelopment) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than 2.0 percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (0.01 foot or less), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 14-430; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the director using the community consent forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of construction, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-432. - Standards of construction within a floodplain. 
(a)  New construction of principal buildings (residential or nonresidential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all of the pertinent requirements of this article have been met. 
(b)  No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable provisions of this Code, state or federal law. In all areas of flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed: 
a.  With flood resistant materials as specified in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 2-93, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
c.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
d.  Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(3)  Elevation and floodproofing. 
a.  Residential buildings. 
(i)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 14-430, 14-431 and 14-422 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 14-430, 14-431 and 14-422 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection (c). 
(ii)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to equalize the hydrologic flood forces on exterior walls and to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with the standards of subsection (c). 
b.  Nonresidential buildings. 
(i)  New construction. New construction of principal buildings, including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 14-430, 14-431 and 14-422 have been met. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 14-430, 14-431 and 14-422 may be flood proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary, must be designed to be watertight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain coordinator. 
(ii)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE or AH zones, may be authorized by the floodplain coordinator to be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the floodplain coordinator. 
c.  [Parking.] All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting these requirements shall follow the guidelines in FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93 and TB-7-93, and must exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Have a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
(ii)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; and 
(iii)  Be certified by a currently state-registered professional engineer or currently state-registered architect. 
d.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity will be eliminated. 
e.  On-site waste disposal system shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them, during flooding; 
f.  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones or multiple base flood elevation cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-433. - Standards for utilities. 
(a)  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
(1)  Infiltration of floodwaters into the systems, and 
(2)  Discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
(b)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(c)  All above-ground utilities shall be elevated three (3) feet above the base flood elevation or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-434. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals (also known as land-disturbance permits) shall identify the special flood hazard area and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data. 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal (also known as land-disturbance permits) shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required. 
(c)  All applications for land-disturbance permits will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a currently state-registered professional engineer or currently state-registered land surveyor and provided to the floodplain coordinator. 
(d)  All applications for land-disturbance permits shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(e)  All applications for land-disturbance permits shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(f)  All applications for land-disturbance permits shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(g)  All subdivision proposals shall provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with section 14-420. 
(Ord. No. 01-08, Pt. I, 5-8-01) 
Sec. 14-435. - Standards for manufactured homes. 
(a)  All manufactured homes that are substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated three (3) feet above the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, if the manufactured home is on a site located: 
(1)  Outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(2)  In a new manufactured home park or subdivision; 
(3)  In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or 
(4)  In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood. 
(b)  All manufactured homes to be substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (a) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
(1)  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is three (3) feet above the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, or 
(2)  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a currently state-registered professional engineer or currently state-registered land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain coordinator. 
(d)  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of section 14-431, 14-432, 14-442 have been met. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-436. - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map will either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, and be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick-disconnect-type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions, or 
(b)  Meet the permit requirements division 4 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes section. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-437. - Standards for accessory structures and facilities. 
Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, parking lots, recreational facilities and other similar structures and facilities) that are permitted to be located within the limits of the floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to pass all floodwater in accordance with subsection 14-432(c) and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-438. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three (3) feet above the base flood elevation, or one (1) foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(b)  Nonresidential buildings. For new construction or substantial improvement of any principal nonresidential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-439. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
(a)  For residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data has been provided (A-zones), the floodplain coordinator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this article. 
(b)  If no data is available from any of these sources, the following provisions will apply: 
(1)  No encroachments including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or fifty (50) feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Opening sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with section 14-431. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-440. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones). 
(a)  Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow-flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one (1) foot above the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map, above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with the standards for "elevated buildings" set forth in this Code or promulgated by the director or the state. The applicant's or owner's engineer shall certify to the floodplain coordinator that the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  Substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified flood insurance rate map flood level plus one (1) foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice; and, 
(b)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-441. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
(a)  The width of a floodway shall be determined from the flood insurance study or FEMA-approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of one hundred (100) acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the floodplain coordinator. If floodway data is not available from the floodplain coordinator, then it shall be determined by a registered professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the floodplain coordinator. 
(b)  Following a pre-design conference with the floodplain coordinator, the boundaries or limits of the floodway shall be shown on the development or stormwater site plan containing existing topographic information. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-442. - Floodway encroachments. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 14-412 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  All encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and any other new development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in [subsection] (b). 
(b)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(c)  If an applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodways shall be issued by the floodplain coordinator until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision is issued by FEMA and a no-rise certification is approved by the floodplain coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-443. - Maintenance requirements. 
The owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on his property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is not diminished. The floodplain coordinator may direct the owner (at no cost to DeKalb County) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the floodplain coordinator. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
DIVISION 6. - VARIANCE PROCEDURE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 08-12, pt. I, adopted July 22, 2008, amended Div. 2 in its entir4ety and enacted similar provisions set out herein. The former Div. 2 derived from Ord. No. 01-08, pt. I, adopted May 8, 2001. 

Sec. 14-444. - Nature of variance. 
(a)  The variance criteria set forth in this division are based on the general principle of law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this article would create an exceptional hardship to the owner or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristics must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
(b)  It is the duty of the board of commissioners to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level is so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this article are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-445. - Appeal board. 
(a)  In passing upon requests for variances, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article including all of the following: 
(1)  Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(2)  Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(3)  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effects of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property; 
(4)  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(8)  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
(9)  Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site; and 
(11)  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(b)  Any owner to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice from the zoning board of appeals that: 
(1)  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level may result in increased premium rates for flood insurance; and 
(2)  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain coordinator in the office of the clerk of superior court of the county in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-446. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(b)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(c)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated or mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-447. - Variance procedure. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals, as established by the county, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The zoning board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain coordinator in the enforcement or administration of this article. No action will be taken under the terms of this division unless such relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(c)  In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(d)  Applications for variances must be submitted in writing to the director within thirty (30) days of discovery of the condition(s) requiring such a variance. Applications are complete when they contain: 
(1)  All those materials and documents required by the director that are necessary to demonstrate the necessity for the variance; 
(2)  Compliance with all other requirements of this Code; 
(3)  A full explanation of the reasons for the variance; and 
(4)  An explanation of how the variance will satisfy the variance conditions set forth in this section. 
(e)  When the variance application is first considered by the zoning board of appeals, the director shall provide the zoning board of appeals with written findings of fact and a recommendation for approval or disapproval of the variance. 
(f)  Applications for variance shall be heard at a public hearing by the zoning board of appeals at the next meeting of the zoning board of appeals held after the filing of a complete application for variance. 
(1)  Notice of the variance shall be mailed via first class mail by the director to all property owners within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the boundaries of the subject property, as such property owners are listed on the tax records of DeKalb County, at least fifteen (15) days before the public hearing before the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Signs shall be posted by the applicant within the public right-of-way in front of or on the subject property at least fifteen (15) days before the hearing before the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  At least one (1) sign shall be posted on each street on which the subject property has frontage. One (1) additional sign shall be posted for each additional five hundred (500) feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred (500) feet of frontage on each street on which the subject property has frontage. Signs shall be double-faced and posted so that the face of the sign is at a right angle to the street to allow the signs to be read by the traveling public in both directions. All signs shall be provided by the county and will be no smaller than six (6) square feet with lettering on the signs at least two (2) inches in size. The sign shall state the nature of proposed variance and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  The director shall sign an affidavit attesting to the posting of signs in accordance with the requirements herein, and shall photograph each sign as evidence of its proper posting. 
(g)  A variance shall only be issued when all of the following conditions are present: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in undue and exceptional hardship; 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, or cause fraud or victimize the public; 
(4)  The requested variance does not go beyond the minimum necessary to afford relief, and does not constitute with the limitations upon other properties; 
(5)  The grant of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to the property or improvements; and 
(6)  The strict application of the requirements of this chapter would deprive the property owner of rights and privileges enjoyed by other property owners. 
(h)  Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 14-445(a) and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(i)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision by writ of certiorari. A person shall be considered aggrieved for the purpose of this subsection only if: said person or said person's property was the subject of the action appealed from; or said person has a substantial interest in the action appealed from that is in danger of suffering special damage or injury not common to all property owners similarly situated. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-448. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described of this article shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-449. - Notice of violation. 
If the floodplain coordinator determines that a property owner or other responsible person has failed to comply with the applicable provisions of this Code, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such owner or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit thereof, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this ordinance and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and, 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the director by filing a written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days after the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Sec. 14-450. - Penalties. 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the director shall first notify the owner or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four (24) hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the owner or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the director may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(a)  Stop-work order. The director may issue a stop-work order that shall be served on the owner or other responsible person. The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop-work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the owner or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(b)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The director may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The director may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the owner or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the director may deem necessary) to enable the owner or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(d)  Penalties. For violations of this chapter, the director may issue a citation to the owner or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the appropriate court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine as set forth in section 1-10. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. I, 7-22-08) 
Chapter 15 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; cable television, Ch. 8; electrical contractors, § 7-55; fortunetelling prohibited, § 16-2; selling or begging on county property, § 16-91; private solid waste disposal services, § 22-51 et seq.; taxation, Ch. 24; wreckers, Ch. 26; vehicle licenses, App. B, § 801. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Security information—Required. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall furnish to the police department, on a form supplied by the police department, any and all information necessary to indicate the security measures located at such person's business, trade or profession and the persons to be notified in the event of an emergency of the business, trade or profession. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1241; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-2. - Same—Furnished with license application. 
All persons applying for a new or renewal license under the provisions of this chapter shall be required, at the time of application, to furnish the information required in section 15-1, and to keep the information current. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1242) 
Sec. 15-3. - Emergency decal. 
All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be furnished by the police department with an emergency decal containing thereon a coded number; it shall be the responsibility of the owner, operator or manager of the business to affix the decal to the main entrance of the business. The decal shall be placed at approximate eye level on the main entrance, and if the decal cannot be placed on the main entrance, it shall be placed on the most conspicuous location as close as possible to the main entrance to the business. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1243; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-4. - Carnivals, sideshows, etc.; permit required prior to issuance of license. 
No license shall be granted for the operation of a carnival, sideshow or similar exhibition on a vacant lot or in any open place where performances of any kind are given or where machinery of any kind or devices of any kind are operated for amusement unless a permit from the board of commissioners is obtained. Applications for this permit, accompanied by a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, shall be filed with the police department. The application shall contain such information as the police department requires. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5001; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Secs. 15-5—15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, adopted Oct. 23, 2018, repealed Art. II in its entirety, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 15-26—15-48, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 95-08, § 1, adopted June 13, 1995. 
Cross reference— Bonds for septic tank installers required prior to issuance of business license, § 13-247. 
State Law reference— Occupation taxes generally O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 15-26. - Generally. 
(a)  Each person engaged in a business, trade, profession or occupation whether with a location within the county, exclusive of incorporated municipalities, or in the case of an out of state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the unincorporated part of the county pursuant to O.C.G.A section 48-13-7, now and as it may be amended hereafter, shall pay an occupational tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation. 
(b)  Occupation taxes shall be based upon gross receipts in combination with profitability ratio and number of employees. The profitability ratio for the type of business will be determined from nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the United States Office of Management and Budget, the United States Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(c)  A schedule of specific business occupation tax rates and fees, as adopted from time to time by the governing authority, is on file in the office of the clerk of the governing authority, and shall be levied and collected in the amount and manner specified by this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-27. - Definitions of terms. 
(a)  Wherever the term "county" is used in this article, it shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(b)  Words or phrases not defined in this chapter, but defined in applicable state law or the code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Administrative fee is a component of the occupational tax which approximates the cost of handling and processing the occupational tax levied and collected pursuant to the requirements of state law and this article. 
(2)  Applicant or holder means the applicant for, or holder of, a business occupation tax certificate, and shall include the business and any legally or organizationally related entity to which the occupational tax certificate applies. 
(3)  Business where used in this article shall be held to mean any person, sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, trade, profession, occupation or other entity and the efforts or activities associated thereby for the purposes of raising revenue or producing income. 
(4)  Business occupation tax certificate or certificate means that document issued by the director, which, when properly annotated or validated by the director shall serve as evidence of compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(5)  Department means the department of planning and sustainability or other department designated by the chief executive officer. 
(6)  Director means the director of the department of planning and sustainability, his or her designee, or the director of another department designated by the chief executive officer. 
(7)  Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line business that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
(8)  Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. This shall include, but not be limited to, permanent, seasonal, and part-time employees. 
(9)  Gross receipts means total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without being limited to the following: total income without deduction for the cost of goods sold or expenses incurred; gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; proceeds from fees charged for services rendered; proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income; and from all other income whatsoever arising from or growing out of the conduct of the business, trade, profession or occupation without any deduction whatsoever, except that gross receipts shall not include the following: sales, use, or excise taxes; sales returns, allowances, and discounts; inter-organizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563 (a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563 (a)(2), or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; payments made to a subcontractor or independent agent; governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds, received by a non-profit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute eighty (80) percent or more of the organization's receipts; and proceeds from sales to customers outside the geographical boundaries of the State of Georgia. 
(10)  Hearing officer shall mean an individual permitted to hear appeals of denials, suspensions, or revocations of a business occupation tax certificate pursuant to section 15-46. 
(11)  Letter of entertainment shall mean a sworn statement from the owner or authorized agent of a restaurant, late-night establishment, nightclub, or adult entertainment establishment concerning the activities allowed, hours of operation, and other information relevant to the operation of the business submitted as part of the application for a business occupation tax certificate to be verified by the director or his/her designee. 
(12)  Location or office shall include any structure or any vehicle of a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted or where services are provided, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or delivery vehicles of a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
(13)  Non-profit organization shall mean a non-profit, civic, educational or charitable organization. 
(14)  Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, trade, profession or business for revenue raising or income producing purposes. 
(15)  Occupation tax rate shall mean the percentage of the gross receipts, less any relevant exemptions, collected from each business in the county as part of the occupation tax. 
(16)  Person wherever used in this article shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization. 
(17)  Practitioner of profession or occupation is one (1) who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. This definition shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(18)  Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required as an exercise of police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. Regulatory fees shall not include an administrative fee. Regulatory fees do not include development impact fees as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. section 36-71-2 or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development. 
(19)  Transient business or transient vendor means a person or business that temporarily sets up business out of a vehicle, trailer, boxcar, tent, other portable shelter, or empty store front for the purpose of selling goods. Individuals may not remain in one (1) location for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-28. - Registration of name of business; payment of taxes required. 
(a)  No person shall be engaged in, pursue, operate, or carry on any business within the unincorporated portion of the county, in any manner, without having registered the name of the business with the department. In addition, each person is required to either pay the taxes as provided by this article, produce evidence of occupation tax payment to another jurisdiction in the State of Georgia, or provide proof of payment of a local business occupation tax in another state that purports to tax the person's or business's sales or services in this state. The county shall not require an occupation tax on those receipts that were taxed by occupation tax in other states or another jurisdiction in the State of Georgia. The county shall also not require payment of an occupation tax by any state or local authority or nonprofit organization, but state and local authorities and nonprofit organizations are required to pay the administrative fee. 
(1)  Applicants that are corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization registered with the Georgia Secretary of State must list the name of the legal entity registered with the Secretary of State, not a trade name, fictitious name, or Doing Business as (DBA) name, in the application. The legal entity must be active and in compliance with all Secretary of State Requirements. The application must also include the name and address of a corporate officer of the business. 
(2)  Applicants that are corporations, partnerships, nonprofits or any other form of business organization registered outside the State of Georgia must list the name of the legal entity and the state or other jurisdiction in which it is registered in the application. Such person must provide proof of registration with the state or jurisdiction in which it is registered. The application must also include the name and address of a corporate officer of the business. 
(3)  Applicants that are sole proprietorships or individuals must include a copy of his or her driver's license with the application. 
(4)  Applicants who seek to operate out of a property zoned for residential use or using a residential address as a physical address or location of business is subject to zoning requirements, and may be subject to relevant special land use permit (SLUP) requirements, under chapter 27 of this Code. Applicants must receive zoning approval, including special land use permits (SLUP) requirements, before such business license is approved. 
(5)  An application shall be on a form provided by the department. The applicant shall provide the following on the application: 
a.  Federal Employer's Identification Number; 
b.  The business name, as reported on the Georgia income tax return; 
c.  Georgia's Sales Tax Number, if applicable; 
d.  The applicant's driver's license number; 
e.  Physical address of business or location of business within county limits of DeKalb County; 
f.  Submission of previous year's tax return (in accordance with section 15-29); 
g.  A notarized covenant whereby the applicant and, if the business premises is owned by someone other than the applicant, the owner of the property swear to maintain the business premises in accordance with all applicable property maintenance regulations under this Code as it currently exists or is hereafter amended, including but not limited to sign, debris, and vegetation regulations. 
h.  Other information reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose of this article. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a certificate renewal application, the director shall conduct a review of any code violations committed by the applicant over the prior twelve (12) months and may deny such application after considering the factors set forth in section 15-45(a)(4). 
(c)  At the time of business registration, such person shall also identify to the department the line or lines of business that the business conducts. Classification of businesses for occupation tax purposes shall be based on the dominant line of business conducted. 
(d)  Each separate business trade name shall be subject to the provisions of this article and shall fully comply with all county code requirements before engaging in, pursuing or carrying on any business within the county. 
(e)  Failure or refusal to provide information requested by the county for the purpose of classification of a business, assessment, audit, or levying of occupation taxes, regulatory fees or administrative costs, or regarding the site of a location or office and taxes or fees paid to other local governments may result in the denial of such application and may be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(f)  Upon compliance with subsections (a) through (e) of this section, the director shall issue to the applicant or holder a business occupation tax certificate, without which no person shall be engaged in, pursue, or carry on any business within the unincorporated portion of the county. The business occupation tax certificate shall serve as a business license. Additional business licenses may be required as established in this Code or in state law. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-29. - Estimation of gross receipts; filing of returns. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied by this article are levied on the amount of business transacted during the current calendar year and the number of employees to be employed in the business conducted. However, for convenience of both the county and the taxpayer those businesses subject to the occupational tax shall, on or before February 1, file with the department a return showing all gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year ending on December 31. This return showing preceding calendar year gross receipts shall be used as an estimate of gross receipts for making payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The number of employees reported for the current year's business operations may be based upon the number of employees employed in the business conducted during the previous year. Applicants or owners engaged in the business shall be reported as employees of the business. For continuing businesses, the return required on or before February 1 showing the business' preceding year's actual gross receipts and number of employees shall also be used to adjust the estimated return for the same period. Differences will be billed or credited to the business' occupational tax billing as required. Should a business not continue or terminate during the year, such business shall notify the department and file a final return reporting the actual number of employees and those gross receipts not previously reported. 
(b)  At the time of application, applicants must provide previous year's tax returns showing gross receipts of the business from the date of commencement until the end of the calendar year. Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be set forth in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(1)  Where a business is unable to provide a tax return from the previous year, an estimated gross revenue amount must be provided. When a federal income tax return is filed, the tax return must be provided to the department. The amount of estimated gross receipts for such part shall be equal to the next year's tax return. In the event of a discrepancy, adjustments will be made between estimated and actual amounts. 
(2)  Newly established businesses that have not had a full year revenue or have not filed a federal income tax return for the previous year will be allowed to estimate revenue and must provide federal income tax returns to the department indicating gross amounts once filed. 
(c)  An applicant may be required to submit a random criminal background check, in accordance with a lottery system established in conjunction with policies and procedures of the department's director to ensure fairness. 
(d)  If a business is to begin on or after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business and shall be based upon estimated gross receipts of the business from the date of commencement until the end of the calendar year. The business shall also file the required registration form and shall pay the administrative fee required by this article. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a lawyer begins business after January 1 of the occupation tax year, the tax and administrative fee on such business shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the business begins. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax and administrative fee by April 30 of the following year shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to and shall pay a ten (10) percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest as provided by section 2-112 and applicable provisions of state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on May 1 of the year following the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupational taxes and administrative fees. In addition, a list of all delinquent lawyers may be sent to the State Bar of Georgia. Section 1-10 of this Code shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. 
(e)  The county shall not require the payment of more than one (1) occupational tax for each location that a business or practitioner shall have nor shall the county require a business to pay an occupational tax for more than one hundred (100) percent of the business' gross receipts. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall pay an occupational tax for each principal office and each separate branch office located in the unincorporated area of the county based upon gross receipts derived from transactions with respect to property located within the unincorporated area of the county. Payment of the occupation tax shall permit the broker, the broker's affiliated associates and salespersons to engage in all of the brokerage activities described in O.C.G.A. § 43-40-1 without further licensing or taxing other than the state licenses issued pursuant to chapter 40 of title 43. 
(g)  For out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia, occupation taxes include the gross receipts of business as defined in section 15-33 of this article titled paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
(h)  For purposes of this section, prima facie evidence of gross receipts generated during any period shall be a copy of the business' federal income tax return or an affidavit of the business' accounting firm. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-30. - Administrative and regulatory fees. 
(a)  A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee set by the governing authority shall be required on all business occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, maintenance, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed on those applicable businesses listed under O.C.G.A. section 48-13-9(b) that the county deems necessary to regulate. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-31. - Separate registration for separate locations or separate trade names. 
Where a person conducts business at more than one (1) fixed location or has multiple business trade names, each location or place and each trade name shall be considered to be separate for the purpose of the occupation tax and the gross receipts of each will be returned on a form furnished by the department in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-32. - Renewal returns and applications; due date; penalty for late payment. 
(a)  On or before February 1, businesses subject to occupation taxes levied under this article for the preceding year shall file a signed application furnished by the department. The signed application must include the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year ending December 31. Businesses that fail to file the signed application by February 1 will be subject to a one-hundred-dollar late fee. Businesses that fail to file the signed application by March 1 will be subject a three-hundred-dollar late fee. Businesses that fail to file the signed application by April 1 will be subject to a six-hundred-dollar late fee. Occupation taxes on all businesses who hold an alcohol license shall be required to be renewed, in conjunction with the alcohol license, no later than December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Occupation taxes shall be considered delinquent if not paid by April 15 of each year (the "delinquency date"). Any businesses failing to pay the occupation taxes and administrative fees by the delinquency date shall be subject to and shall pay a ten-percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest as provided by section 2-112 and applicable provisions of state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on April 16 of the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupation taxes, regulatory fees and administrative fees. 

 
1  Interest is assessed and accrues at the rate of one (1) percent per month for any businesses failing to pay by the due date (April 16 or January 1). 
2  A one-time, ten-percent penalty is assessed upon any business failing to pay by the due date (April 16 or January 1). 
(c)  If any person or business whose duty it is to obtain a registration in the county begins to transact or offers to transact any kind of business after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, such offender shall be assessed interest according to the rate as provided by state law and penalties under the provisions of county code and shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(d)  On any new business begun in the county and not subject to payment of occupational taxes to DeKalb County, failure to register the name of the business and the line or lines of business that the business conducts shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. Registration under this section is required for insuring business to be conducted complies with county codes or ordinances governing health, safety and other purposes. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, occupation taxes and administrative fees for lawyers shall be due and payable on December 31 of the year in which the tax is incurred. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax and administrative fees by April 30 of the following year shall be considered delinquent and shall be subject to and shall pay a ten (10) percent penalty of the amount of tax or fee due and interest as provided by state law. Such penalty shall be assessed in full on May 1 of the year following the tax year in addition to interest on delinquent occupation taxes and administrative fees. In addition, a list of all delinquent lawyers may be sent to the State Bar of Georgia. Section 1-10 of this Code shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. 
(f)  In addition to the above remedies, the department may obtain a lien for failure to pay taxes against the person so delinquent and against such person's property for the amount of the occupational tax required to be paid for the purpose of carrying on any of the businesses enumerated in this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-33. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
Registration and the assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business' largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the unincorporated area of DeKalb County, Georgia, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one (1) or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of unincorporated area of DeKalb County, Georgia, for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the unincorporated area of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-34. - Professionals classified in O.C.G.A. section 48-13-9(c). 
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c), now and as it may be amended hereafter, shall elect as their entire occupation tax one (1) of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on the number of employees and the gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in this article; or 
(2)  An established fee set by the county governing authority in accordance with authority granted by state law. Such fee is per practitioner who is licensed by the state to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. Practitioners paying according to this paragraph shall pay the fee per practitioner and shall not be required to provide information relating to gross receipts or number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(3)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by instrumentalities of the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, shall not be required to register or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-35. - Purpose and scope of tax and applicability of state law. 
The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession, trade or calling. To the extent that any provision of this chapter conflicts with applicable state law, such provision is null, void, and unenforceable. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-36. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; county and state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the county registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person required to obtain a business occupation tax certificate shall post the business occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous public place in the licensee's place of business. Each person who is licensed by the state shall also post the state license in a conspicuous public place in the licensee's place of business. 
(c)  Any transient or nonresident person doing business within the county shall carry their occupational tax receipt either upon such person or in any vehicle or other conveyance which is used in such business, and such person shall exhibit it to any authorized enforcement officer of the county when so requested. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-37. - Change of location. 
Any business moving from one (1) location to another shall notify the department of this move and the new address in writing on a form provided by the department prior to the day of the moving. A new receipt for the occupational tax will be issued for the new location if the new location conforms to the zoning regulations of the county and the building official approves the occupancy pursuant to section 7-27(i) and all applicable codes. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-38. - Transferability. 
Business occupation tax certificates shall not be transferable. Transfer of ownership of the business shall be considered as the termination of the business and the establishment of a new business. Filing a new registration application and payment of applicable fees and taxes shall be required of the new owner of the business. Failure to file a new registration application and to pay any applicable fees shall be grounds for revocation. Any attempt to transfer a business occupation tax certificate itself shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-39. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
Any business subject to state or local permits, licenses, certificates, qualifications, and other regulatory requirements, including but not limited to health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, alcohol licenses, building permits, and certificates of occupancy, must show evidence of such license, permit, certificate, or qualification prior to the issuance of a county business occupation tax certificate. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-40. - Inspections of books and records; audits; confidential information. 
(a)  (1)  The director may inspect or audit the books or records of any business to ensure compliance with this chapter. The director may issue an administrative subpoena describing the books or records sought and shall serve such subpoena. Failure to submit the requested books or records to the director within thirty (30) days of service may result in the denial or revocation of an application or certificate. The recipient of an administrative subpoena may petition a court of competent jurisdiction to quash a subpoena within three (3) days of service. 
(2)  The director may enter any building or property where business is conducted during business hours and at other reasonable times to ensure compliance with this chapter. Prior to entry, the director shall present credentials, state the reason for the inspection, and request entry. If the building is unoccupied, the director shall make reasonable efforts to locate any person having control of the building or property and request entry. If entry is refused or the director is unable to obtain consent, the director shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including but not limited to application to a magistrate judge or any court of competent jurisdiction for an administrative search warrant. 
(3)  An administrative search warrant may be issued where the person seeking the warrant establishes under oath or affirmation that the property, records, or books to be inspected are to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes those records, books, or property, or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions above, whenever it appears to the director that conditions exist requiring immediate inspection or other action to protect the public health, safety or welfare, or to preserve property, the director is authorized to enter any building or property without first obtaining the consent, or when any other circumstance exists making such entry lawful under the common law. The right of entry set forth in this section is supplemental to any other right of entry provided by law. 
(b)  If it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of under reporting, additional payment of occupation taxes required to be paid under this article shall be assessed the interest as provided by state law. 
(c)  Information provided by a business or practitioner of an occupation or profession for the purpose of determining the amount of occupation tax for the business or practitioner is confidential and exempt from disclosure pursuant to the procedures laid out under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., except that such information may be disclosed to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collection of occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by the director of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof. 
(d)  Applicants and holders have a duty to update the department of any change in ownership, use, address, line of business, or any other information required to be submitted with the initial application or renewal. Unless otherwise specified, failure to update the department, within sixty (60) days, of any such change may result in the suspension, revocation, or denial of the application or certificate. 
(e)  An applicant or holder may be subject to a random audit to ensure accuracy and truthfulness, in accordance with a lottery system established in conjunction with policies and procedures of the department's director to ensure fairness. The director may hire outside auditors for this purpose. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-41. - Business classifications for determining tax levy. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, every person engaged in business requiring the payment of occupational taxes is classified in accordance to the major line of business as defined in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of Management and Budget; and profitability classes are assigned in accordance with Statistics of Income, Business Income Tax Returns, United States Treasury Department, Internal Revenue Service. The department shall review assignment of businesses to profitability classes on a biannual basis and shall administratively reassign businesses as necessary to the then most accurate profitability class. 
(b)  Classifications by business profitability have been established by the governing authority and are incorporated herein by reference and adopted for use in the application of this article. All separate businesses engaged in more than one (1) business activity shall be classified on the basis of their dominant business activity at each location where business is done; except, that a person whose dominant business activity is legally exempt as defined by this article shall be classified according to such person's principal subsidiary business, if any, which is subject to the levy and assessment of occupation taxes. 
(c)  The occupation tax shall be determined by applying the business' gross receipts and number of employees returned to the director to the business' profitability classification established for each business type. 
(d)  A copy of business classifications shall be maintained in the office of the clerk of the governing authority and shall be available for inspection by all interested persons. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-42. - Casual and isolated transactions. 
Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to require any person who may engage in casual or isolated activity and commercial transactions, where they involve personal assets and are not the principal occupation of the individual, to pay occupation tax therefor. Street vendor, transient vendor or flea market vendor activities shall not be considered to be casual and isolated business transactions and shall be required to comply with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-43. - Exemption for disabled veterans, disabled indigent persons, certain organizations. 
(a)  Persons who qualify for a state veteran's or disabled indigent person's license shall be eligible for exemption from the county occupational tax fee. Any such person claiming an exemption shall secure evidence of qualification for the exemption from the proper authority and present it to the department. 
(b)  Organizations that are exempt from federal income taxation under section 501(c)(3) or section 501(c)(4) of the United States Internal Revenue Code shall be eligible for exemption from the county occupational tax. This exemption does not extend to the administrative fee. Any such organization claiming an exemption shall provide to the department a federal tax exemption letter showing the code section under which an exemption is claimed. However, with respect to any activity for which an organization otherwise entitled to an exemption under this section shall be liable for federal income tax on unrelated business income or shall be deemed to be a feeder organization under the United States Internal Revenue Code, the exemption from payment of occupational taxes shall not be available. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the exemption from payment of county occupation taxes, an exempt person or business shall comply with the same laws and regulations as are required of other registered businesses. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-44. - Exclusions from article; special classifications. 
(a)  Wholesale dealers in liquor, wine, beer, and malt beverages who are licensed and domiciled outside of unincorporated DeKalb County are not required to pay the business occupation taxes provided for in this article. 
(b)  Registration and occupation tax payment is required from any satellite subscription television system. Satellite subscription television system means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services utilizes a master antenna type system or earth dish system designed to receive and distribute satellite television signals; particularly, a system to provide service to one (1) or more multiple unit dwellings under common ownership wherein any wiring necessary to operate the system does not cross adjacent non owned property lines and does not cross county right-of-way in the unincorporated area of the county. The provisions of this paragraph shall not apply to any person that is franchised by the governing authority to own and operate a cable system under the provisions of chapter 8. 
(c)  Registration and occupation tax payment is required from any broadcast subscription television system. Broadcast subscription television system means services provided to subscribers for sale where the provider of the services transmits premium programming from one (1) or multiple sources by transmitting or retransmitting programs to the public. 
(d)  Any vendor or exhibitor who is a member of a group or collection of vendors or exhibitors that has come together at one (1) location for the purpose of selling arts, crafts, antiques, or other goods for a period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days may be registered individually, or the group or collection may be registered as a "special event." Any applicant for a special event shall be considered as the promoter of the special event and shall be responsible for registration of the special event and paying the occupational taxes. Any special event group or collection of vendors or exhibitors shall comply with the same laws and regulations as required of other registered businesses, where applicable. 
(e)  Attorneys must comply with the requirements of this article subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Pursuant to state law, attorneys are not required to pay the business occupation taxes provided for in this article except as provided by section 15-34. 
(2)  Attorneys are not required to display a business occupation tax certificate pursuant to the requirements of this article in order to practice law in the county. 
(3)  Attorneys are required to register with the department as set out in section 15-28. 
(4)  Attorneys shall not be subject to any criminal or civil penalties for failing to comply with this article, nor are they subject to having their business occupation tax certificates revoked. 
(5)  The director may report any violations of this article to the State Bar of Georgia. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-45. - Denial, revocation or suspension of business occupation tax certificate. 
(a)  A business occupation tax certificate application shall be denied upon determination by the director that one (1) or more of the following has occurred: 
(1)  The original application or renewal thereof contains materially false or misleading information, or the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
(2)  The applicant or holder is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
(3)  The business premises or business activity presents a threat to public health and safety due to the presence of dangerous conditions including, but not limited to, fire, health, and building code violations; 
(4)  a.  For an original application, the applicant or holder has been convicted of or has pleaded guilty to any felony offense, crime of moral turpitude, misdemeanor, or violation of this Code that directly relates to the business for which the certificate is sought. 
b.  In determining whether a felony, crime of moral turpitude, misdemeanor, or violation of this Code directly relates to the business for which the certificate is sought, the director shall consider: 
1.  The nature and seriousness of such violation; 
2.  The relationship between such violation and the business for which the certificate is sought; 
3.  The age of the individual at the time such violation was committed; 
4.  The length of time elapsed since such violation was committed; 
5.  The number of violations committed; 
6.  The circumstances relative to such violation including, but not limited to, mitigating circumstances or social conditions surrounding such violation; and 
7.  Evidence of rehabilitation and present fitness to operate the business for which the certificate is sought or held. 
(5)  For a renewal application, the applicant or holder has operated the subject business in violation of federal or state law or any provision of this Code. 
(6)  The applicant or holder failed to obtain any permit, license or certificate required in section 15-39 of this Code. 
(b)  (1)  A business occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to this article shall be suspended upon determination by the director that one (1) or more of the following conditions has occurred but such condition may be remedied thereafter within a reasonable time: 
a.  The original or renewal application contains materially false or misleading information, or the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
b.  The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of state law or any provision of the Code; 
c.  The holder is operating under a business or trade name not listed on the current application on file with the director; 
d.  The holder fails to maintain the initial requirements for obtaining the certificate; 
e.  The applicant or holder fails to pay occupation taxes and administrative fees by the delinquency date; 
f.  The applicant or holder fails to comply with an inspection or audit conducted pursuant to section 15-40; 
g.  The business premises or business activity presents a threat to public health and safety due to the presence of dangerous conditions including, but not limited to, fire, health, and building code violations; 
h.  The premises has moved locations without notifying the department; or 
i.  The premises has changed use under the zoning code without permission; or 
j.  The holder failed to obtain required building permits in violation of section 15-39 of this Code. 
(2)  A certificate that is suspended under this subsection shall not be reinstated until the underlying violation is corrected or remedied as determined by the director. 
(c)  (1)  A business occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to this article shall be revoked upon determination by the director that one (1) or more of the following has occurred: 
a.  The original or renewal application contains materially false or misleading information, or the applicant omitted material facts in the application; 
b.  The premises covered by the certificate are found to be in violation of federal or state law or any provision of the Code; 
c.  The applicant or holder is engaged in the business or occupation under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name; 
d.  The applicant or holder is engaging in false, misleading, or deceptive advertising or practices; 
e.  The holder is operating under a business or trade name not listed on the current application on file with the director; 
f.  If after having been granted a certificate, the applicant or holder has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony offense or crime of moral turpitude, misdemeanor, or violation of this Code that relates to the business for which the certificate was issued; 
g.  The business premises or business activity presents a threat to public health and safety due to the presence of dangerous conditions including, but not limited to, fire, health, and building code violations; 
h.  The holder failed to obtain required building permits in violation of section 7-30 of this Code. 
(2)  An applicant or holder whose certificate is revoked may not apply for a new certificate within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of the service of the director's decision or, if appealed, within three hundred sixty-five (365) days of the hearing officer's decision to affirm the revocation. 
(d)  Public comments. The public may submit comments concerning the director's approval, denial, suspension or revocation of any application or certificate via a standard form available on the county website for the director's consideration. 
(e)  False or misleading information. No certificate shall be issued or renewed pursuant to any provisions of this article to any applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity if within the twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing with the department of planning of any application under this chapter the same applicant, business or legally or organizationally related entity has been denied a certificate or had a certificate revoked for any location based in whole or in part upon having furnished false or misleading information in any application or having omitted material facts in any application. 
(f)  Violations of state or federal law or this Code committed by employees. If an employee of an applicant or holder violates a federal or state law or a provision of this Code on the premises covered by the certificate, and the applicant or holder knew or should have known that the violation was likely to occur but did not take reasonable steps to prevent such violation from occurring, the certificate shall be suspended or revoked by the director considering mitigating factors, including the severity of the violation, the relationship between the violation and the business for which the certificate was issued, the employee's past behavior, and the foreseeability of the violation occurring. 
(g)  Cease and desist order. The director shall issue a cease and desist order prohibiting any further business activity on the premises after the issuance of three (3) citations for operating without a valid business occupation tax certificate, or after a determination that the business premises or business activity presents an immediate threat to public health and safety due to the presence of dangerous conditions including, but not limited to, fire, health, and building code violations. The director must tack the cease and desist order on the premises and send notice of the order to the business address. 
The property owner or operator of a business in receipt of a cease and desist order may appeal the issuance of that order following the procedures outlined in section 15-46. While the appeal is pending, the business operator or property owner must comply with the cease and desist order. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-46. - Appeals of decisions of the director. 
(a)  Any person affected by a decision of the director under this article shall have the right to appeal to the hearing officer. Notwithstanding any contrary provision in this Code, all decisions concerning the denial, suspension, or revocation of an application or certificate under the Code shall be appealed in accordance with this section. An appeal shall be based on a claim that the director's decision was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or an incorrect application of this Code or other applicable laws and regulations. 
(b)  Unless otherwise indicated, all notices required to be served upon the appellant under this section shall be served by U.S. Mail. Notice shall also be sent via e-mail if appellant has provided the department with a valid e-mail address. 
(c)  Appeals regarding the denial, suspension, or revocation of an application or certificate. 
(1)  Upon determination that an application or certificate is subject to denial, suspension, or revocation, the director shall provide written notice of such decision and the grounds for such decision to the applicant or holder. The notice shall give the applicant or holder the option to request a pre-disciplinary meeting with the director. If the applicant or holder elects not to request a pre-disciplinary meeting, the applicant or holder may immediately appeal the director's decision via the appeal procedure set forth in subsection (a). 
(2)  If the applicant or holder elects to request a pre-disciplinary meeting, he or she must advise the director within fifteen (15) calendar days of receiving notice and must be available for the pre-disciplinary meeting within fifteen (15) calendar days thereafter. The applicant or holder shall have the opportunity to explain or refute any alleged violation and describe efforts made to resolve the matter. 
(3)  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the pre-disciplinary meeting, the director shall serve the applicant or holder with a written decision explaining the rationale for such decision. The applicant or holder may appeal that decision via the appeal procedure set forth in subsection (f). 
(d)  Appeals regarding occupation tax assessment or classification. 
(1)  For decisions concerning the occupation tax assessed or the major line of business classification, the applicant or holder shall file an objection with the director within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the decision. The objection shall be in the form of a letter and shall identify the grounds on which the objection is based and shall include a mailing address and e-mail address for receipt of future notices and decisions. 
(2)  Within fifteen (15) calendar days of the pre-disciplinary meeting, the director shall serve the applicant or holder with a written decision explaining the rationale for such decision. The applicant or holder may appeal that decision via the appeal procedure set forth in subsection (f). 
(e)  Appeals regarding cease and desist orders. 
(1)  Upon the issuance of a cease and desist order, the applicant or holder may request a pre-appeal meeting with the director. If the applicant or holder elects not to request a pre-appeal hearing, he or she may immediately appeal the cease and desist order via the appeal procedure set forth in subsection (f). 
(2)  If the applicant or holder elects to request a pre-appeal meeting, he or she must advise the director within five (5) calendar days of receipt of the order. The applicant or holder shall have the opportunity to explain or refute any alleged violation and describe efforts made to resolve the matter. 
(3)  Within five (5) calendar days of the pre-appeal meeting, the director shall serve the applicant or holder with a written decision explaining the rationale for such decision. The applicant or holder may appeal that decision via the appeal procedure set forth in subsection (f). 
(f)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, an appellant must file a notice of appeal with the director within fifteen (15) calendar days of the decision being appealed. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter, identify the grounds for appeal, and include a mailing address and e-mail address for receipt of future notices and decisions. Should the appellant fail to file a notice of appeal that contains the required information within the time allowed, the right to appeal is lost. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the director shall send a notice of hearing to appellant of the date, time and place where a hearing will be held. The director will designate a location for grievances and hearings which will be utilized to hold these hearings. The hearing shall be held before the hearing officer within thirty (30) calendar days of the date the notice of appeal is filed with the director, but no sooner than five (5) calendar days of service of the notice of hearing. 
(3)  While an appeal is pending before the hearing officer under this section, the subject business may continue operating, but all legal proceedings with regard to collection of the occupation tax from the applicant or holder shall continue. The filing of a notice of appeal shall not preclude the director from pursuing any and all other legal remedies to enjoin any violation of this article or of any other article of the Code or law. 
(4)  If the director deems it necessary that an audit of the financial books/records of the applicant or holder be conducted, the director shall notify the applicant or holder in writing of a reasonable date, time and place for the audit, which shall be conducted prior to the date of a hearing on the matter. The director may hire outside auditors for this purpose. 
(g)  (1)  Proceedings before the hearing officer shall be open to the public and recorded. All allegations of code violations and misconduct by the applicant or holder shall be read at the commencement of the hearing unless waived. Parties to an appeal may be represented by counsel and may present documentary evidence and sworn witness testimony. Any member of the public may submit written documents and sworn affidavits relevant to the proceeding for the hearing officer's consideration. The rules of civil procedure and rules of evidence shall not apply, but the hearing officer shall control the proceeding in such a way as to ensure the fair and efficient administration of justice. No hearing shall last more than three (3) hours unless the hearing officer determines there is good cause to extend the allotted time. 
(2)  The hearing officer shall determine whether the appellant is an affected person under subsection (a). If more than one (1) person appeals a decision of the director, the hearing officer shall consolidate the appeals. If the appeal is properly before the hearing officer, the hearing officer shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the director. The hearing officer shall only modify or reverse a decision of the director upon a determination that such decision was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact or an incorrect application of this Code or other applicable laws or regulations. The hearing officer's decision must be supported by evidence presented at the hearing. If the hearing officer affirms the director's decision, the hearing officer may require the appellant to reimburse the director for any reasonable fees incurred in conducting an audit of the applicant or holder. The hearing officer shall issue a written decision and shall serve a copy of such decision on parties within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the hearing. All documents and other evidence considered by the hearing officer shall be preserved as the record of the proceedings for not less than one hundred fifty (150) calendar days after the hearing and in accordance with the record retention requirements of law. 
(3)  Any person with legal standing may seek review of such decision by petitioning the Superior Court of DeKalb County for a writ of certiorari, setting forth plainly the alleged errors. Such petition shall be filed within thirty (30) days after the final decision of the hearing officer is rendered. Should the hearing officer fail to issue a timely decision, the applicant or holder may seek review as if a decision adverse to the applicant or holder had been rendered. 
(h)  Hearing officer qualifications; administration. 
(1)  A person serving as a hearing officer shall be admitted to the practice of law in the State of Georgia and an active member of the State Bar of Georgia, with a minimum of five (5) years of experience in the practice of law. 
(2)  A pool of at least four (4) hearing officers shall be established to hear all appeals under this section. The pool of hearing officers shall be established in the same manner as the hearing officer pool established under appendix B of article XVI of this Code and individuals serving as hearing officers under this chapter shall be compensated in the same manner as those individuals who serve as hearing officers in appeal hearings under article XVI of this Code. In no event shall the hearing officer be a current appointed or elected official or employee of DeKalb County or have been an official or employee of DeKalb County within two (2) years prior to serving as a hearing officer. 
(3)  The hearing office for each proceeding will be selected on a rotating basis based on availability. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-47. - Promulgation of rules, regulations. 
The department shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the county and the state, or the constitution of this state or the constitution of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational tax. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 15-48. - Requirement for public hearings. 
The governing authority shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding the occupation tax. The governing authority shall also conduct at least one (1) public hearing in any year when revenue from occupational taxes is greater than revenue from occupational taxes for the preceding year in order to determine how to use the additional revenue. 
( Ord. No. 18-05 , Pt. I, 10-23-18) 
Secs. 15-49—15-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ASTROLOGERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fortunetelling prohibited, § 16-2. 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit, tax and regulate astrology, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 

Sec. 15-71. - Definition. 
In this article, "astrology" means the interpretation of human experience based upon an examination and correlation to celestial activity for fee, gift or donation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1212) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-72. - Applicability. 
This article governs the practice of astrology in the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1211) 
Sec. 15-73. - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both. 
State Law reference— Authority for above penalty, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
Sec. 15-74. - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to practice astrology in the unincorporated area of the county unless such person holds a valid, unexpired and unrevoked license to engage in such practice in astrology issued by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1213) 
Sec. 15-75. - Same—Application. 
An application for a license to engage in the practice of astrology shall be made to the finance department on a form prepared by it. Prior to being licensed to practice astrology the applicant shall: 
(1)  Be eighteen (18) years of age or over. 
(2)  Be of good moral character. 
(3)  Not have been convicted of a crime or violated any ordinance involving the following: criminal conduct, larceny, embezzlement, fraudulent conveyancing, perjury and/or false swearing, or subrogation of either, gambling, deceitful means, artful practices, lottery, felonies or other crimes involving moral turpitude within three (3) years of the date of application. 
(4)  Have a high school diploma or the equivalent thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1214) 
Sec. 15-76. - Other rules apply. 
In addition to the requirements of this article, the same rules apply to an astrology applicant or licensee that apply to general business applicants or licensees. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1215) 
Secs. 15-77—15-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Going-out-of-business sale signs, § 21-147. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock or goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: Adjuster's; adjustment; alteration; assignee's bankrupt; benefit of administrator's; benefit of creditor's; benefit of trustee's; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditor's end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced out of business; insolvent's last days; lease expires; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's; and quitting business. 
Goods means any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated under this article. 
Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location or will then continue business from another existing location. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1072) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-92. - Persons exempt from article. 
The provisions of this article do not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(4)  Any publisher or newspaper, magazine or other publication that publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character or without knowledge that there has not been compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1074) 
Sec. 15-93. - Duties of licensee. 
A licensee under this article shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions during the period of the licensed sale to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application, and present this duplicate to inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale, and make this distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all these goods. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1080) 
Sec. 15-94. - Interval between sales. 
Any person who has held a sale as regulated under this article at the location stated in the application within one (1) year last past from the date of the application shall not be granted a license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1081) 
Sec. 15-95. - Location of sale restricted. 
Where a person applying for a license required by the provisions of this article operates more than one (1) place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one (1) store or branch specified in the application. No other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperating with this sale or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1082) 
Sec. 15-96. - Bankrupt or fire sales. 
(a)  Sale of unaffected or undamaged goods. It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any sale, whether by auction or otherwise, of any goods, wares or merchandise which are or have been or which are claimed to be or claimed to have been in or damaged by a fire, or which are or have been or which are claimed to be or claimed to have been sold or purchased on account of any fire, or which are or have been or are claimed to be or claimed to have been the property of any bankrupt or person who has failed in business or has made a general assignment, or which are being sold or offered for sale in any other way than through the usual channels of trade, to sell or offer for sale therein any goods, wares or merchandise not so circumstanced or affected or damaged. 
(b)  Adding to goods. It shall be unlawful for any person to add to, or to permit to be added to, or to bring into or permit to be brought into any store, warehouse or other building in the county, any goods for the purpose of adding to these goods, wares or merchandise so circumstanced or affected and on hand in this store, warehouse or other building for the purpose of being sold at this sale. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1083) 
Sec. 15-97. - Advertising restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise, in any newspaper, handbill, sign, poster or any other such printed media, or by radio or television broadcast to residents of the unincorporated area of the county, that the person is conducting a closing-out, going-out-of-business, fire or bankrupt sale or similar sale as defined in this article as a means of attracting the general public to the person's place of business when such person does not actually intend to close out or go out of business or has not purchased the license required by this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise by sign, poster, handbill, newspaper or any other such printed or written media any closing-out, going-out-of-business, fire or bankrupt sale or similar sale as defined in this article unless all the written or printed matter in this advertisement shall be of the same size and type, including the notice that sales, excise and other taxes are either included or excluded from the advertised price and also whether the advertised price includes an article of the type being advertised to be traded in on the advertised article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1084) 
Secs. 15-98—15-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 15-116. - Required. 
A license issued by the finance department shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be any of the following kinds: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sale. 
(2)  Removal of business sale. 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1073) 
Sec. 15-117. - Application. 
A person desiring to conduct a sale for which a license is required by this division shall make a written application to the finance department setting forth the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale. 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom the applicant purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of this acquisition. 
(3)  A description of the place where the sale is to be held. 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of the termination of such occupancy. 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which it will be conducted. 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising the sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at this sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. This inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1075) 
Sec. 15-118. - Established business required; exception. 
(a)  Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license under this division for a period of at least twelve (12) months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license under this division. 
(b)  Upon the death of a person doing business in the county, such person's heirs, devisees or legatees or the representative of such person's estate shall have the right to apply at any time for a license under this division. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1076) 
Sec. 15-119. - Inventory restrictions. 
(a)  All goods included in the inventory of an applicant for a license under this division shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
(b)  The inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated under this division. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within thirty (30) days before the filing of an application under this division shall be deemed to be of this character. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1077) 
Sec. 15-120. - Conditions of issuance. 
A license shall be issued under this division on the following terms: 
(1)  Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than thirty (30) consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof. 
(2)  Renewal procedure. The finance department shall renew a license for one (1) period of time only, this period to be in addition to the thirty (30) days permitted in the original license and not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when it finds that all of the following exists: 
a.  Facts justifying the license renewal. 
b.  The licensee has filed an application for renewal. 
c.  The licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application and inventory. For the purpose of this subparagraph, any application for a license under the provisions of this division covering any goods previously inventoried as required hereunder shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant, or by any other person. 
(3)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(4)  Salable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(5)  Surrender of general licenses. Upon being issued a license hereunder for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the finance department all other business licenses the licensee may hold at the time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this division. 
(6)  Nontransferability. Any license provided for shall not be assigned or transferable. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1079) 
Sec. 15-121. - Fees. 
(a)  Any applicant for a license under this division shall submit to the finance department with the application the required license fee. 
(b)  Any applicant for a renewal license under this article shall submit to the finance department with the renewal application the required renewal license fee. 
(c)  The license fee shall be in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1078, 7-1085) 
Secs. 15-122—15-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNSHOPS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 15-136. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Employee means any person working for an owner or pawnbroker, or any owner or pawnbroker who, in the performance of duties or the management of the business affairs of a pawnshop, comes into substantial contact with members of the public, or is employed on a part-time or full-time basis, either with or without remuneration, by a pawnshop. 
Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement, redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale on default. 
Pawnbroker means any person, whether an owner or not, who works in a pawnshop on a regular basis and in a managerial capacity whereby the person has charge of the business or operations of the pawnshop. "Pawnbroker" includes any person whose business or occupation it is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares or merchandise or any kind of personal property whatever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
Pawnshop means any business wherein a substantial part thereof is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or any kind of personal property as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1131) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-137. - Penalties; suspension or revocation of license. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-10. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article, or such other laws, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the board of commissioners for the conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall have the license to conduct this business revoked. This revocation shall result from conviction in any court for a violation of any provision of this article or any other ordinance or regulation covering the conduct of the business for which a permit and license have been issued. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1143) 
Sec. 15-138. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1144; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-139. - Annual permit. 
(a)  All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop or similar place where money is advanced on goods or other effects or merchandise of any kind is taken in pawn, shall first file an application with the police department and obtain an annual permit to conduct or be employed in the business. No permit shall be issued until a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, is paid to the police department. 
(b)  The requirements of this section are in addition to the requirements of article II of this chapter. 
(c)  The application for the permit required shall state the street and number at which it is proposed to operate the business. The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and social security number of all persons, including pawnbrokers, owning any interest in the proposed business, plus any additional information, including fingerprints, deemed necessary by the police department. 
(d)  No business license shall be issued to a person until the permit required by this section has been granted by the police department. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1132—7-1134; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-140. - Employees. 
No person shall be employed by a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the police department and has been issued an annual permit authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to assure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1136; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-141. - Character of persons connected with business. 
No owner, stockholder, employee, pawnbroker or any other person connected with the business for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or shall have been convicted of any crime involving theft or a crime against property. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1137) 
Sec. 15-142. - Records. 
All pawnbrokers shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to them. This description shall include, to the extent possible, the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In these books there shall be entered also the full name and address of the person by whom it was deposited or sold, and the time when it was done. These entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, in no event more than one (1) hour thereafter. The pawnbroker shall photograph the person pawning the merchandise along with a pawnbroker's ticket showing a transaction number. The pawnbroker shall obtain the right index fingerprint provided it has not been amputated; if so, the next adjoining finger shall be acceptable. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1138) 
State Law reference— Permanent records, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 15-143. - Daily reports; fingerprinting, photographing of persons pawning articles. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall make a daily report in writing to the police department in such form as may be prescribed by the police department of all property pledged, traded or bought by such pawnbroker during the twenty-four (24) hours ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. These reports shall be typewritten. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the reports shall show: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnbroker. 
(2)  The time of transaction. 
(3)  The serial numbers of pawn tickets. 
(4)  The amount paid or advanced. 
(5)  A full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design; kind and number of stones in jewelry and all identifying names, marks and numbers. 
(6)  A description of the person selling or pawning, including name, address, race, weight and height. 
(b)  Insufficient reports shall be rejected, and any pawnbroker making them shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(c)  In addition to the other records and information, each pawnbroker shall obtain from each person pawning any articles with such pawnbroker the fingerprint of the right-hand index finger, unless this finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand of the person pawning the articles shall be obtained with a notation as to the exact finger printed. All prints shall be made on forms approved by the police department and the pawnbroker shall obtain all other information called for on the form approved. Fingerprints and the information as required in this section shall be obtained from all persons each time these persons pawn any article with a pawnbroker, regardless of whether the person may have previously pawned an article with the pawnbroker and been fingerprinted. 
(d)  In addition to other records and information, each pawnbroker shall photograph each customer with the photograph showing the pawnbroker's ticket and transaction number. This photograph shall be reduced to a negative form and maintained by the pawnbroker as a permanent record. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1139; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-144. - Hours of operation. 
Pawnbrokers may not keep open their places of business except between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1140) 
Sec. 15-145. - Waiting period prior to disposal of articles. 
Any pawnbroker or person operating under a pawnbroker's license who takes goods on pawn or buys goods, taking full title thereto, the word "goods" being used in the broadest sense and including all kinds of personal property, shall hold these goods so taken in pawn or purchase for at least thirty (30) days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1141) 
Sec. 15-146. - Dealing with minors. 
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker, the pawnbroker's agents or employees to receive goods in pawn from minors. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1142) 
Secs. 15-147—15-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-1 et seq.; additional local requirements authorized, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-166. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dealer means any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems or a person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers or manufacturers' representatives or other dealers in precious metals or gems when the purchase is for resale in its original form or is changed by remounting, melting, reforming, remolding or recasting, or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
Employee means any person working for a dealer, whether or not the person is in the direct employment of the dealer, who, in the performance of duties or the management of the business affairs of the dealer, handles precious metals or gems, or who prepares any reports or records which are required by this article. "Employee" does not include any employee of any bank, armored car company, private security company, or other business entity which is acting in the sole capacity of bailee-for-hire in relationship to the dealer. 
Gem means any precious or semiprecious stone cut and polished. 
Precious metal means gold, silver, platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver or platinum. 
Purchase means buy, barter, trade, accept as collateral for a loan, or receive for the purpose of melting down, crushing or otherwise altering the appearance of the item. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1251) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-167. - Purpose; applicability of state law. 
The purpose of this article is to regulate and establish qualifications for dealers of precious metals, gems and goods made from precious metals and gems, who engage in business in the unincorporated areas of the county. It is a further purpose of this article to enhance and supplement state law. Any permit fee required by the terms of this article shall be collected in addition to any license or registration fee as may be imposed on dealers by any state law. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1265) 
Sec. 15-168. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to pawnshops, pawnbrokers, or employees of pawnbrokers who maintain permanent places of business within the unincorporated area of the county and are in compliance with article V of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1271) 
Sec. 15-169. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any dealer or employee to violate any of the provisions of this article, whether or not such dealer or employee is the holder of a current, valid permit issued according to the terms of this article. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a dealer or employee of a dealer. 
(b)  Willful violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of the dealer's business license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1266) 
Sec. 15-170. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
The police department shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1268; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-171. - Records of transactions. 
(a)  Every dealer shall maintain a book in permanent form in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems, the following: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase transaction. 
(2)  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller. 
(3)  The name, age and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from each seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller. 
(4)  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial model or other number, and all identifying marks ascribed thereon. 
(5)  The price paid for the goods purchased. 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price if payment is made by check. 
(7)  The signature of the seller. 
(b)  The permanent record book required in this section shall be in legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order, and shall be numbered in sequence. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two (2) years. The book shall be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or any reasonable time. The book shall be kept at the business premises during ordinary hours of business. 
(c)  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail may record the post office record of the mail parcel in lieu of the seller's age, driver's license number and signature as required in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1259) 
State Law reference— Permanent records, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-3. 
Sec. 15-172. - Daily reports. 
(a)  Every dealer shall record, on cards or forms furnished or approved by the police department the details of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems. These records shall be entered in legible English at the time of each purchase of such items, and each card or form shall bear the number of the corresponding entry made in the book required by section 15-171 of this article. Each record shall include such information as may be reasonably required by the police department and shall include, as a minimum, the following: 
(1)  An accurate description of all articles received in the transaction with the particular seller. This description shall include to the extent possible the maker of each article, any identifying mark, number or initials, any pattern or shape, and a statement of the kind of materials of which it is composed. 
(2)  The date and time of the transaction. 
(3)  The name and address of the dealer. 
(4)  The name of the person making the purchase. 
(5)  The full name, date of birth and address, race and gender of the seller, as well as a general description of the seller. 
(6)  The number of the seller's valid state driver's license or state-issued I.D. card, or other similar identification which bears a photograph of the seller. 
(7)  Signature of seller. 
(8)  Such other information as may be required by any state law regulating dealers of precious metals and gems. 
(b)  Each card or form required by this section shall be delivered or mailed to the police department within twenty-four (24) hours after the date on which the transaction occurred, and shall be handled in the following manner: 
(1)  All such forms or cards shall be maintained in a locked container under the direct supervision of the police department and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(2)  The police department may allow any person to inspect the records for the purpose of locating stolen property, providing such person demonstrates theft of precious metals or gems by presenting an incident report or other similar document. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1260; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
State Law reference— Written reports of certain purchases, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-4. 
Sec. 15-173. - Photographs of articles and sellers; photocopies of documents. 
(a)  Every dealer shall take a well-focused, properly exposed color photograph of all precious metals, gems or goods made from precious metals or gems, which are purchased by the dealer. In the case of flatware, a photograph may be made of a representative place setting. 
(b)  In addition to photographing the items purchased, the dealer shall take a well-focused, properly exposed color photograph of the seller, and shall attach the photograph to the corresponding form or card required by section 15-172. In addition to the required photographs, the dealer shall attach to the form or card a photocopy of any bill of sale, receipt or other document tending to show the seller's ownership of the items purchased by the dealer, if any such documents exist, and a photocopy of the seller's driver's license or other identification authorized by this article. 
(c)  All photographs required in this section shall be made with a self-developing camera and film system, or such other system as may be authorized in writing by the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1261; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-174. - Hours of operation. 
Dealers may not keep open their places of business except between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1262) 
Sec. 15-175. - Waiting period prior to disposing of articles. 
Any dealer who in the course of business acquires precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems shall hold these items for at least seven (7) calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment, grinding, melting, crushing or otherwise altering the appearance of the items. This section does not prevent any dealer from storing such items off the business premises, or from placing such items in the hands of any bank or security company for safekeeping, provided that no such item shall be removed from the county during the above-described holding period. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1263) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-6(a)(6). 
Sec. 15-176. - Inspection of items held by dealer. 
All items held by any dealer in accordance with the terms of section 15-175 shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any authorized law enforcement officer or, if the items are stored off the premises, within one (1) business day thereof, during normal business hours. If the provisions of this section are in conflict with the provisions of section 15-175, the provisions of this section shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1264) 
Secs. 15-177—15-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 15-191. - Required; prerequisite to issuance of business license. 
(a)  No business license shall be issued to conduct the business of purchasing precious metals or gems until the annual permit required by this section has been issued by the police department. 
(b)  No dealer shall engage in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems without having first obtained an annual permit issued by the police department and no dealer shall allow an employee to be involved in any way in the purchase of precious metals or gems until that employee has first obtained an annual employee permit from the police department and no person shall work as an employee of a dealer until such person has first obtained an annual employee permit. No annual employee permit shall be issued unless the dealer with whom employment is authorized is a holder of a current dealer's permit. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1252; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-192. - Application. 
(a)  The application for the annual dealer's permit required by this division shall include such fingerprints, photographs and information as may be reasonably required by the police department, but shall in any case include the following: 
(1)  The name, age and business address of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  The telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The name, age and business address of all other persons having an ownership interest or actually employed in the business other than publicly held corporations. 
(4)  The address of the premises upon which the business is conducted and the zoning and planning classification of the premises. 
(5)  The applicant shall be required to notify the police department within seven (7) calendar days of any change of address of the applicant or business or any change of ownership in the business. 
(b)  The applicant shall attach to this application a completed and signed employee or owner application as described in section 15-194 for each person named in the dealer's application. Each such application shall be signed by the owner, managing partner, corporate president or chief executive officer of the business, and there shall be a description of the capacity in which the signator is acting. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1253; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-193. - Denial. 
No permit required by the provisions of this division shall be issued under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The applicant has no permanent place of business other than a van, mobile home, trailer or similar nonpermanent structure. 
(2)  No owner, corporate officer, majority stockholder, partner or managing director of the business entity applying for the license has been a legal resident of the state for a minimum of ninety (90) days preceding the date of application. 
(3)  Any person required to be listed in the application for a dealer's permit has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any felony under the laws of this state or of the jurisdiction in which the verdict or plea was entered. This paragraph does not apply to any person who has been convicted of or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or any felony after ten (10) years have expired from the date of the plea, conviction or completion of sentence, whichever is later. 
(4)  The person is not eligible to register as a dealer in precious metals or gems by the terms of any law of this state requiring such registration. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1254) 
Sec. 15-194. - Employee or owner application. 
(a)  Persons required to obtain an employee permit by this division shall complete an employee or owner application which shall state relevant information including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name. 
(2)  Date of birth. 
(3)  Driver license, state identification card or social security number. 
(4)  Race. 
(5)  Sex. 
(6)  Residential address and telephone number. 
(7)  Last previous residential address. 
(8)  Height and weight. 
(9)  Hair and eye color. 
(10)  Name, address and telephone number of the dealer. 
(11)  Either a statement that the applicant has never been convicted of, plead guilty to or been sentenced to probation for any offense other than a minor traffic violation, or a list of all such pleas, convictions and sentences of probation. 
(b)  The application form shall also provide a place for the applicant's signature. Persons required to be listed in a dealer's application shall also complete an employee or owner application. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1255) 
Sec. 15-195. - Fingerprints. 
All persons required to complete an employee or owner application shall also submit to fingerprinting by the police department or by any agency or individual designated by the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1256; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-196. - Issuance; fee. 
(a)  The police department shall provide the permit application forms required by this division, and shall review each completed application prior to issuing any permit. No employee or dealer permit shall be issued if it appears that the applicant or any person required to complete an employee or owner form has been convicted of, or has entered a plea of guilty to a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any felony. 
(b)  After ascertaining that all requisite forms have been completed, all fingerprint cards have been submitted, that no applicant or listed person is disqualified by virtue of a prior criminal record, and that all other requirements of this article have been complied with, the police department shall approve the application, subject to payment of an annual permit fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1257; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-197. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each permit required by this division shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is at least one (1) year from the date of issue and must be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Any permit holder may reapply for a permit at any time following the sixtieth day preceding the date of expiration. It shall be unlawful for any dealer to apply for a renewal unless all of the dealer's employees are holders of current, valid employee permits. No permits shall be renewed unless the dealer is the holder of a current, valid business license. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1258) 
Sec. 15-198. - Revocation and surrender of permits. 
(a)  Any dealer or employee permit issued in accordance with provisions of this division shall be revoked by operation-of-law upon the occurrence of any of the following: 
(1)  The conviction of the dealer or employee for violating any state law or county ordinance pertaining to making false statements for the purpose of obtaining registration or authorization to become a dealer or employee of a dealer. 
(2)  The conviction of the dealer or employee for violation of a provision of this article after the dealer or employee has been previously convicted of a violation of this article within the preceding three (3) years. 
(b)  Upon revocation, the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the police department within one (1) business day of the conviction resulting in revocation, and failure to do so shall constitute a separate violation for each day the permit is withheld. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1267; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-199. - Appeals. 
In any case in which it appears to the police department that an applicant is not entitled to the issuance of a dealer or employee permit under the provisions of this article, the police department shall so notify the applicant in writing by mailing the notice to the last address furnished to the police department by the applicant. If the police department refuses to issue a permit, or if a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this article, the applicant or permit holder shall have an absolute right of appeal to the board of commissioners according to the procedures set forth herein. The appeal shall be perfected by filing with the police department a notice of appeal to the board of commissioners. The notice of appeal to the board of commissioners must be filed with the police department within fourteen (14) days following the mailing of the notification of denial or surrender of the permit and it shall be the duty of the police department, upon receipt thereof, to transmit such notice of appeal to the clerk of the board of commissioners, together with copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Thereafter, it shall be the duty of the clerk of the board to place the appeal upon the agenda of the board the first available date for hearing on the matter. It shall be the duty of the clerk of the board to so notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place when the matter shall be heard. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1269; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Secs. 15-200—15-215. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PEDDLERS, DOOR-TO-DOOR SALES AND SIMILAR OCCUPATIONS[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Selling or soliciting on public right-of-way, § 16-3; soliciting or begging on county property, § 16-91. 
State Law reference— Peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; peddling by disabled veterans, etc., O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-216. - Definition. 
In this article "solicitor" includes any person who solicits orders door-to-door or house-to-house on behalf of a business, individual, vocation or occupation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1161) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-217. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Persons, businesses and organizations exempted from local regulation by operation of state or federal law, or by the Constitution of the United States, or of the state, are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit organizations or corporations registered with the secretary of state, or tax-exempt organizations which have been recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department, shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of division 2 of this article, provided that such organization first supplies proof of the recognized status to the police department, and has received from such department written confirmation of its exempt status. The organization shall then furnish each of its agents or representatives with a copy of the confirmation letter. The organization shall then furnish the regulatory enforcement unit of the police department with a list of such agents or representatives, and shall promptly notify the unit of changes in the list. 
(c)  Any sales representative who calls upon prospective customers at their prior invitation shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of division 2 of this article. 
(d)  Any sales representative who does not demand, accept or receive payments in advance of final delivery and who has had, for the previous six (6) months, a regularly established place of business or permanent residence in the county from which the sales representative transacts business or solicits orders on a continuing and ongoing basis within the county, shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of division 2 of this article. Any person who is exempt under this subsection must be soliciting orders only for goods capable of being delivered at one (1) time and must have on such person proper identification which substantiates the claim to an exemption. In this subsection, "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth, and includes without being limited to a passport, military identification card, driver's license or an identification card issued by the police department, but shall not include a birth certificate. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1162; Ord. No. 89-19, § 1, 5-9-89; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
State Law reference— Exemption for blind persons, disabled veterans, etc., from license fees, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq. 
Sec. 15-218. - Violation of other ordinances and laws. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person while engaging in any activity for which a permit is required by this article to: 
(1)  Violate any county ordinance. 
(2)  Violate any criminal law of this state, or violate any state or federal consumer protection law. 
(b)  In this section "consumer protection law" includes the Fair Business Practices Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. tit. 10, ch. 1, pt. 3 [§ 10-10-410 et seq.], O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 17 [§ 43-17-1 et seq.] and the Federal Consumer Credit Protection Act (truth-in-lending and truth-in-leasing). 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(b), (c)) 
Sec. 15-219. - Hours of operation. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the conduct for which a permit is required by this article between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., according to the standard time in effect. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(e); Ord. No. 89-10, § 4, 5-9-89) 
Sec. 15-220. - Restriction on number of persons soliciting. 
It is unlawful for more than two (2) individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services, or religious or charitable purposes. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this provision shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(g)) 
Sec. 15-221. - Persons with criminal records. 
It is unlawful for any person with a criminal record as described in section 15-247, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 15-217, to engage in any of the activities for which a permit is required by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(j)) 
Sec. 15-222. - Frequency of solicitation of same premises. 
It is unlawful for any person to make more than one (1) solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any consecutive two-week period, without receiving a prior invitation therefor from the occupant of any such premises. This section includes solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents or representatives of any person more than once during such period without a prior invitation. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(h); Ord. No. 89-19, § 5, 5-9-89) 
Sec. 15-223. - Solicitation to be at main entrances. 
It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance or part of the building other than the main entrance to the residence. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(m)) 
Sec. 15-224. - Announced purpose of call. 
At each dwelling, whether it is an apartment unit or private residence, the solicitor shall inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the call and shall not represent that the solicitor is participating in any contest, game or other competitive endeavor, or that the solicitor is offering the occupant an opportunity to participate in any such contest, game or endeavor. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1168) 
Sec. 15-225. - Identification to prospective customers. 
It is unlawful for any person, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer, to fail to verbally identify himself for the purpose of the solicitation, and the company and product line represented. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(k)) 
Sec. 15-226. - Fraud, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation or use any false or deceptive statements or any misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plan, scheme or ruse which misrepresents the status or purpose of the person making the call. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(l)) 
Secs. 15-227—15-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 15-241. - Required. 
Any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, canvassing, survey-making or any other business, occupation or vocation, which by its nature requires going from door to door or house to house in the residential areas of the unincorporated areas of the county, whether on a temporary or a permanent basis and whether or not it is for any religious, charitable, nonprofit or profit-making organization, shall obtain a solicitor's permit from the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1161; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-242. - Application. 
(a)  Questionnaire. The police department shall prepare a questionnaire requiring pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each applicant for a permit, to include the following: 
(1)  Name, local address and telephone number. 
(2)  Date and place of birth. 
(3)  Driver's license number and issuing state. 
(4)  Social Security number (if different from driver's license number). 
(5)  Race and sex. 
(6)  Height and weight. 
(7)  Eye color and hair color. 
(8)  Name, address and telephone number of the organization represented. 
(9)  Name and telephone number of immediate supervisor. 
(10)  Product or service. 
(11)  A list of all arrests, convictions and the disposition of each charge, other than minor traffic violations. 
(b)  The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: 
"Georgia Code section 16-10-71 provides that a person who makes a lawful oath or affirmation or who executes a document knowing that it purports to be an acknowledgment of a lawful oath or affirmation commits the offense of false swearing when, in any matter or thing other than a judicial proceeding, he knowingly and willfully makes a false statement." 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1161, 7-1163; Ord. No. 89-19, § 3(a), (b), 5-9-89; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-243. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon filing of an application for a solicitor's permit, the police department shall review the application for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has plead to, or has been convicted of, a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the application has been properly completed, and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas of conviction, the finance department shall approve the application. 
(b)  In any case in which it appears to the finance department that a solicitor's permit should not be issued to an applicant, the finance department shall so inform the applicant, and upon the applicant's request, shall furnish the applicant with a reasonably detailed written statement of the reasons why the permit will not be issued. 
(c)  Following approval of the permit application and prior to issuance of a permit, the applicant shall obtain a business license and pay the required license fee. 
(d)  Upon payment of the business license fee, the applicant shall receive from the finance department a copy of the license application, which the applicant shall then carry to the police department. Upon payment by the applicant of a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, the police department shall photograph the applicant and provide the applicant with a permit bearing the applicant's photograph, name, and organization, and identifying the applicant as a solicitor. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1161, 7-1163, 7-1165, 7-1175(a); Ord. No. 89-19, § 3(c), 5-9-89; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
State Law reference— Exemption of blind persons, disabled veterans, etc., from license fees, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1 et seq. 
Sec. 15-244. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each solicitor's permit shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is one (1) year from the date of issue. Application for renewal may be made at any time following the sixtieth day preceding the date of expiration. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1166) 
Sec. 15-245. - Selling, renting, etc. 
It is unlawful for any person to lend, rent or sell a solicitor's permit card to another. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1171(d)) 
Sec. 15-246. - Display. 
The police department shall furnish to each holder of a solicitor's permit a device suitable for attaching the permit card to the outer clothing. No person shall act as a solicitor without wearing and displaying the permit in a conspicuous manner. Such a person shall display such identification to any authorized person or potential customer upon request. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1167, 7-1171(i); Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-247. - Denial; suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No solicitor's permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of any misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five (5) years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony, except that a permit may be issued to a convicted felon if it appears that such person either has been pardoned, or that such person has been free from any legal restriction for a period of five (5) or more years prior to the date of application. In this section "conviction" and "found guilty" include verdicts or pleas of guilty, entered by a court of this state, a court of any sister state, or any federal district court. Any permit issued as the result of willful false statements or omissions in the solicitor's application for the permit shall be deemed null and void from the time of its issue. 
(b)  The permit of any solicitor charged with a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal accusation or indictment, whichever shall first occur; such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted, or until the charge is dismissed, dead-docketed, nol-prossed or no-billed. 
(c)  The permit of any solicitor who is convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence, shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. The permit of any solicitor convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. 
(d)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor while such person's permit has been suspended or after it has been revoked. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1171(f), 7-1173) 
Sec. 15-248. - Surrender. 
Each solicitor's permit shall remain the property of the county. Each permit holder shall surrender the permit card to the police department no later than three (3) business days following the expiration, suspension or revocation of the permit or upon the demand of the police department or finance department, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1174; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-249. - Appeals. 
A person to whom the county refuses to issue a solicitor's permit or whose solicitor's permit is suspended or revoked may appeal pursuant to section 15-47. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1175(b)) 
Secs. 15-250—15-265. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE THERAPY LICENSING[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, adopted Feb. 9, 1999, deleted former Art. XV of Ch. 15 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as Art. XV to read as herein set out. Former Art. XV, §§ 15-266—15-282, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 96-15, § 1, adopted Sept. 24, 1996. 

Sec. 15-266. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in this article shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
(a)  The word "director" shall mean the director of finance, or his/her designee. 
(b)  The term "massage establishment" shall mean any business established for profit which employs or contracts with one (1) or more "massage therapists," or operates or maintains for profit one (1) or more "massage apparatus", and which, for good or valuable consideration, offers to the public facilities and personnel for the administration of "massages." This term shall not include hospitals or other professional health care establishments separately licensed as such by the State of Georgia. 
(c)  The term "massage" or "massages" or "massage therapy" shall mean the manipulation and/or treatment of soft tissues of the body, including but not limited to the use of effleurage, petrissage, pressure, friction, tapotement, kneading, vibration, range of motion stretches, and any other soft tissue manipulation whether manual or by use of massage apparatus, and may include the use of oils, lotions, creams, salt glows, hydrotherapy, heliotherapy, hot packs, and cold packs. This term shall not include diagnosis, the prescribing of drugs or medicines, spinal or other joint manipulations, or any service or procedure for which a license to practice chiropractic, physical therapy, podiatry, or medicine is required by the State of Georgia. 
(d)  The term "massage therapist" shall mean any person whom for good or valuable consideration administers a "massage." 
(e)  The term "massage apparatus" shall mean any manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic, electric, or electronic device or instrument or any device or instrument operated by manual, mechanical, hydraulic, hydrokinetic or electric power, which is utilized by a "massage therapist" for the purpose of administering a "massage." 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-267. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Massage therapist license. It shall be unlawful for any natural person to administer massages without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Massage establishment license. It shall be unlawful for any person, natural or corporate, to operate a massage establishment without having obtained a license therefor; or for any person, natural or corporate, to allow a massage therapist to administer massages without having obtained a license in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-268. - Scope of regulations. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this article shall constitute a mere privilege to conduct the business so authorized during the term of the license or permit only and subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the county and state law. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to regulate, prevent, or restrict in any manner: (i) any physician, chiropractor, physical therapist, or similar professional licensed and regulated by or through the State of Georgia while engaged in the practice of said profession; or (ii) any hospital or other professional health care establishment separately licensed as such by the State of Georgia; or (iii) any other individual or entity expressly exempted from local legislation by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Except as specified in subsection (b) of this section, the requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law, and shall not authorize violations of said other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-269. - Application process. 
(a)  Application Requirements. Any person desiring to obtain a massage establishment license or massage therapist license shall make application to the finance department. All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant as true, correct and complete before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. All applications shall be in writing and shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full legal name of the applicant, including all aliases, nicknames, pseudonyms or trade names currently or heretofore used by the applicant; 
(2)  The current and all previous business and residence addresses of the applicant within the three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(3)  Sworn affidavits of at least three (3) bona fide residents of DeKalb County that the applicant is personally known to them and they believe the person to be of good moral character; 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
(6)  Two (2) current photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches in size; 
(7)  The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of application; 
(8)  Any massage or similar business license history of the applicant, including whether such person, in any previous operation in any jurisdiction, has had such a license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and any business activity or occupation subsequent to the action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, pleas of guilty, or pleas of nolo contendere for violations of any law and the grounds therefor; 
(10)  The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the DeKalb County Police Department and such fingerprint card and record shall be attached as an exhibit to the application. Payment of all fees charged by the DeKalb County Police Department in connection with this requirement shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
(11)  Applicants for a massage therapist license shall provide a certificate dated within thirty (30) days of application from a physician licensed in the State of Georgia, certifying that the applicant is in sound mental and physical health, and free of all contagious or communicable diseases; 
(12)  Applicants for a massage therapist license must furnish a certified copy of a diploma or certificate of graduation (demonstrating compliance with section 15-270 (a) (2)), along with a certified statement from the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work evidencing passage by the applicant thereof of the exam for massage therapists administered by said Board. Applicants for a massage establishment license must furnish an affidavit demonstrating compliance with section 15-270 (b)(2) and 15-270 (b)(3). 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, such corporation or partnership shall submit the foregoing information and exhibits with regard to each employee, independent contractor agent and partner, general or limited, associated with the operation of the licensed establishment. 
(14)  If the applicant is a corporation, such corporation shall, in addition to the foregoing information, submit a complete list of the stockholders of said corporation, including names, current addresses and current occupations, and provide the name and address for its registered agent in DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(15)  If the applicant is an individual, the applicant must reside in the State of Georgia and must submit written, reliable proof thereof. Additionally, if the applicant does not reside in DeKalb County, the applicant must provide the name and address for an agent who resides in DeKalb County authorized to receive legal process and notices under this article on behalf of the applicant. 
(b)  Fees. All license applications shall be accompanied by a fee as elsewhere established by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners to defray the costs associated with issuance of said licenses. All fees associated with the background check required by section 15-269(a)(10) shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be in addition to the application fee. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-60, § I, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-270. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  Massage therapist. No applicant shall be issued a license as a "massage therapist" unless both of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if said applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of five (5) years prior to the filing of the application; and 
(2)  The applicant must be the holder of a diploma or certificate earned by the applicant from a state certified school, representative of the fact that the applicant attended a course of massage therapy education and study of not less than five hundred (500) classroom hours consisting of a curriculum of anatomy and physiology, basic massage theory, technique and clinical practice, approach to massage, allied modalities and disease awareness, and other such subjects and have passed the National Certification Board of Therapeutic Massage and Body Work exam for massage therapists. 
(b)  Massage establishment. No applicant shall be issued a license for a "massage establishment" unless all of the following standards are first met: 
(1)  The applicant, including the partner applying on behalf of a partnership and an agent applying on behalf of a corporation, must be of good moral character. No applicant shall be found to have met this requirement if said applicant has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, within a period of four (4) years prior to the filing of the application; 
(2)  A corporate applicant must be chartered under the laws of Georgia or authorized by the Secretary of State to do business in Georgia. The applicant shall be the owner or legal agent of the establishment. The corporate applicant must identify an agent for service of process in DeKalb County; 
(3)  The owner/applicant, or corporate agent must be a resident of the State of Georgia; 
(4)  A readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment, provided also that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the DeKalb County Code; 
(5)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the Uniform Building Code, and, additionally, at least one (1) artificial light of not less than forty (40) watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth; 
(6)  Ordinary beds or mattresses shall not be permitted in any licensed massage establishment; 
(7)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the Standard Mechanical Code and the Georgia Energy Code; and 
(8)  The establishment, prior to the issuance of any license hereunder, must be in compliance with all applicable building and life safety codes, and the building to be occupied must have a valid, current certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-271. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Review of applications. If a license application is submitted in proper form, including all information and exhibits required herein and accompanied by the correct fees, the application shall be accepted and a review of the application and an inspection and investigation shall be conducted by the director. The director shall transmit a copy of the completed application to the DeKalb County Police Department. Upon the payment by the applicant of the required fees, the DeKalb County Police Department, or its designee, shall cause to be conducted a background investigation of the police record of the applicant, and shall transmit a summary of the investigation results to the director. 
(b)  Action on applications. Upon receipt of this background investigation, and completion of review of the application in accordance with the terms of this article, the director shall act on the application. The director shall deny any application that: 
(1)  Fails to meet each of the application requirements specified herein; 
(2)  Fails to meet each of the minimum standards specified in section 15-270; or 
(3)  Contains false information in the application or attached documents. 
Otherwise, the director shall approve the application and the license shall be issued by the finance department upon the payment of any applicable county business or occupation tax. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for a period of one (1) year. If an application for a license is denied under this article, the applicant shall not be authorized to reapply for said denied license for a period of one (1) year from the date of denial. 
(c)  Appeals of denials of applications. In the event the director denies a license or apprentice permit application, such denial shall be in written form, addressed to the applicant at the application address, and shall state the grounds upon which the denial is based. Within fifteen (15) days of the date of issuance of such notice, the applicant may appeal the denial by submitting a written notice of appeal to the finance department division of internal audit and licensing. The alcoholic beverage review board, established pursuant to DeKalb County Code section 4-56, shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice of appeal, unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the finance department. The board shall provide written notice of the hearing date, time, and place to the appellant. At the hearing, the appellant and the director may each present evidence relating to the grounds for denial. The appellant may be represented by counsel at the expense of appellant, and shall have the right to present evidence and cross-examine the witnesses. 
The board shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time. An appeal shall be sustained upon a finding by the board that the director's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that he acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, or may modify, the decision appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director and may issue or direct the issuance of a license provided all requirements imposed by applicable laws are met. The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board shall be final, unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-272. - Transfers and sales prohibited. 
All licenses issued pursuant to this article are nontransferable. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-273. - Change of location. 
A change of location of massage establishment premises may be approved by the finance department provided all general ordinances are complied with and a change of location fee as elsewhere established by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners is first paid. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-274. - Renewals. 
All valid licenses may be renewed for additional one (1) year periods provided a renewal application meeting all of the requirements for an initial license application is submitted prior to expiration of the existing license and approved by the director according to the same standards for initial licenses. The fee for said annual renewal shall be as elsewhere established by the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-275. - Further requirements. 
The following additional requirements shall apply to all license holders and establishments: 
(a)  All massage therapists and all other persons on the premises, with the exception of the customers, shall be completely clothed at all times when administering a massage. For the purposes of this provision, "completely clothed" shall mean having on the upper portion of the body appropriate undergarments and either blouse or shirt which shall cover all the upper body save the arms and neck and shall mean having on the lower body appropriate undergarments plus either pants or skirt, and said pants or skirt must cover from the waist down to a point at least two (2) inches above the knee. All clothes worn in compliance with this subsection shall be entirely non-transparent. 
(b)  Massage of the human genitals or anus within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(c)  The storing, serving, sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages within massage establishments is expressly prohibited. 
(d)  Every person to whom a license shall have been granted shall display said license in a conspicuous place on the premises that is clearly visible to the visiting public. 
(e)  DeKalb County, through the finance department or the police department, shall have the right to inspect any licensed massage premises and its records at any time, with or without notice, during business hours to insure compliance with this article. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to patronize any massage establishment unless at the time of such patronage such person carries with him/her a written order directing the treatment to be given by a regularly licensed physician, or unless such person provides a written consent to massage therapy treatment signed by the underage patron's parent or guardian. It shall be the duty of the operator of such massage establishment to determine the age of each person patronizing such massage establishment and a violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the license of such massage establishment and/or massage therapist administering massage to an underage patron. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license for a massage establishment under this article to file with the DeKalb County Finance Department the names of all employees and independent contractors other than those holding massage therapist licenses, their home addresses, home telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of said employees and independent contractors with the names of new employees and independent contractors must be filed with said county department within ten (10) days from the date of any such change. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment; and the name of the person at the establishment administering the treatment. The records shall be subject to inspection at any time by DeKalb County through the finance department or the police department. 
(i)  It shall be the duty of the licensee establishment to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of any and all employees, independent contractors, customers and all other persons on the premises in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-60, § II, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-276. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be revoked except for due cause as herein defined without the opportunity for a hearing as hereinafter set forth before the alcoholic beverage review board. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. In the event the license holder cannot be found, and the service of notice cannot be otherwise made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed registered postage fully prepaid, addressed to the license holder or the registered agent thereof at his, her, or its place of business or residence at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing. The notice shall state the grounds for revocation of such license and shall designate the time and place where such hearing will be held. 
(b)  "Due cause" for revocation of such license shall be as provided in section 15-277 of this article. 
(c)  In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
(1)  The charges and specifications against the licensee shall be read along with any response filed by the licensee. 
(2)  The alcoholic beverage review board shall hear the evidence upon the charges and specifications as filed against the licensee and shall not consider any additional evidence beyond the scope of the charges, and may exclude evidence which is purely cumulative. 
(3)  The order of proof shall be as follows: The county representative shall present his evidence in support of the charges; the licensee shall then present his evidence. Evidence of each party may be supported by submission of pertinent documents. Each party shall be allowed to present pertinent rebuttal evidence. 
(4)  The licensee and county may be represented by counsel, and may present, examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, the alcoholic beverage review board may interrogate all parties and witnesses to obtain necessary information. Following the presentation of evidence, the board may have a reasonable time within which to issue its decision. 
(5)  The findings of the alcoholic beverage review board will be final unless within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision, the applicant files a petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-277. - Grounds for revocation. 
(a)  The license of a massage therapist may be revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The holder is guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit in his being licensed in the practice of massage; 
(3)  The holder is engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another therapist of a like or different name; 
(4)  The holder is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he/she is unable to perform his or her professional duties; 
(5)  The holder is guilty of fraudulent, false, misleading or deceptive advertising or practices any other licensed profession without legal authority therefor; 
(6)  The holder has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; 
(7)  The holder has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law; or has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
(8)  The original application, or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; or 
(9)  There has been the occurrence of a fact which would have barred the issuance of the original license. 
(b)  The license of a massage establishment may be revoked upon one (1) or more of the following grounds: 
(1)  Failure of the holder to maintain initial requirements for obtaining the license; 
(2)  The holder allows or permits any person who is not a licensed massage therapist to administer a massage in said establishment; 
(3)  The premises in which the massage establishment is located are in violation of any federal, state, or county laws designated for the health, protection and safety of the occupants or general public; 
(4)  The premises are in violation of the DeKalb County building or life safety codes; 
(5)  The original application or renewal thereof, contains materially false information; or the applicant has deliberately sought to falsify information contained therein; 
(6)  The holder of the license, including any person with an ownership interest in the license, has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law; 
(7)  Any of the license holder's employees, independent contractors or agents has been convicted, pled guilty, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony, or to any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or has violated any laws relating to sodomy, aggravated sodomy, solicitation of sodomy, public indecency, prostitution, pimping, pandering, pandering by compulsion, masturbation for hire, distribution of obscene materials, distribution of material depicting nudity, or sexual conduct as defined under Georgia law, in connection with the operation of the massage establishment or on or about the premises of the massage establishment; 
(8)  Failure of the holder to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, independent contractors, agents, customers, or others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the customers; or 
(9)  The holder, his employees, agents, or independent contractors associated with the establishment have allowed to occur or have engaged in a violation of any part of this chapter. 
(c)  Any massage therapist or massage establishment who has his or her or its license or permit revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license or permit for a period of twelve (12) months immediately following the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-278. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days, or by both such fine or imprisonment. Violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(b)  The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance. 
(c)  The violation of all provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-279. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)  Any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  No massage establishment shall operate at any location nor on any premises which does not comply with all zoning, building code, fire safety code, and other ordinances and laws of DeKalb County and the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-280. - Existing practices. 
Any person who is actually engaged as a massage therapist or who operates a massage establishment upon the effective date of this article, shall have through December 31, 1999 to comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-281. - Severability. 
(a)  Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the article as a whole nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(b)  Should any section or provision of this article be in conflict with any other ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement or law, then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law shall control. 
(c)  All ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Sec. 15-282. - Effective date. 
This article shall be effective upon adoption by the board of commissioners and approval by the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 2-9-99) 
Secs. 15-283—15-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ESCORT OR DATING SERVICES 

Sec. 15-311. - License. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of providing or arranging dates, escorts or partners for persons shall, before engaging in such business, file an application for a business license on a form supplied by the finance department and shall comply with all the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The applicant for a dating or escort service license must be an owner, partner or majority stockholder. 
(c)  Each applicant shall submit the following information, as a minimum: 
(1)  Trade name and business address. 
(2)  Applicant's name and residence address. 
(3)  Names and residence addresses of all interested persons, to include owners, partners, stockholders, officers and directors. 
(4)  Manager's name and residence address. 
(5)  Employees' names and residence addresses. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1231, 7-1232) 
Sec. 15-312. - Qualifications of license applicant, others connected with business. 
No applicant, owner, partner, stockholder, officer, director or any other interested person connected with the business for which a license is applied under this article shall have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, lottery or illegal sale or possession of narcotics within the preceding ten-year period; any subsequent convictions of the above nature automatically acts to void any such license and permits held. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1234) 
Sec. 15-313. - Police department permit required. 
All applicants for an escort or dating service business license, along with their employees, must also file for a permit with the police department accompanied by a permit fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners and providing the information in section 15-311 as well as any additional information and fingerprinting as deemed necessary by the police department for the purposes of conducting a background investigation of the applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1233; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-314. - Employees. 
No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be employed by an escort or dating service in any capacity and not before such person has been fingerprinted by the police department. When determined that the employee applicant has not been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude for the preceding three-year period, an annual personal identification card authorizing such person to be employed by the escort or dating service will be issued. It shall be the responsibility of the business license applicant to ensure that the provisions of this section are complied with and that no employee possesses an expired identification card or permit while in the business' employ. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1235; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Secs. 15-315—15-330. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - POOLROOMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-331. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Pool or billiards includes any game played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue. 
Poolroom means any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of pool or billiards. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1182) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-332. - Applicability. 
O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 8 [§ 43-8-1 et seq.] does not apply within the unincorporated area of the county. The provisions of this article govern the operation of poolrooms within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1181) 
Sec. 15-333. - Inspection of licensed establishments. 
The police department may inspect establishments licensed under this article during the hours in which the premises are open for business. Such inspection shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1188; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-334. - Gambling. 
No gambling or other games of chance shall be permitted in a poolroom. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1187(a)) 
Sec. 15-335. - Manager. 
All poolrooms which have three (3) or more pool tables shall have a manager, or designated employee, on duty during operating hours, whose responsibility is the operation of the pool tables. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1187(b)) 
Secs. 15-336—15-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 15-351. - Required. 
No person shall operate a poolroom without a business license issued by the finance department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1183) 
Sec. 15-352. - Application. 
(a)  All persons desiring to operate a poolroom shall make application for a business license on a form prescribed by the finance department. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner-applicant. 
(2)  The address of the licensed establishment. 
(3)  The number of pool tables to be operated at the licensed establishment. 
(4)  If the owner-applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners. 
(5)  If the owner-applicant is a corporation, the names of the officers. 
(6)  The name and address of the agent for service of process. 
(7)  The name of the manager. 
(8)  The name of all shareholders holding more than ten (10) percent of any class of corporate stock, or other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the licensed establishment. 
If the manager changes, the owner-applicant must furnish the finance department and police department with the name and address of the new manager and other information as requested within ten (10) days of such change. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish data, information and records as required by the finance department to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Failure to furnish data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(e)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this division, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least one (1) year from the final date of denial. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1183; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-353. - Persons eligible. 
(a)  No poolroom license shall be granted to any illegal alien. 
(b)  Where the owner-applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, officers, managers and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and to the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this section. In the case of a partnership, the license will be issued to one (1) of the partners. 
(c)  No license shall be granted to any person who has been convicted under any federal, state or local law of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(d)  No license shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony within ten (10) years prior to the filing of the application for such license. 
(e)  No license shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued under the police powers of the county previously revoked within two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. The finance department may decline to issue a license when any person having an interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth for the licensee. 
(f)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in the county a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the licensee or owner may be served. This person shall be a resident of the county. The licensee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent with the finance department in such form as is prescribed. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1184) 
Sec. 15-354. - Expiration; renewal; transfer. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this division shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(b)  Licensees who desire to renew their licenses shall file application with all applicable fees with the finance department on the form provided for renewal of the license for the following year. Applications for renewal must be filed before November 30 of each year or the applicant shall pay a late payment penalty in addition to an assessment of interest as specified by section 2-112. No renewal licenses shall be granted after January 1, but such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all requirements for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. 
(c)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be for the full calendar year. License fees shall not be prorated and are nonrefundable. 
(d)  No license shall be transferred without prior approval of the finance department. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1185) 
Sec. 15-355. - Fee. 
No poolroom license shall be issued until a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, is paid to the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1186) 
Sec. 15-356. - Issuance. 
Before a poolroom license is granted, the applicant therefor shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the board of commissioners regulating the operation of poolrooms. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1186) 
Sec. 15-357. - Suspension or revocation. 
A poolroom license may be suspended or revoked by the finance department for failure of a licensee to comply with the provisions of this article or where the licensee furnishes fraudulent or false information in the license application. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1189) 
Sec. 15-358. - Appeals. 
(a)  No poolroom license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing. 
(b)  The finance department shall provide written notice to the owner-applicant and licensee of the order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall notify the owner-applicant and licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this article. Any owner-applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the county may have a review thereof in accordance with the appeals procedures specified in section 15-47. For purposes of this section notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or, when served by mail, within three (3) days after the date of disposal in the United States mail. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-1190, 7-1191) 
Secs. 15-359—15-374. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Parking of taxicabs, § 17-146; parking of taxicabs, § 17-146. 

Sec. 15-375. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 
Limousine shall mean any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousines, with a designed seating capacity of no less than five (5) and no more than nine (9) passengers behind the operator of the vehicle. Limousines shall not have a door at the rear of the vehicle to allow entry or exit of passengers. No vehicle shall be allowed to operate as both a taxicab and a limousine. All vehicles for hire shall obtain either a taxicab permit or a limousine permit. 
Open stand shall mean locations on the streets of unincorporated DeKalb County, including the locations on the premises of MARTA stations that may be used by any taxicab on a nonexclusive, first come, first served basis, and not by private vehicles or other public conveyances. 
Taxicab shall mean a motor vehicle used to transport passengers for a fee or fare and which is fitted with a taximeter or other device that is used to compute such fee or fare. 
Taxicab company shall mean an entity licensed to do business by the State of Georgia with its primary business being the operation of motor vehicles used to transport passengers for a fee or fare within unincorporated DeKalb County. 
Taximeter shall mean an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to measure the distance traveled by such vehicle, or an instrument or device attached to a motor vehicle and designed to compute and indicate the fare or fee to be charged to the passenger(s). 
Vehicle for hire shall mean a limousine, taxicab or other passenger-carrying vehicle that is used to transport passengers for a fee. Vehicles regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission, and passenger vans with a capacity of fifteen (15) or more passengers, shall not be considered a vehicle for hire. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3001; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. 1, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 15-376. - Doing business defined. 
Any person shall be deemed doing business in the unincorporated areas of the county under this article if such person is picking up passengers in unincorporated areas of the county and accepting or soliciting any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, by the length of time the vehicle is used or by contract for the use of any motor vehicle or other vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers. Any person shall also be deemed as doing business in the unincorporated areas of the county under this article if such person has established a business relationship with independent contractors or operates vehicles for hire on such person's own behalf for the purpose of transporting passengers in the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3003(A); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88) 
Sec. 15-377. - Compliance. 
No person shall conduct the business of operating vehicles for hire in the unincorporated area of the county without first meeting the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3002; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88) 
Sec. 15-378. - Taxicab company permit holder's responsibilities for violations. 
Taxicab company permit holders are responsible for violations of this article by their employees and independent contractors, including company drivers and dispatchers. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3005(I); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 15-379. - Notice. 
For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by mail within three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3010; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88) 
Sec. 15-380. - Hearings. 
(a)  Decisions of the finance department that adversely affect or aggrieve any applicant or licensee under this article may be appealed to the finance director or the director's designated representative. Decisions of the police department that adversely affect or aggrieve any permittee may be appealed to the chief of police or the chief of police's designated representative. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the director of finance or the director's authorized representative or any permittee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final decision of the chief of police or the chief of police's designated representative may request an appeal to a five-member review board appointed by the chief executive. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the finance director's or chief of police's office of the deciding department within fifteen (15) days after the final decision. 
(b)  A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within thirty (30) days of the date of filing the written petition, unless a continuance of such hearing is agreed to by the appellant and the deciding department director or his designated representative. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. 
(c)  The findings of the review board shall be forwarded to the director of the department originating the review board appeal after the conclusion of the hearing. It shall be the duty of the department director or his designated representative to notify the appellant of the action of the review board. 
(d)  The findings of the review board shall be final unless appealed within thirty (30) days of the date of the findings by certiorari to the superior court of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3009; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, §§ 1, 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-381. - Audits; filing returns. 
Each company and individual licensed under the provisions of this article shall be subject to the provisions of article II of this chapter for audits and the filing of returns. No licensed business or individual shall fail to comply with the audit requirements of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3007; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88) 
Sec. 15-382. - Taxicab company permits generally. 
(a)  An applicant for a taxicab company permit is required to provide information showing its qualifications on a form(s) provided by the police department. 
(b)  Applicants must be approved by the police chief or designee, and such clearance shall include a background investigation and fingerprinting of the applicant. 
(c)  No taxicab company permit shall be issued to any taxicab company owning or leasing less than one (1) vehicle. 
(d)  No taxicab company permit shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant has a valid and current business license to do business in the State of Georgia. 
(e)  All permits required by the provisions of this article shall expire on the same date as the expiration of the business license. 
(f)  If the applicant is not a sole proprietor or individual then all partners, officers or directors holding ten (10) percent or more interest in the company or entity shall be required to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  All applicants must: 
(1)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
(3)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five (5) years previous to the date of application, for the violation of any of the following offenses of the State of Georgia, of any other state, or of the United States: any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; criminal solicitation to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; attempt to commit any of the offenses listed in this subsection; any misdemeanor crime of violence or theft, any misdemeanor crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or any crime involving moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant from applying for a permit; 
(4)  Provide a verifiable dispatch location staffed by company agents or employees, have a published telephone number and have sufficient parking to accommodate its vehicles for hire when not in use; 
(5)  Provide proof that the applicant has a dedicated two-way communication system with a dispatcher that personally mans such communication system during the entire time that the applicant's business is open for service, or that any taxicab is available for transportation of fee-paying passengers. The dedicated two-way communication system must be a Federal Communications Commission licensed two-way radio network. Citizens Band radios, ham radios, cell phones and text paging devices shall not qualify as a dedicated two-way communication system; 
(6)  File applications for the initial permitting and inspection of the taxicabs, with a list of all drivers that will be scheduled for driver permitting, indicating whether drivers are company employees or contract drivers. A copy of each contract driver's insurance coverage must be included in the application; 
(7)  Provide a copy of the applicant's rate schedule and the daily hours of operation; and 
(8)  Provide the name, address and telephone number of a responsible individual residing in DeKalb County who will be the registered agent for the purpose of service of process or receipt of citations. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-3002, 7-3003(B), (C); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. 1, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 05-02, Pt. 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 15-383. - Insurance. 
(a)  All companies and drivers permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall provide with their application, and shall maintain for the duration of the permit, a certificate of insurance showing proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by a state approved insurer. Such insurance shall insure passengers and third person against personal injury and property damage in amounts specified by this section. 
(b)  All companies and drivers permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall provide with their application, and shall maintain for the duration of the permit, minimum motor vehicle insurance coverage per vehicle as required by Georgia state law. 
(c)  All permit holders must provide the police chief or his designee with an annual certificate of insurance showing the existence of such policies of insurance as required by this article. The annual certificate of insurance must be provided to the police chief or his designee thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of any such insurance. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3003(B); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 88-19a, § 1, 12-13-88; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. 1, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 15-384. - Taxicab driver's permits generally. 
(a)  No person shall drive a taxicab without a valid driver's permit issued pursuant to the requirements of this article. All drivers must have held a valid Georgia driver's license for a minimum period of twelve (12) consecutive months before applying for a driver's permit pursuant to this article. If an applicant's driver's license is suspended for a nontraffic-related violation or conviction then the applicant is exempt from the requirement that he/she hold a valid Georgia driver's license for twelve (12) consecutive months before applying for a driver's permit. If an applicant's driver's license has been suspended for a nontraffic-related violation or conviction no taxi driver's permit shall be issued by the county unless and until the applicant provides written certified proof from the state that the applicant's driver's license has been fully reinstated and is valid. No company permitted for operating taxicabs shall employ or otherwise associate with, including as an agent or independent contractor, any driver who has not first met the requirements of this article and been issued a valid driver's permit. 
(b)  No drivers' permit shall be issued to any person who is not employed by or represented by a licensed company. All drivers' permits shall expire on the drivers' birthday, and shall be renewed annually. 
(c)  Driver permits must be posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being driven so that it is visible from the passenger area. Licensees under this article are responsible for checking to ensure that each driver has a current driver permit in the driver's possession and posted on the dash or sunvisor of the vehicle being operated along with a visible vehicle inspection sticker. 
(d)  No request for a driver's permit will be processed unless the permit applicant presents a letter on company stationery to the police department from a licensed company requesting issuance of a driver's permit to the named individual. The driver's permit applicant will further furnish information requested on a form to be provided by the police department and submit to a police clearance consisting of a background investigation or fingerprinting. Driver permit applicants must meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(3)  Possess a current valid state driver's license. Such license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(4)  Exhibit a proficiency with the English language so as to be able to comprehend and interpret traffic signs, issue written receipts to passengers and obey lawful orders of police and others in lawful authority. 
(5)  Have not been convicted, been on probation, parole, or been imprisoned for a period of five (5) years previous to the date of application, or for the violation of any of the following offenses of the state, of any other state or of the United States; any felony; driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol; child molestation; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; attempts to commit any of these offenses; any crime of violence or theft; any crime of possession, sale or distribution of illegal drugs or moral turpitude. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(6)  Have not been convicted of four (4) or more moving traffic violations, or one (1) or more mandatory suspensions as defined by Georgia law, within the twelve (12) month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(e)  Drivers are responsible for reporting any change in qualifications or other licensing or permitting information previously supplied to the police department within ten (10) days of the change. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-3002, 7-3004, 7-3005(F); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. 1, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 05-02, Pt. 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 08-21, Pt. I, 11-18-08) 
Sec. 15-385. - Determination of permit or inspection fees; proration of license, permit or inspection fees. 
Fees for vehicle inspections and driver permits under this article shall be recommended by the police department for approval by the board of commissioners. Fees required by this article are nonrefundable and are not prorated. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3003(C); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-386. - Transfer and term of permits and vehicle stickers. 
(a)  No company permits, driver's permits, licenses or county inspection stickers for individual vehicles required by this article are transferable; and they shall expire annually as provided in this article. If not renewed in compliance with this article, all such licenses, permits and inspection stickers shall expire annually and be of no further force and effect. 
(b)  All county inspection stickers required by the provisions of this article shall expire on the date the Georgia motor vehicle license tag expires. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3002; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 15-387. - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
(a)  Suspension. For reasons set forth below, a business license or a driver's permit issued under this article may be suspended until these conditions no longer exist: 
(1)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a license or driver's permit. 
(2)  Violation of any part of this article. 
(3)  For driver's permits only: have not been convicted of four (4) or more moving traffic violations, or one (1) or more mandatory suspensions as defined by Georgia law, within the twelve-month period preceding the date of application or renewal of the application. Discharge without court adjudication of guilt pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 42-8-62 shall not disqualify an applicant. 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse, or allowing a vehicle to operate in the unincorporated area of the county without a county inspection sticker. 
(b)  Suspension for six (6) months. For reasons set forth below, a business license or a driver's permit issued under this article may be suspended for six (6) months: 
(1)  Charging a fare in excess of those fares on file with the police department. 
(2)  Refusing to accept a passenger solely on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief, sex or sexual orientation. Sexual orientation shall mean the state of being heterosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Operators shall not refuse to accept a passenger unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. 
(c)  Revocation. A business license or a driver's permit issued under this article may be revoked where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information, or omits information, requested in the application. 
(d)  A taxicab company permit, driver's permit or business license may be revoked for a violation of this article. If any permit holder, or employee or independent contractor of a permit holder, is found to have violated this article on three (3) or more occasions in a twelve-month period, such permit may be revoked. 
(e)  A permit may be revoked if any driver affiliated in any way with such permit is found to have violated this article on five (5) or more occasions in a twelve-month period. 
(f)  In addition to any other remedies provided by law, the permit holder may also be cited for violating the provisions of this article, and such citation(s) shall be prosecuted in accordance with the requirements of this article in the Recorder's Court of DeKalb County. 
(g)  The requirements of this article shall be in addition to all other licensing, taxing, and regulatory provisions of local, state or federal law and shall not authorize violations of any other applicable laws. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3008; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. 1, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 05-02, Pt. 1, 10-9-01; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 15-388. - Vehicle condition and equipment; inspection and inspection sticker. 
(a)  Drivers and company licensees are responsible for maintaining each vehicle for hire in a clean and mechanically safe condition. The interior and exterior shall meet the requirements set out under inspection requirements outlined in this section. 
(b)  Drivers are not to drive and company licensees are not to allow drivers to operate a vehicle without the required markings, a taximeter, top light and inspection sticker as outlined in this section. Required markings shall also include the name of the company painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left front doors and the schedule of rates, including minimum fares, painted or affixed by decal to the outside right and left rear doors. Magnetic signs, or non-permanent signs or markings, shall be prohibited. Limousines are excepted from having markings, top lights, two-way radios or taximeters; however, limousines are required to have a plate attached to their front or rear bumper indicating the company business name. 
(c)  All vehicles for hire to be used by a licensee in the county shall be inspected annually and approved by the police department. Once a vehicle meets the requirements of the inspection, a sticker will be affixed to the left side of the windshield. The requirements that each vehicle must meet are as follows: 
(1)  Exterior inspection shall ensure that headlights, taillights, brake lights, directional signal lights, license plate lights, windshield wipers, all vehicle glass, window cranks or electric windows, doors and door locks, trunk lid, trunk, hood, door handles, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires and other vehicle parts are in good condition and functioning properly. There shall be no tears or rust holes in the vehicle body and no loose pieces hanging from the vehicle body. There shall be no unrepaired body damage or any body condition which would create a safety problem or interfere with the operation of the vehicle. 
(2)  Interior inspection shall include the rearview mirror, steering wheel, foot brakes, parking brakes, air conditioning and heating systems to ensure each item is in good operating condition. The upholstery, floor mats, headlining, door panels and the trunk compartment shall be inspected to insure there are no tears, that they are clean and have no offensive odors and that the trunk has sufficient space for passenger luggage. 
(3)  The vehicle shall have a spare tire and jack, a functional two-way radio and a taximeter. The taximeter is to be positioned so that it is visible from the passenger compartment. Taximeter accuracy shall be verified according to the police department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. Limousines are excepted from having a two-way radio and a taximeter. 
(4)  Vehicles shall be subject to random inspections at any time. Vehicles found to be substandard shall be removed from service immediately and shall be subject to immediate vehicle inspection sticker removal by the police department. Additional inspection requirements will be outlined in the police department's vehicle rules and regulations governing passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(d)  The inspection sticker is proof that the company met the licensing and insurance requirements at the time of license issuance and that the vehicle passed the last vehicle inspection. Each vehicle operator must have in the vehicle proof of current insurance coverage. Any company or vehicle letting insurance coverage lapse shall have the inspection sticker or stickers removed by the police department and the business license suspended or revoked by the finance department. Business operations shall not be resumed until proof of insurance is provided to the finance department, the license reinstated and the vehicle or vehicles reinspected and new inspection stickers issued by the police department. 
(e)  No business licensed for operating vehicles for hire shall use any vehicle that has not been inspected and had the county inspection sticker affixed. 
(f)  Inspection sticker are not transferable from vehicle to vehicle and are nonrefundable if the vehicle is wrecked or taken out of service for any reason. The finance department and police department must be notified within ten (10) days of any vehicle being taken out of service; stickers from vehicles taken out of service must be turned in to the police department. Stickers for replacement vehicles or additional vehicles are issued under the same procedures as original inspection stickers. 
(g)  The maximum number of inspection stickers issued in any calendar year shall not exceed one thousand (1,000). 
(h)  Inspection stickers shall expire on the date the Georgia motor vehicle license tag expires. 
(Code 1976, §§ 7-3002, 7-3005(D), (E), 7-3006; Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 01-04, Pt. 1, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-389. - Miscellaneous requirements and regulations. 
(a)  All taxicab drivers shall maintain in each taxicab a suitable map or street guide of the metropolitan Atlanta area. 
(b)  All taxicab drivers shall make a reasonable search of their vehicle immediately following each trip, and upon discovery of any personal property left by a passenger in the taxicab, shall immediately notify the dispatcher so that the dispatcher can attempt to locate the owner to return the property. If the owner cannot be located within twenty-four (24) hours, the dispatcher shall forward the property to the police department. The county shall reflect the initial receipt of the property in a log that shall be maintained and available for inspection by the police chief or designee for one (1) year. 
(c)  All taxicab drivers shall take the most direct route to a passenger's destination unless otherwise authorized or directed by the passenger. 
(d)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger, unless the passenger is obviously intoxicated or dangerous. All employees and independent contractors of companies permitted pursuant to this article shall be courteous and respectful to members of the public. 
(e)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to accept a passenger solely on the basis of that passenger's race, color, gender, religion, sex, national origin, sexual orientation, age or disability. 
(f)  All taxicab drivers shall provide receipts upon request of a passenger, showing the amount of fare paid, the name of the company, the taxicab identification number, the number of passengers, and origin and termination location of trip. 
(g)  No taxicab driver shall refuse to transport a blind or disabled person or that person's guide or service dog. No taxicab driver shall charge any extra fee for the guide or service dog to accompany said blind or disabled person. 
(h)  All taxicab drivers shall practice good personal hygiene, and wear proper dress while operating a taxicab. Proper dress shall mean shoes (not sandals), ankle length pants, and a shirt or blouse with sleeves and a collar. Hats must be of the baseball style or a chauffeur's cap. Clothing must be clean and not visibly soiled. 
(i)  Taxicab company permit holders are responsible for ensuring that any driver who is affiliated in any way with such permit complies with the requirements of this article. In addition to being cited for a violation of this article, violation(s) of this section may be grounds for suspension or revocation of the permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(j)  Failure of a taxicab driver to comply with this article shall result in the issuance of a citation and/or the driver's arrest and the impoundment of the taxicab. 
(k)  No taxicab driver's permit shall be issued to a driver not affiliated with a taxicab company properly permitted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3005(A); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 15-390. - Trip sheets or logs. 
Drivers must maintain daily trip sheets or logs of all passengers, the time, place of entry, the destination of each passenger, the amount charged and an itemization of any personal property left in the vehicle for hire. Trip sheets must be maintained in the vehicle for forty-eight (48) hours and, thereafter, transferred to and maintained at the licensed business premises for a period of time to be specified by the police department in that department's published rules and regulations for vehicles for hire. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3005(B); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-391. - Drivers smoking, playing radios, etc. 
A driver while operating a vehicle for hire is not to smoke or play a radio or tape player if objected to by a passenger. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3005(C); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88) 
Sec. 15-392. - Cruising and use of vehicle stands. 
Licensees under this article are responsible for ensuring that no driver participates in cruising. Cruising is defined as moving about the streets of the unincorporated area for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers who have not previously requested such service by telephone or by personal command. Licensees shall ensure that their drivers use open stands on a nonexclusive, first-come-first-served basis. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3005(G); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88) 
Cross reference— Parking of taxicabs, § 17-146. 
Sec. 15-393. - Call jumping. 
Licensees under this article shall not participate in nor allow their drivers to practice call jumping or the act of intercepting a passenger who has requested service from another company. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3005(H); Ord. No. 88-11a, § 1, 10-11-88) 
Sec. 15-394. - Age of vehicles for hire, taxicabs and limousines. 
(a)  As of December 31, 2004, no vehicle having a vehicle age greater than fifteen (15) years may be operated as a taxicab, vehicle for hire or limousine in the unincorporated area of the county. For the purposes of this section, the term vehicle age shall be the vehicle's model year. 
(b)  As of December 31, 2006, no vehicle having a vehicle age greater than eight (8) years may be operated as a taxicab, vehicle for hire or limousine in the unincorporated area of the county. For the purposes of this section, the term vehicle age shall be the vehicle's model year. 
(Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03) 
Sec. 15-395. - Schedule of fares. 
(a)  All permitted taxicab drivers shall charge the following schedule of fares: 
(1)  To the first one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of a mile—Two dollars twenty-five cents ($2.25); 
(2)  Each additional one-eighth mile( 1/8 )—Twenty-five cents ($.25); 
(3)  Waiting time—Twenty-one dollars ($21.00) per hour; and 
(4)  For each additional passenger in excess of one riding in the vehicle on the same trip—One dollar ($1.00) per extra person. Children under five (5) years of age shall not be charged the extra person fee, and only one (1) child over the age of five (5) in the company of an adult may be charged the extra person fee. 
(b)  All taxicab drivers permitted under this article shall have the right to charge a six dollar ($6.00) charge if the meter is not utilized. 
(c)  Taximeters shall be calibrated by the permitted taxicab driver or taxicab company to calculate the fares in accordance with the schedule set forth in this section. The permit holder shall install lead and wire seals to the taximeter once it is calibrated so that no adjustments, alterations or replacements may be made to the taximeter that affects in any way its accuracy or indications. 
(Ord. No. 29-03, Pt. I, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 05-15, Pt. I, 9-13-05) 
Sec. 15-396. - Temporary fuel surcharge. 
(a)  The police chief or designee shall assess fuel prices in the county every three (3) months, the first assessment to occur immediately after approval of this section and again thereafter on November 1, February 1, May 1, and August 1 of each calendar year and repeating every November 1, February 1, May 1, August 1 and/or an assessment may be needed based on a sudden increase in gasoline prices between those dates. 
(b)  At the time of the assessment, if the police chief or designee finds that the price of fuel in the county exceeds by twenty (20) percent the average price of fuel in the Atlanta metropolitan area in the preceding year, as published by the American Automobile Association, the police chief or designee shall be authorized to institute temporary fuel surcharges as set forth in this article. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of the assessment of fuel prices, if the price exceeds the standards of subsection (b) above, the police chief or designee shall notify all taxicab companies, taxicab drivers, taxicab trade associations, and all other affected persons or entities operating in the taxicab industry within the county of temporary fuel surcharges that may be imposed on customers. 
(d)  If the police chief or designee authorizes the assessment of temporary fuel surcharges, all taxicab companies and drivers shall charge, in addition to the schedule of fares set forth in section 15-395 of the Code of DeKalb County, the following fuel surcharges: 
(1)  A two-dollar fuel surcharge per metered taxicab trip; 
(2)  For each additional passenger in excess of one riding in the vehicle on the same trip, an additional two-dollar fuel surcharge per extra person. Children under five (5) years of age shall not be charged the extra two-dollar per-person fee, and only one (1) child over the age of five (5) in the company of an adult may be charged the extra two-dollar per-person fee. 
(e)  No other temporary fuel charges may be assessed against customers and the temporary fuel surcharges applied only remains in effect until the time of the next periodic fuel price assessment by the police chief or designee. 
(f)  All taxicab drivers must and shall conspicuously display a printed passenger notice on the taxicab dashboard describing the temporary fuel surcharge. 
(g)  The printed notice shall advise passengers that a temporary fuel surcharge will be added to the metered fare or to the flat rate fare due to increases in gasoline prices in the county and shall advise passengers of the amount of the fee as described in [sub]section (d). 
(Ord. No. 08-21, Pt. I, 11-18-08) 
Secs. 15-397—15-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 15-400. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments on the community in the findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); and Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), studies in other communities including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; and Cleveland, Ohio; findings from the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group on the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the evidence and testimony of the citizens and experts who appeared before the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners at a hearing conducted in 1991, and public hearing on the Revised Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance held on March 10, 1998 and April 14, 1998, the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the finding of the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners that adult entertainment establishments, as defined herein, are often associated with criminal behavior and tend to contribute to undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with adult entertainment establishments are disorderly conduct, prostitution, drug trafficking, and drug use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with adult entertainment establishments are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior described above, and the acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Furthermore, the public health, safety, and welfare require that adult entertainment establishments and their locations, operations, and employees be regulated and licensed in order to reduce the potential for harm and in order to preserve the quality of urban life in residential and business areas of the community. Therefore, the limitation of adult entertainment establishments to certain prescribed areas of the community is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which provide or establish adult entertainment or adult uses. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses and the adverse effect on property values and on the public health, safety, and welfare of the county, on its citizens and property, and on the character of its neighborhoods and development will be curtailed. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally-protected forms of expression. This article is intended to represent a balancing of competing interests: reducing criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods and development through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments while protecting the rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. This article is not intended to allow or license any business establishment or activity that would otherwise be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 21-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 15-401. - Definitions. 
Adult entertainment establishment is any one (1) or more of the following: 
(a)  Adult bookstore. An establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, printed material, and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this subsection, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It may be presumed that a business has a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in adult material if any one (1) of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; or 
(2)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; or 
(3)  Twenty (20) percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; or 
(4)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the retail floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); 
(5)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
(b)  Adult business. An establishment, other than those expressly specified in this section, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities. 
(c)  Adult motion picture theater. An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(d)  Adult minimotion picture theater. An enclosed building, or enclosed or semi-enclosed room or booth within an enclosed building, with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(e)  Adult motion picture arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(f)  Adult video store. An establishment having a significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes, digital video devices (DVDs), movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined below. For purposes of this subsection, the aforementioned items shall be collectively referred to as "adult material." It shall be presumed that a business shall have a "significant portion of its stock in trade" in adult material if any one (1) of the following criteria is satisfied: 
(1)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the merchandise displayed for sale consists of adult material; or 
(2)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the stock in trade consists of adult material; or 
(3)  Twenty (20) percent or more of all inventory consists of adult material; or 
(4)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the floor area is devoted to adult material (not including storerooms, stock areas, bathrooms, basements or any portion of the business not open to the public); 
(5)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the gross sales (including rentals) result from the sale or rental of adult material; or 
(6)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the dollar value of all merchandise displayed at any time is attributable to adult material. 
(g)  Erotic entertainment/dance establishment. A nightclub, theater, or other establishment which features live performances by dancers, entertainers, strippers, or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. These establishments are also regulated pursuant to section 4-104 of this Code. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(a)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(b)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(a)  Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following sexually-oriented acts or conduct; anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(b)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(c)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(d)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, or female breasts; or 
(e)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating, or the infliction of pain; or 
(f)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexually-oriented contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(g)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, or vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 00-20, Pt. 1, §§ I, II, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 42-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02; Ord. No. 21-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 15-402. - Certain activities prohibited. 
(a)  No person or licensee shall admit or permit the admission of any individual under the age of eighteen (18) or allow such individual to remain within a licensed premise. 
(1)  A licensee is defined herein as any person, association, partnership, corporation or other business entity which has obtained a valid DeKalb County license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. 
(2)  A licensed premises is defined herein as any adult entertainment establishment which has obtained a valid DeKalb County license. 
(b)  No person or licensee shall sell, exchange, barter, trade, give or offer to sell, exchange, barter, trade or give, to any individual under the age of eighteen (18) any entertainment, service, material device or thing offered, for sale or otherwise, at an adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit or suffer an employee or other person to appear nude or semi-nude where there is an individual payment offer or solicitation of money occurring between patron and employee. 
(d)  No licensee shall permit any employee or patron to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described in this rule. 
(e)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to insert an object into her vagina or his/her anal orifice, except for personal hygiene or necessity. 
(f)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in actual or simulated genital masturbation, or, in the case of females, fondling of the breasts. 
(g)  No licensee shall suffer or permit a male employee or any person on the premises to exhibit an unclothed erect penis. 
(h)  No licensee shall suffer or permit an employee or any person on the premises to engage in, or simulate bestiality. 
(i)  No person other than a dancer or entertainer while on any licensed premises, shall expose or be permitted to expose to public view with less than a complete and opaque covering of his or her genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus or anal cleft or cleavage, and if a female, her breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola. 
(j)  No employee or person while on a licensed premises shall or be permitted to dance or perform nude or semi-nude in such a manner as to simulate specified sexual activity with any patron, spectator, employee or other person not employed therein. 
(k)  No person, while on a licensed premises, shall, while nude, or semi-nude, be permitted to sit upon or straddle the leg, legs, lap or body of any patron, spectator, employee or other person therein, or to engage in or simulate sexual activity while touching or being touched by said patron, spectator or other person. 
(l)  No licensee shall suffer or permit the use of any areas on the premises of such establishment for sexual contact or private dancing performance or entertainment. 
(m)  No dancer or entertainer while on a licensed premises shall dance on a platform intended for that purpose which is not raised at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor. Furthermore, no dancing shall occur closer than four (4) feet from any patron. 
(n)  No licensee shall suffer or permit any signage or advertisement which encourages, solicits, induces or promotes conduct or activities prohibited by this article. 
(o)  No erotic entertainment/dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverages or controlled substances upon the premise of the licensee. 
(p)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-403. - Distance requirements. 
Adult entertainment establishments, businesses, or uses shall be located within the following distances as defined and measured as stated herein: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than one thousand (1,000) feet to another adult entertainment establishment and shall comply with any distance requirements imposed by this Code including those found in section 4-101.1. The measurement of distances for the purpose of this paragraph shall be from structure to structure along the shortest possible course, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e. "as the crow flies." 
(2)  An adult entertainment establishment shall not be located on property which is within one thousand (1,000) feet of an R or RM use or district. The measurement of distances for purposes of this paragraph shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e. "as the crow flies." 
(3)  An adult entertainment establishment shall be located no closer than one thousand (1,000) feet of any governmental facility, church, residence, park, library, school ground, or college campus. The measurement of distances for purposes of this paragraph shall be from property line to property line along the shortest possible course, regardless of any customary or common route or path of travel, i.e. "as the crow flies." 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 00-20, Pt. 1, § III, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 32-02, Pt. I, 8-27-02) 
Sec. 15-404. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership, corporation, or other business entity, to engage in, operate, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises, an adult entertainment establishment without first having complied with the provisions of this article, or without a currently valid DeKalb County license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment. No license issued hereunder shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States or under any other ordinance, rule or regulation of DeKalb County. The license shall be conspicuously displayed at all times within the premises. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-405. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Employees of adult entertainment establishments shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(b)  No person shall be employed in any capacity whatsoever, including, but not limited to, performers, entertainers, waiters, bouncers, bartenders, discjockeys, and musicians, who has been convicted in this or any other county or state or in any federal court within five (5) years immediately prior to the application for employment of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, or any other felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or for whom any outstanding warrant exists on which service has not been perfected. "Be employed" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the premises and elsewhere than on the licensed premise, for compensation or otherwise. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair or maintenance services for licensee. 
(c)  A permit to work in or be employed by an adult entertainment establishment, whether for compensation or otherwise, shall be required for all employees thereof. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors, such as entertainers, employed or hired by an adult entertainment establishment, shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. Each independent contractor shall be required to have and maintain his or her separate business license. Notwithstanding, this provision shall not apply to an independent contractor who performs accounting, legal, administrative, repair or maintenance services for licensee. 
(d)  No person requiring a permit may be employed by or work in an establishment until such person has filed an application, paid the fee for and obtained a work permit from the bureau of police services. 
(e)  An application for a permit shall include the applicant's legal name, all of the applicant's aliases and/or any other name by which the applicant has ever been known, address, business name and address, date of birth with written proof thereof, and prior arrest record of the applicant. The bureau of police services shall make a complete search relative to any police record of the applicant. If there is no record of a violation of 15-405(b) herein, or of any other section of this article, the bureau of police services shall issue a permit to the applicant. A permit will be issued or denied within ten (10) business days after submission of a properly completed application. If the permit is not issued or denied within the specified time frame, then the permit shall be deemed approved. 
(f)  Any applicant denied a permit may, within ten (10) days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police may be appealed within ten (10) days after notification of denial. The applicant must submit in writing a notice of appeal to the board of commissioners by filing with the clerk of the board of commissioners. Said notice shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or request, the date of the adverse decision and receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the board of commissioners, and the name and address of the applicant. Said appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners' meeting occurring not less than five (5) no more than thirty (30) days after receipt of said notice of appeal. The decision of the board of commissioners will be final unless the applicant files a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court within fifteen (15) days of the date of board's decision. 
(g)  Any permit for employment issued hereunder shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of issuance unless earlier revoked or suspended. The DeKalb County Police Department may prescribe reasonable fees for certifying the eligibility for employment. 
(h)  Employees holding permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall at all times during their working hours have said permits available for inspection at the premises. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 00-20, Pt. 1, §§ IV—VI, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 15-406. - Licensing and licenses. 
(a)  All licenses herein shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this article and related laws, applicable provisions of this Code and other ordinances and resolutions of the county relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses hereunder shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is a mere privilege subject to be suspended and revoked under the provisions of the ordinances of DeKalb County." 
(c)  A separate license shall be required for each place of business. 
(d)  No license shall be issued to any person who is less than twenty-one years of age. 
(e)  Application for license shall be written and on forms supplied by DeKalb County at the finance department. Such application shall state the name and address of the applicant; the place where the proposed business is to be located; nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and shareholders; if other business entity, then the names of all holding any ownership or managerial interests therein. 
(f)  All applications shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them by the county and pay an administrative investigation fee to be determined by the finance department. Failure to furnish such data, information and records within thirty (30) days from the date of such request shall mean an automatic denial of the license. 
(g)  For the purpose of this article, the term "applicant" shall include a person or persons and, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, directors, principals, and shareholders of said partnership or corporation. 
(h)  Each application must be complete in its entirety before being accepted by the county for filing and processing. 
(i)  All applicants for licenses shall furnish plans and renderings of the proposed premises. The applicant's structure or premises shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Code. An applicant shall obtain and file with the license application a certificate of zoning compliance, certifying that the property where the applicant seeks to operate the business contains the required zoning and land use for the legally intended use of the business and its premises. The director of planning shall within thirty (30) days after receipt of a complete application, either issue or deny the certification of zoning compliance. If the certificate is not issued or denied within thirty (30) days after the application is submitted, then the certificate shall be deemed issued on the thirty-first day. 
(j)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
(4)  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 00-20, Pt. 1, § VII, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 21-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 15-407. - Notice of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses hereunder shall give notice that application has been filed and of the purpose of making such application by publication of an advertisement once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration of the application by the business license division in the newspaper in which legal advertisements are published. 
(b)  The first advertisement shall not appear more than thirty (30) days prior to the date of such consideration. The advertisement shall be of type not smaller than ten (10) point capital and lower case and shall be at least one-inch column. The advertisement need not appear on the same day as legal advertisements are regularly published. 
(c)  The notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and the date, time and place of hearing, and a statement that any objections to the issuance must be made at or prior to the time of hearing, and, if prior to the time of hearing, must be in writing and received by the supervisor on or before the date and time of hearing. 
(d)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following: 
"DeKalb County Adult Entertainment License applied for. Any objection to this application must be made at or prior to _____ o'clock ___.m., on the ________ day of ___________ 19___ at ___________ (address) which is the date and time of hearing. If prior to the hearing, objections must be in writing." 
The sign or signs shall be at least eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks, or other public property which adjoin or adjoins the location so as to be clearly visible by persons using such public area. The sign shall be posted on the property from the date of the first publication of the notice of intent to engage in business through the date of the granting or denial of a license. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-408. - License fees and penalty for late payment. 
(a)  The annual license fee shall be set by the board of commissioners from time to time by resolution. Licenses shall be issued for a calendar or any partial year and shall expire on December 31st of each year. No license shall be issued or renewed until and unless all fees and penalties due the county are first paid. 
(b)  In addition to and not in the alternative to any other penalty which may be provided herein, any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to DeKalb County of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a separate penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the required fee, tax or other charge, for each period of thirty (30) days, or portion thereof, following the due date, until paid in full, including penalties. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-409. - License application investigation. 
(a)  Within five (5) days after receipt of a complete application that includes all of the information required in section 15-406 of this Code, the finance department shall transmit a copy to the police department, development department, fire department, and health department for review and comment. Each reviewing department shall review and make any appropriate written comments to the finance department within twenty (20) days of the reviewing department receiving the license application. The county shall then have a reasonable time, not to exceed twenty (20) days after the finance department has received all final documents from the reviewing departments, within which to investigate a license application. The investigation shall be conducted to ensure that an applicant meets the terms and requirements of this article. The director of finance shall within forty-five (45) days after receipt of a compete application, issue or deny the license. If the director of finance or his or her designee does not issue or deny the license within forty-five (45) days after the completed application is submitted, then the license shall be deemed approved on the forty-sixth day. Upon completion of the investigation, a license shall be granted if: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this county or any other county located within or outside this state within five (5) years of the date of the application; 
(5)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(6)  The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(7)  Neither the applicant nor any of his or her employees, agents, partners, directors, officers, stockholders, or managers have, within five (5) years of the date of the application, committed or performed or knowingly allowed to be committed or performed any of the specified sexual activities, defined in section 15-401(k) herein, in or upon the premises where the adult entertainment establishment is to be located or knowingly allowed such premises to be used as a place where in solicitations are made for any of the specified sexual activities; 
(8)  On the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(9)  The proposed premises meets the distance requirements set forth in section 15-403 of this Code. 
(10)  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of DeKalb County, the State of Georgia, or the United States; 
(11)  No individual having an interest either as an owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, is in violation of section 15-410 of this Code; 
(12)  The applicant is not overdue on payment to the county on taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against, or imposed on the applicant; and 
(13)  The applicant is not residing with or married to a person (i) who has been denied an adult entertainment license within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the application, (ii) whose adult entertainment license has been revoked within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the date of the application, or (iii) whose adult entertainment establishment license is under suspension at the time of the application. 
(b)  No further action shall be taken by DeKalb County or by any applicant with respect to any application until completion by the county of its investigation. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 00-20, Pt. 1, §§ VIII—XI, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 21-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 15-410. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions. 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application for any felony or misdemeanor or any state of the United States or any municipal ordinance except traffic violations, or for whom an outstanding warrant exists on which no service has been perfected. Where the violation is for misdemeanor, forfeiture of bond, violation of a county or municipal ordinance, or where there is a plea of nolo contendere, the board of commissioners after hearing, may, after investigation, waive same as a disqualification. Such a hearing shall be conducted in the manner provided in section 15-418(c) herein. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 00-20, Pt. 1, § XII, 3-14-00) 
Sec. 15-411. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval of application. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained and fees paid not later than two (2) weeks from the date of the approval of the application; and if not so obtained, the permit granted shall be void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the business license department the required fee, the license shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-412. - Causes for mandatory denial of license. 
No license shall be issued to an applicant if within twelve (12) months immediately preceding the filing of an application one (1) or more of the following shall have occurred: 
(1)  The same applicant for a license or renewal has been rejected for any location, if such rejection was based upon the applicant's failure to meet the terms of the ordinance applicable to the applicant as opposed to rejection for reasons related to the location itself. 
(2)  The location has been rejected for any applicant. 
(3)  When any application for a license to transact any business within the control of the police powers is denied for cause or any license is revoked for cause by the board of commissioners. 
The twelve (12) months waiting period will not apply where the applicant shall apply for a new location which has not been rejected within the preceding twelve months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding twelve (12) months, except if the applicant has had an application for another location rejected within the preceding twelve (12) months because of lack of qualifications of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-413. - License; refusal, appeal, procedure. 
(a)  If, following investigation of the application, the director of finance determines that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, the director shall, within the time frame specified in section 15-409(a), notify the applicant that the application is denied. The applicant may appeal such denial in the manner provided in this section. 
(b)  Should an applicant desire to appeal a decision under this section, the following procedure shall apply: 
(1)  A notice of appeal must be filed with the director of finance within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the decision complained of. The notice of appeal shall be in the form of a letter, and shall clearly identify all of the objections or exceptions taken to the decision of the director of finance. The notice of appeal shall also contain an address for receipt of future notices and decisions of the certificate review board. Should the aggrieved person or entity fail to file a notice of appeal within the time allowed, the right to appeal is lost. 
(2)  Upon receipt of a timely and proper notice of appeal, the director shall notify the appellant, in writing, of the date, time, and place where a hearing will be held. The hearing shall be held before the certificate review board within forty-five (45) calendar days of the date the notice of appeal is filed with the director, but no sooner than ten (10) calendar days after appellant receives notice of the hearing. The director shall transmit to the certificate review board all documents or materials constituting the record of the action or proceedings below. 
(3)  If the director deems it necessary that an audit of the financial books/records of appellant be conducted, the county shall notify appellant in writing of a reasonable date, time and place for the audit, which shall be conducted prior to the date of a hearing on the matter. The director may hire outside auditors for this purpose. The expense of hiring outside auditors shall be borne by the county if the position of the appellant is sustained by the audit. If not, the expense of the outside auditors shall be due and payable from appellant as part of the costs of appeal. 
(4)  An appeal under this section shall not preclude the county from pursuing legal proceedings to enjoin any violation of this article or of any other article of the DeKalb County Code. 
(5)  Certificate review board. In all hearings pursuant to this section, the following procedures shall prevail, and the proceeding shall be as informal as compatible with justice: 
a.  A certificate review board shall be convened. The certificate review board shall be composed of three (3) individuals, selected from the following positions: the deputy public works director for development, the chief of police or the deputy chief of police, the director of the department of fire and rescue services, the director of health, the director of the human resources & merit system department. 
b.  The proceeding before the certificate review board shall be recorded, and all documents and other materials considered by the certificate review board shall be preserved as the record of the proceedings. The record of the proceedings shall be preserved for not less than one hundred fifty (150) calendar days after the hearing. 
c.  Any alleged violations or misconduct levied against the appellant and scheduled for a hearing before the certificate review board shall be read completely to appellant at the commencement of the hearing, unless waived by appellant. 
d.  The certificate review board may receive evidence in support of the alleged violations or misconduct as filed against appellant. Decisions of the certificate review board are to be supported by the evidence accepted and admitted during the hearing. 
e.  The county shall bear the burden of proof. The standard of proof shall be by a preponderance of the evidence. 
f.  The order of proof shall be as follows: The county representative shall present the case-in-chief in support of the alleged violations or misconduct; the appellant may present a case-in-chief, if desired. Each party may be allowed to present one case-in-rebuttal. 
g.  The appellant and county may be represented by counsel, may present evidence, and may examine and cross-examine witnesses. Additionally, members of the certificate review board are permitted to question witnesses. A party is permitted no more than fifteen (15) minutes to present that party's case-in-chief; a case-in-rebuttal is permitted no more than ten (10) minutes of presentation. Presentation of augments and evidence may be in oral or written form, except that affidavits of individuals who are unavailable for cross-examination shall not be accepted or admitted by the certificate review board nor considered by the board. 
h.  Following the presentation of evidence, the board shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be mailed, via registered or certified mail, to the parties or the parties' representatives. For the appellant, the decision shall be mailed to the address provided on the notice of appeal. Should the certificate review board fail to issue a timely decision, on the thirty-first day after the date of the hearing appellant may seek review as if a decision adverse to appellant had been rendered. 
i.  The findings of the certificate review board shall be final unless either party files an appeal to the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Within ten (10) days of notification of an adverse decision, either party appearing before the certificate review board may submit a written notice of appeal to the board of commissioners. Said notice shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or request, the date of the adverse decision and receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, and the action requested of the board of commissioners. Said appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next regular board of commissioners meeting occurring not less than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of said notice of appeal. 
(d)  The board of commissioners shall review the record of the certificate review board and the standard of review applied shall be whether the decision of the certificate review board was supported by substantial evidence. The board of commissioners shall issue a decision within ninety (90) days of the date of the certificate review board's decision. The board of commissioners may sustain, overrule, or modify the decision of the certificate review board. 
(e)  The decision of the board of commissioners may be immediately reviewed as a matter of right upon the filing by the applicant of a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court. The decision of the board of commissioners shall be final if the applicant does not file a petition for writ of certiorari within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 00-20, Pt. 1, § XIII, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 21-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 15-414. - License not transferable; restrictions on additional partners or shareholders; location and name change. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be sold, given, transferred or assigned by any licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, persons or entities. Any such sale, gift, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of the license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, if the licensee is a partnership or corporation, and one (1) or more of the partners or shareholders, as the case may be, should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners or shareholders who were partners or shareholders at the time of issuance of the license may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the licensee, shall immediately notify the finance department. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a closely held corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license hereunder is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(b)  No licensee shall change the location of the establishment without obtaining a new license. The licensee upon change of the name of the establishment must notify the finance department of DeKalb County thirty (30) days prior to the change. An application for a license due to a change of location is subject to all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-415. - Issuance to persons with prior convictions (felony). 
No original license shall be issued to any person where any individual having an interest either as owner, partner, principal stockholder, directly or indirectly beneficial or absolute, shall have been convicted within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application for any felony. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-416. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
Where a building where the adult entertainment establishment is to operate is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location provided the plans for the proposed building or renovation show clearly compliance with all other provisions of this article. No business shall be conducted therein until the premises have been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this article, the other ordinances of DeKalb County and laws and regulations of the state or federal government. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-417. - Annual renewal required. 
(a)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be issued for a calendar year or any partial year and shall expire on December 31st of each year. All licensees hereunder shall be required to renew their licenses annually on forms prescribed by the county. 
(b)  An application for renewal shall meet and qualify under all requirements of this article for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-418. - Suspension, revocation and probation of license. 
(a)  No license issued hereunder shall be suspended, revoked, or placed on probation except for due cause, as herein defined. If the director of finance determines that the due cause exists, the director shall notify the licensee in writing that the license issued hereunder is suspended, revoked, or placed on probation. 
(b)  "Due cause" for suspension, revocation, or probation or such license shall consist of the violating of any local, state, or federal laws, regulations, statutes or ordinances regulating such business or for any reason which would authorize the refusal to issue or renew such license. 
(c)  The applicant may appeal any action taken under this section in the manner provided in section 15-413(b) through 15-413(e). 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 21-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 15-419. - Falsifying information in applications. 
Any material omission, untrue, or misleading information contained in or left out of an original or renewal application for any license or permit issued pursuant to this article shall be unlawful, shall be cause for denial thereof, and shall be punishable as a violation of a county ordinance and applicable state statutes. If any such license or permit has previously been granted under the above circumstances, such shall constitute cause for the revocation of same. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-420. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  An applicant or licensee shall permit county representatives from the police department, finance department, health department, fire department, and planning and/or development department to enter the premises of any adult entertainment establishment or proposed adult entertainment establishment at any time between thirty minutes prior to opening for business and thirty (30) minutes after closing to inspect the premises to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of this Code. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this article or who refuses to permit inspection of the premises by representatives of the police department, finance department, health department, fire department, or development department, shall be assessed a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also constitute "due cause," as defined in section 15-418, for the suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this article may be abated by the county as a public nuisance. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any courts of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of this county. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 21-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 13-16 , Pt. I, 10-22-13) 
Sec. 15-421. - Zones where establishments permitted. 
No license for an adult entertainment establishment may be issued for any premises or location, unless the location has been zoned C2 or M, under the zoning laws of DeKalb County and meets all the requirements of the DeKalb County Zoning Ordinance for adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-422. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
(a)  Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be conducted on any premises which does not comply with all zoning, building code, fire and other ordinances and laws of DeKalb County and the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-423. - Severability and conflict. 
(a)  Should any section or provision of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole nor any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(b)  Should any section or provision of this article be in conflict with any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or law, then the more restrictive ordinance, rule, regulation, provision, requirement, or law shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 15-424. - Effective date. 
(a)  This article shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
(b)  All existing adult entertainment establishments shall obtain a license and comply with all the terms of this article within thirty (30) days of its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 94-02, § 2, 2-8-94) 
Secs. 15-425—15-499. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - MULTIFAMILY RENTAL DWELLINGS 

Sec. 15-500. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, certain terms and words are defined. Where words have not been defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning defined therein. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them as directed below, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Certified building inspector means a person who has been authorized to perform inspections pursuant to the process established by this article, provided that such person maintains the qualifications for certification as established by this article. 
Code compliance certificate means a certificate, in a form authorized by the chief executive officer or his/her designee, executed by a certified building inspector showing compliance with those minimum requirements described in the inspection report attached thereto. 
Inspection report means the report attached to the code compliance certificate describing minimum requirements for inspection of each unit. 
Lease means any written or oral agreement that sets forth any and all conditions concerning the use and occupancy of multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
Multifamily rental dwelling means any multifamily structure, multifamily building, or other facility that is leased to a residential tenant or tenants for use as a home, residence, or sleeping unit. This definition includes, but is not limited to, multifamily dwellings, multifamily apartments, duplexes, boardinghouses, rooming houses, group homes, and flats. 
Multifamily rental unit means any one area, room, structure, flat, apartment, or facility of a multifamily rental dwelling that is leased or available for lease to an occupant. 
Occupant means any person who is a tenant, lessee, or a person residing within a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit. 
Owner means any person, agent, firm, or corporation having a legal or equitable interest in a premises. 
Premises means any lot or parcel of real property on which exists one or more multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, Pt. I, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 15-501. - Certification process, requirements, forms and appeals. 
(a)  Process. The chief executive officer or his/her designee shall create the process for certifying building inspectors, shall establish the requirements and application for becoming a certified building inspector, and shall administer the process. A nonrefundable administrative fee set by the board of commissioners shall be required to be submitted with all applications to be a certified building inspector. Persons who have successfully completed the certification process issued by the chief executive officer or his/her designee shall be designated as certified building inspectors authorized to perform the inspections required by this article. 
(b)  Code compliance certificates and inspection reports. The chief executive officer or his/her designee is authorized to create the forms for code compliance certificates and inspection reports. At a minimum, inspection reports submitted to the county must contain the certified building inspector's signature and date of certification. A certified building inspector shall personally perform the inspections required by this article. The certified building inspector signing the inspection report and performing the inspection shall not be an employee of, otherwise related to, or affiliated in any way with any owner or occupant of the multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental dwelling unit being inspected. Failure to have a certified building inspector personally perform an inspection shall nullify any such code compliance certificate. 
(c)  Certified building inspectors. 
(1)  Minimum requirements. At a minimum, a certified building inspector shall be a licensed architect or engineer or shall hold one (1) of the following certifications from the International Code Council: property maintenance and housing inspector, housing rehabilitation inspector, building inspector, building plan examiner or commercial combination inspector. 
(2)  Denial of certification. Upon receipt of a complete application to be a certified building inspector, the chief executive officer or his/her designee shall have forty-five (45) days to grant or deny the application. If denied, the chief executive officer or his/her designee shall notify the applicant in writing of the reason(s) for the denial at the address set forth on the application. 
(3)  Revocation of certification. Upon a certified building inspector's conviction of a violation of subsection 15-503(c) of this article, or if a certified building inspector no longer meets the minimum requirements set forth in this article, the chief executive officer or his/her designee shall revoke the authority of that individual to act as a certified building inspector. The chief executive officer or his/her designee shall notify the individual in writing of the reason(s) for the revocation at the address set forth on the application to be a certified building inspector. 
(4)  Appeals. Any applicant or certified building inspector who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
a.  A writing identifying the ground(s) for appeal must be filed with the executive assistant within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision for which review is sought. 
b.  The executive assistant shall review the appeal and respond in writing within thirty (30) days by either affirming or reversing the decision for which review is sought. 
c.  A decision of the executive assistant under this article may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of DeKalb County filed within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, Pt. I, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 15-502. - Inspection, certificate and fee required. 
(a)  Code compliance certificate. A code compliance certificate shall contain the certification of a certified building inspector that all multifamily rental dwellings and/or multifamily rental units subject to this article have been inspected within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the date of certification and are in compliance with applicable provisions of the Code and the requirements set forth in the code compliance certificate and inspection report. 
(1)  Commencing on January 1, 2012, all owners of multifamily rental dwellings and/or multifamily rental units within the unincorporated parts of the county that receive income from four (4) or more such units and meet the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 for having a location or office within the unincorporated parts of the county shall file, simultaneously with their business occupation tax return, code compliance certificate(s) covering one hundred (100) percent of the owner's multifamily rental units located within the unincorporated parts of the county. 
(2)  After submission of the initial code compliance certificate(s), owners shall submit code compliance certificates annually with their business occupational tax return. Each subsequent code compliance certificate shall show an internal and external inspection of at least twenty (20) percent of the units on a premises and all units on a premises shall be inspected, at a minimum, every five (5) years. All units inspected shall be listed individually on the code compliance certificate submitted by the certified building inspector. 
(b)  Fee. A nonrefundable administrative fee set by the board of commissioners shall be required to be submitted with all code compliance certificates. 
(c)  Inspections and repairs. Upon initial inspection of multifamily rental dwellings and multifamily rental units subject to this article, should a certified building inspector determine that further work is necessary to comply with the minimum standards set forth in the Code, an acceptable plan shall be submitted to the building official, outlining the time and scope of work necessary to bring the units into compliance. If the plan is accepted by the building official as reasonable and justified, an extension of the time for compliance with this article may be granted for up to one (1) year so that necessary repairs may be completed. No extension shall be granted if life or safety issues are involved, and none of the units where life or safety issues are involved shall be leased until brought into compliance with the minimum standards set forth in the Code. For years subsequent to the initial year, the one year extension for repairs is not available. 
(d)  Written record of inspection. Each owner and certified building inspector shall for a period of five (5) years from the date of inspection keep a written record of inspection for each multifamily rental dwelling and/or multifamily rental unit, including the date of the inspection, items inspected, and all violations, if any, observed. These records shall be presented to the building official within ten (10) business days after a request is made in writing to the owner or inspector. Failure to provide these records shall nullify the code compliance certificate for such dwellings or units. 
(e)  Exemptions. Provided all other required permits, certificates and/or permissions are obtained from the county, this section shall not apply to multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units for a period of five (5) years following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such dwelling or unit. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, Pt. I, 12-14-10) 
Sec. 15-503. - Violations. 
(a)  No business occupation tax certificate shall be issued to any owner until the owner provides the county with a code compliance certificate in the form and manner required by this article. 
(b)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10. 
(c)  An owner who knowingly furnishes or participates in furnishing a code compliance certificate to the county falsely certifying that all multifamily rental dwellings or multifamily rental units inspected are in compliance with the requirements set forth in the code compliance certificate shall be guilty of a violation of this article for each multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit for which the certification is shown to be false. 
(d)  A certified building inspector who knowingly furnishes or participates in furnishing an inspection report containing false information that a multifamily rental dwelling or multifamily rental unit meets the minimum housing standards of the county as shown by the inspection report shall be guilty of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-22, Pt. I, 12-14-10) 
Secs. 15-504—15-550. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - FILM PRODUCTION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, adopted May 10, 2016, enacted provisions designated as art. XIII. Inasmuch as art. XIII already exists, said provisions have been redesignated as art. XIV, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 15-551. - Scope and purpose. 
The governing authority's intent in adopting this article is to facilitate entertainment production events in DeKalb County while safeguarding the interests of DeKalb County's residents and businesses. This article provides the basis for the rules and regulations governing the issuance of permits for filming within the county. It strengthens the county's ability to anticipate and provide necessary support services for entertainment production events to ensure filming is done in a manner consistent with public health, safety and the protection of property. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-552. - Definitions. 
Words and terms not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below, except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means the individual applying for a permit who is legally authorized to bind the producer. 
Application means the documents created by the department that must be completed and submitted to the department to request a permit. 
Department means the planning department. 
Director means the director of the planning department or designee. 
Element means an activity listed in section 15-556. 
Filming means creating motion picture images and all activity attendant to staging, shooting, and associated basecamp operations associated with the production of commercial motion pictures, independent filmography, documentaries, music videos, television shows, and commercials. Filming also means creating still photography images for commercial use and all activity attendant to staging or shooting such images. 
Permit means the authorization issued by the department necessary to conduct filming. 
Producer means an individual, organization, corporation or any other entity that is responsible for the filming. 
Public property means real property owned by the county, or of which the county is a tenant, including, without limitation, parks, streets, sidewalks, other rights-of-way, and buildings. Public property shall not include real property which is being leased by the county to a tenant. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-553. - Rules and regulations. 
The director may promulgate such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, necessary for the administration and enforcement of this article. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-554. - Permit required. 
(a)  Any producer who wishes to perform filming on public property must obtain a permit prior to filming. 
(b)  Any producer who wishes to perform filming on private property must first obtain a permit if filming includes any element listed in section 15-556. 
(c)  Permits shall be issued by the department and shall be issued to a producer. 
(d)  Any producer who performs filming without receiving a permit, or performs filming that violates the material terms of a permit, or is otherwise in violation of this article, upon citation or summons by the police chief, code enforcement officer or other authorized county employee, and judgment or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the Magistrate Court of DeKalb County, shall be subject to appropriate penalties as imposed by the court. If convicted of violating any provision of this article, the court shall impose a minimum fine of four hundred ninety-nine dollars ($499.00) in addition to any other authorized punishment imposed by the court. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-555. - Permit exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Current news productions, including reporters, photographers or cameramen in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of news events; 
(2)  Productions that are conducted by the DeKalb County School System or other government organizations, including but not limited to DeKalb County Television; and 
(3)  Filming associated with any rally, protest or demonstration, except when such rally or demonstration is staged for the sole purpose of being included in filming. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-556. - Filming elements. 
(a)  All applications shall list each element that may be included in filming. 
(b)  Elements are as follows: 
(1)  Filming outdoors between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within a three-hundred-foot radius of a dwelling unit, residence, place of worship, or business; 
(2)  Filming on public property; 
(3)  Closure of a street, lane and/or sidewalk; 
(4)  Occupation of the right-of-way; 
(5)  Use of pyrotechnics or other explosives, smoke effects, water effects, flame effects, or other potentially dangerous instrumentalities; 
(6)  Display or use of real or artificial firearms, grenades, or other weaponry; 
(7)  Vehicle chases and/or vehicle crashes; 
(8)  Dangerous stunts that have a reasonable likelihood of causing substantial personal injury; 
(9)  Use of equipment that has a reasonable likelihood of causing damage to public property; 
(10)  Filming that includes sound as defined and regulated by the DeKalb County Noise Ordinance, now and as it may be amended hereafter; 
(11)  Use or presence of any animal which is naturally inclined to do harm or capable of infliction serious harm upon human beings, or any animal whose possession or sale is prohibited by federal, state, or local law; 
(12)  Public nudity and/or any behavior that would be deemed lewd and lascivious; 
(c)  The final decision of whether an element is allowed shall be made by the director. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-557. - Permit application. 
An application shall include the following: 
(1)  Project title; 
(2)  Name and specific contact information of applicant, including physical address and current phone number; 
(3)  Dates, times and locations of the filming; 
(4)  Detailed description of the filming; 
(5)  Description of all elements that may be performed; 
(6)  Applicable insurance policy information and certificates. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-558. - Permit modification, suspension, or cancellation. 
(a)  After receiving a permit, a producer may request a modification of the permit at any time by submitting a change request in writing and the requisite change fee to the director. The department shall process the change request in the same manner established for processing initial applications. 
(b)  A permit may be immediately suspended where the county identifies an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to property caused by or resulting from the filming; or an actual or imminent violation of the material terms of the permit, this article or any other federal, state or local law. 
(c)  A permit may be cancelled where: 
(1)  The department determines that an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons or to property caused by or resulting from the filming cannot be reasonably eliminated; 
(2)  The department determines that the producer has intentionally or recklessly violated material terms of the permit or this article; 
(3)  The department determines that the producer does not have or has lost insurance coverage. 
(d)  If a permit is suspended or cancelled, the department shall give written notice to the applicant setting forth the reasons for permit suspension or cancellation. The applicant or producer shall have an opportunity to respond to a suspension or cancellation notice within seven (7) business days after receipt of the notice by presenting written or oral evidence to the director. A final written decision will be issued by the director within fifteen (15) business days after the applicant or producer has appealed the suspension or cancellation. 
(e)  If a permit is under consideration for cancellation or suspension because of health or safety risk and the producer is otherwise in compliance with the permit, the county shall make reasonable efforts to find alternative means to accommodate the producer's filming and to eliminate said health or safety risk and allow filming to proceed. 
(f)  If the producer is not in compliance with the permit or suspends or cancels the permit prior to filming, no refund will be issued. 
(g)  If the department suspends or cancels a permit prior to filming, the county will refund the permit fee upon written request. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-559. - Permit denial. 
(a)  The director may deny a permit if any one (1) of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  Filming poses an unreasonable risk of injury or damage to persons or property not associated with the filming; 
(2)  Filming poses an unreasonable risk of irreversible damage to public property; 
(3)  The date and time requested conflicts with other filming or other scheduled events or activities; 
(4)  Filming unreasonably interferes with county functions or operations; 
(5)  Producer owes an outstanding debt to the county; 
(6)  Producer cannot procure insurance; 
(7)  Producer previously violated this article on two (2) or more occasions within the last three (3) years; or 
(8)  Producer made a material misrepresentation on the application. 
(b)  If a permit is denied, the department shall give written notice to the applicant setting forth the reasons for permit denial. The applicant or producer shall have an opportunity to respond to a denial within seven (7) business days after receipt of the denial notice by presenting written or oral evidence to the director. A final written decision will be issued by the director within fifteen (15) business days after the applicant or producer has appealed the denial. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-560. - Responsibilities after permit issuance. 
(a)  The producer shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the removal of trash and debris. Upon completion of the filming, the premises shall be left in a clean condition. It is the responsibility of the producer to exercise reasonable care in inspecting and immediately repairing any damage to any public property which occurs as a result of filming. 
(b)  After filming concludes, the producer shall leave all public property in the same or better condition as it was prior to filming. 
(c)  The producer must publicly display the approved permit on site at all times during filming, set up, break down, and related activities. 
(d)  The producer, including any employees, contractors and subcontractors, is responsible for knowing and complying with all county ordinances and other applicable federal, state and local laws. 
(e)  The producer must give written notification of filming activities to all residents and businesses within a three-hundred-foot radius of the filming and post notices. The notification should be sent within a reasonable time before filming begins. The notification should include the date, time, location, and a general description of the filming activities authorized by the permit. 
(f)  Where filming includes advertising signs or other displays of commercial speech, all signs and/or displays must be removed upon expiration of the permit. 
(g)  Issuance of an approved permit shall not grant to producer, nor otherwise create, a constitutionally protected property interest. 
(h)  Upon receipt of the permit, and by accepting said permit, the producer shall, at its sole cost and expense, fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the county, its officers, boards, commissions, employees and agents against any and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damages to persons or property, that may arise from the permit and any activities performed pursuant to the permit by, on behalf of, or at the direction of the producer, except to the extent that the claims, losses and/or expenses are caused by the negligence or intentional misconduct of the county, its officials, or employees. 
(i)  The producer may be required to hire at its sole expense off-duty police or fire personnel, as determined by county assessment of the public safety risks posed by elements of the filming and related activities. 
(j)  The producer shall obtain at its sole expense, and keep in full force and effect during the term of the permit liability insurance as required by the county. Insurance requirements shall be identified on the permit application. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-561. - Fee schedule. 
The applicant shall pay all such applicable fees, including the following: 
(1)  Each application must be accompanied by the nonrefundable application fee. 
(2)  Producer shall attach payment for the permit fee to the application. 
(3)  Where producer requests a material change in the terms of a previously-issued permit, a change fee shall apply. Where the department determines that any requested change is immaterial, no change fee shall apply. 
(4)  Where filming requires the presence of law enforcement, fire rescue services, watershed management services, or any other services provided by the county, such services will be paid for by producer accordingly. The fee schedule for such services provided by the county shall be promulgated by the department and approved by official action of the governing authority. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Sec. 15-562. - Disclaimer. 
By enacting this article, the county is assuming an undertaking to promote the general welfare of its citizens. The county, its officers, agents and employees shall not be liable to any person, including, but not limited to, persons whose names appear on the application or permit, who claim that the enactment, enforcement or violation of this article caused injury or loss of any kind. 
( Ord. No. 16-05 , Pt. I, 5-10-16) 
Chapter 16 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Operation of motorized vehicles on school property. 
The operation of motorized vehicles of any nature in or on any yard, campus, playing field or open area of any public school, college or institution in the unincorporated area of the county, except on those areas designated by school authorities for use of motorized vehicles, is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1006) 
Sec. 16-2. - Fortunetelling. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or participate in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other kindred practices, businesses or professions where a charge is made or a donation accepted for such services. This section does not apply to astrology. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5002) 
State Law reference— Authority to prohibit fortunetelling, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-15. 
Sec. 16-3. - Selling, soliciting on public rights-of-way; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale or solicit for sale any food or beverage for human consumption from any pushcart, bicycle cart, motorized cart or other type of motor vehicle on the public streets, sidewalks or in the public rights-of- way of unincorporated areas of the county unless specifically allowed as set forth in this section. 
(b)  Pushcarts, bicycle carts, motorized carts or other type of motor vehicles are permitted to sell their products on the public streets, sidewalks or in the public rights-of-way of unincorporated areas of the county between the hours of noon and 8:00 p.m. only if they limit their inventory to the following categories: ice cream, popsicles, frozen desserts, candies, confections, chips, crackers, cookies, popcorn, pastries, and/or canned/bottled drinks for the purpose of retail sale. All items must be pre-packaged for sale. None of these vehicles may operate on the rights-of-way, streets, or sidewalks adjacent to any properties where "no solicitation" or similar signs are posted. 
(c)  A license from the Georgia Department of Agriculture must be prominently displayed for view on each vehicle and available for inspection upon request by a county employee. Each vehicle shall contain a copy of the current valid business occupation tax certificate issued for the business (not for the vehicle itself) by DeKalb County, another jurisdiction in Georgia, or another state, and such business occupation tax certificate must also be prominently displayed for view on the vehicle and available for inspection upon request by a county employee. 
(d)  All vehicles operating under this section shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Code and federal and state law, rules and regulations. Each vehicle must exhibit exterior signage showing it as a slow-moving vehicle. The placement, size and wording of such signage shall be determined by the police chief. No vehicle shall be allowed to remain stationary on any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way for longer than fifteen (15) minutes at a time. After the expiration of that time, the vehicle must move to a different location. Vehicles must be operated in a way that allows for unobstructed pedestrian and vehicular access to public streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way. No vehicle shall be operated within ten (10) feet of any fire hydrant, driveway, bus stop, subway entrance or exit, crosswalk, or intersection. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5003 ; Ord. No. 12-11, Pt. I, 7-24-12 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-11, Pt. I, adopted July 24, 2012 , changed the title of § 16-3 from "Selling, soliciting on public rights-of-way" to "Selling, soliciting on public rights-of-way; exceptions." 
Sec. 16-4. - Single-family residential real estate signs. 
(a)  Real estate signs on single-family residential properties shall be removed within ten (10) days of the signing of an agreement for the sale, rental or lease of the property advertised. In addition, the use of a "sold" attachment to these signs on single-family residential properties shall not be permitted except as provided in Acts 1975, p. 4533 [App. B, § 701]. 
(b)  This section shall be administered and enforced by designated employees of the public works department who may issue a citation requiring the appearance of any person violating its provisions before a court. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5004) 
Sec. 16-5. - Bird sanctuary designated; exceptions. 
(a)  The entire portion of the unincorporated county lying between Interstate Highway 285 and the west boundary of the county and all that tract or parcel of land bounded on the north by Rainbow Drive, bounded on the east by Wesley Chapel Road, bounded on the south by Interstate Highway 285 are designated as a bird sanctuary. No person shall trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot any bird or wildfowl, or rob or molest in any manner bird or wildfowl nests in this area. 
(b)  If starlings, feral pigeons or other birds are found in such situations in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the board of commissioners, the board shall direct the corrective action necessary to reduce or eliminate the problem, to be taken by the proper department of county administration. 
(c)  This action shall not restrict the activities of persons duly authorized by state or federal wildlife agencies to trap birds for banding, scientific or propagating purposes. 
(Code 1976, § 10-6001) 
Sec. 16-6. - Recorder's court's express jurisdiction. 
The jurisdiction of the DeKalb County Recorder's Court listed in 1959 Ga. Laws p. 3093, section 2 and section 31 is hereby affirmed. Said recorder's court is hereby granted all the general powers heretofore or hereafter granted by any Act of the General Assembly of Georgia to any police or recorder's court in this state, municipal or otherwise, including but not limited to exercising the same subject matter jurisdiction as the general assembly grants to municipal courts to adjudicate alleged violations of state law, except for offenses involving violations of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 
( Ord. No. 14-07 , Pt. I, 12-16-14 
Sec. 16-7. - Prosecution by the solicitor general of DeKalb County. 
The solicitor general of DeKalb County shall be the prosecuting attorney of the recorder's court and may assign other members of his or her staff to prosecute cases in said recorder's court. 
( Ord. No. 14-07 , Pt. I, 12-16-14 
Secs. 16-8—16-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 16-26. - Transporting building materials at night. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to haul or transport any building materials by means of any vehicle between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the driver of the vehicle has in possession documents establishing the ownership of the building materials or the vehicle is owned by a governmental entity or public utility and is operated by an authorized employee of such governmental entity or utility, or the vehicle is subject to regulations of the state public service commission or the interstate commerce commission. In this section, "building materials" includes any new materials customarily used in building or construction work and which have a reasonable fair market value in excess of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Code 1976, § 10-1012) 
Sec. 16-27. - Evasion of MARTA fares. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, hinder, interfere with or otherwise disrupt or disturb the operation of a public transit bus or rapid rail car by evasion of or attempted evasion of payment of the fare. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-120(b). As used in this section, "evasion of payment of the fare" includes the following acts, activities or conduct: 
(1)  Entry into or upon a rapid rail car or public transit bus without payment of the fare charged for transportation service. 
(2)  Misuse of a transfer, TransCard, pass, ticket or other evidence of payment of or prepayment of a fare issued by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) with the intent to avoid or to assist another in avoiding payment of the fare charged for transportation service. 
(3)  Use or attempted use of an unsigned MARTA TransCard for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service or refusal to sign such card upon request of an authorized agent or employee of MARTA. 
(4)  Use or attempted use of a signed MARTA TransCard by a person who is not the person whose name is signed or whose signature appears on the surface of the TransCard for the payment of the fare charged for transportation service, or refusal or failure to provide proof, upon request, that the person so using the TransCard is the person whose name is signed or whose signature appears upon the TransCard. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1013) 
Sec. 16-28. - Residential picketing prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in picketing upon, before, or about the private residence or home of any individual. 
(b)  Picketing shall include, but not be limited to, the following types of activity: 
(1)  Staging a public or private protest of any kind. 
(2)  Obstructing passage to or from a residence. 
(3)  Promoting a strike or a boycott at a residence. 
(4)  To intimidate or otherwise harass the resident. 
(c)  It is the purpose of this section to protect and preserve the home, inasmuch as the public health and welfare and the good order of the county require that citizens of the county enjoy a feeling of peace, well-being, and privacy in their homes at all times. 
(Ord. No. 89-15, § 1, 4-11-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-15, adopted April 11, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1, as § 16-28 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 16-29. - Littering on public and private property. 
(a)  Definitions: 
(1)  Litter means all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
(2)  Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential, commercial, governmental, farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
(b)  Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on any public or private property or waters in the unincorporated area of the county, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the county for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 89-26, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-26, adopted June 27, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 16-29 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Health regulations, Ch. 13; solid waste, Ch. 22. 
Secs. 16-30—16-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 16-41. - Crowding, pushing other persons. 
No person shall jostle or roughly crowd or push any person in any public place. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1003(6)) 
Sec. 16-42. - Public intoxication. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear on the streets or roads of the county or in any public place or place of business patronized by the public in a state of intoxication or incapacitation caused by illicit drugs, alcohol, concentrated vapors, or inhalants. The condition of intoxication or incapacitation shall be manifested by boisterousness, public indecency as defined by section 16-60, indecent acts, vulgar, profane, or loud language, unconsciousness, disorientation or the inability to care for his or her own needs or recognize obvious dangers. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1005; Ord. No. 16-03, Pt. I, 7-8-03) 
State Law reference— Public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 16-43. - Loitering—Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person after having been directed by an officer or member of the police department to move away therefrom, to remain or loiter in front of any church or other place of public worship during services therein, or in front of any theater, concert hall, ballroom, coffeehouse, tavern or other public place, or to loiter or idle away time around the hotels or on the sidewalks or public streets or roads of the county. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of loitering when the person is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(c)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1008; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 16-44. - Juvenile curfew. 
(a)  Definitions. Words or terms not defined in this section but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section 16-44 and in section 16-45, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult means a person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the lawful care and custody of a minor, or an emancipated minor. 
Curfew hours means the hours from 12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. each day. 
Emancipated minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18) who has had the disabilities of minority removed and been declared an emancipated minor by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a serious or life threatening medical problem/condition, a fire, natural disaster, automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
Establishment means any privately owned place of business which is open for business and to which the public is invited during curfew hours including but not limited to any teen club open during curfew hours, places of amusement or entertainment, malls, restaurants, and shops that are open during curfew hours. 
Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court or other adult. 
Minor means any person under the age of seventeen (17) years. 
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation owning, operating, managing, conducting or having control or custody of any establishment or public place. The term "operator" includes, but is not limited to, elected and appointed officials, managers, members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation. 
Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adopted parent or step-parent of a minor. 
Public place means any place owned or operated by a governmental entity to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access during curfew hours and includes, but is not limited to, streets, sidewalks, highways, alleys, and public schools, and school stadiums or athletic fields. 
Remain means to linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer, code enforcement officer, authorized county employee, the operator or other person in control of an establishment or a public place; and 
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that causes death or creates a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of any part of the human body. 
(b)  Curfew for minors. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any minor to remain in or at a public place or an establishment in unincorporated DeKalb County unsupervised by a parent or guardian during curfew hours except as allowed in subsection 16-44(c). 
(2)  It is unlawful for the parent or guardian of any minor to knowingly allow such minor to remain in or at any public place or establishment in unincorporated DeKalb County during curfew hours except as allowed in subsection 16-44(c). 
(3)  It is unlawful for an operator of an establishment or public place to knowingly allow a minor to remain in or at an establishment or public place in unincorporated DeKalb County during curfew hours except as allowed in subsection 16-44(c). 
(4)  It is a full defense to prosecution under this section that the operator of an establishment or public place promptly notified the DeKalb County Police Department that a minor was present on the premises during curfew hours and the minor refused to leave. 
(c)  Exceptions. The requirements of this section shall not apply during curfew hours in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; 
(2)  When the minor is involved in an emergency or if such minor is seeking medical treatment; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is engaged in lawful employment or is going to or returning directly home from lawful employment; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with the consent of a parent or guardian. All minors engaged in interstate travel through unincorporated DeKalb County are exempt from the requirements of this section 16-44; 
(7)  When the minor is traveling with the consent of a parent or guardian and is in an airport, bus station or other waiting or business area of a facility that provides transportation from one (1) place to another; 
(8)  When the minor is an emancipated minor; or 
(9)  When applicable law or regulation authorizes the minor to be in a public place or establishment. 
(d)  Violations and jurisdiction. 
(1)  Any person who does anything prohibited by sections 16-44 and 16-45 or who fails to do anything required by sections 16-44 and 16-45, upon citation or summons by a police or code enforcement officer or other authorized county employee, and judgment or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the Recorders Court and Juvenile Court of DeKalb County, shall be subject to appropriate penalties as imposed by the court. A minor, parent, guardian or operator of an establishment or public place who violates this section for the first time shall be given a warning citation. 
(2)  Adjudication of violations of this section by minors shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-1-1 et seq. 
(3)  Before taking any enforcement action, the authorized county officer or employee shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place or establishment. The authorized county officer or employee shall not issue a citation or make an arrest unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstance, that no exception listed in subsection 16-44(c) is present. 
( Ord. No. 13-14 , Pt. I, 9-24-13) 
Editor's note— Part I of Ord. No. 13-14 , adopted Sept. 24, 2013, repealed the former § 16-44, and enacted a new § 16-44 as set out herein. The former § 16-44 pertained to Loitering—minors and derived from the 1976 Code, § 10-1009. 
Sec. 16-45. - Responsibility of operators of establishments. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of operators of establishments to post curfew hours. A sign containing the following language shall be conspicuously posted at all public entrances and exits of every establishment: "This Establishment complies with the Curfew Hours set by DeKalb County. With few exceptions, Minors, unless accompanied by a Parent or Guardian, are not allowed in this Establishment from Midnight until 5:00 A.M. each day. Violations of the Curfew Hours will be reported to DeKalb County." All signs shall be no smaller than two (2) square feet and the lettering on the sign shall be no smaller than one (1) inch in size. 
(b)  The posting of signs required by this section does not relieve operators of any establishment from compliance with section 16-44. 
( Ord. No. 13-14 , Pt. I, 9-24-13) 
Editor's note— Part I of Ord. No. 13-14 , adopted Sept. 24, 2013, repealed the former § 16-45, and enacted a new § 16-45 as set out herein. The former § 16-45 pertained to Loitering—responsibility of proprietors, managers, etc., and derived from the 1976 Code, § 10-1010. 
Sec. 16-45.1. - Loitering—For purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in public for the purpose of soliciting or procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(Ord. No. 89-27, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-27, adopted June 27, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 16-45.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 16-45.2. - Same—For purposes of engaging in drug-related activity. 
(a)  Legislative findings and intent. 
(1)  The governing authority of DeKalb County finds that the increase throughout the county of loitering in public places for the purposes of unlawful drug-related activity, or in effect, "open air" drug dealing, has become extremely disturbing and disruptive to residents and businesses. This activity has contributed not only to the loss of access to and enjoyment of public places, but also to an enhanced sense of fear and intimidation and disorder. 
(2)  Loitering for purposes of unlawful drug-related activity usually includes a dominate presence of those persons engaging in such activity by approaching pedestrians, encouraging the presence of vehicle and pedestrian traffic for the purpose of unlawful drug-related activity in and out of residential areas, to or from motor vehicles or in parking lots. Such presence carries with it an implicit threat to visitors and residents to avoid the use of these public places. The avoidance of such places by law-abiding citizens leads to an increased opportunity for the unlawful criminal activity and furthers the decay of the neighborhood. 
(3)  The county has a strong interest in ensuring that citizens feel safe in their neighborhoods, in safeguarding the economic vitality of its business districts, and in preserving public places for their intended purposes. 
(4)  This section is not intended to limit any person from exercising their right to assemble or engage in any other constitutionally protected activity. This section applies to all persons with the requisite intent to induce another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined in section 16-43, in or near any thoroughfare, place open to the public, or any public or private place in order to induce, entice, solicit or procure another to engage in unlawful drug-related activity. 
(1)  "Unlawful drug-related activity" means conduct which constitutes an offense defined in O.C.G.A. Tit. 16, Ch. 13, as amended; conduct which constitutes complicity to commit such an offense by, for example, acting as a lookout; or conduct which constitutes conspiracy to commit such an offense. 
(2)  "Public place" means an area open to the public or exposed to public view and includes streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles, whether moving or not, and buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(c)  A police officer who observes a person loitering under circumstances that provide the officer with a reasonable basis to believe unlawful drug-related activity is occurring or has occurred may detain the individual for the purpose of investigating whether the person is in violation of this section. 
(d)  A police officer may not detain an individual under this Code section unless both of the following elements are satisfied: 
(1)  The person engages in one (1) or more of the following behaviors: 
a.  The person passes or receives from a passer-by, bystander or person in a motor vehicle money, objects having characteristics consistent with controlled substances, and/or an envelope, bag or other container that could reasonably contain such objects or money; 
b.  The person conceals or attempts to conceal an object having characteristics consistent with controlled substances and/or an envelope, bag, clear plastic baggie or other container that could reasonably contain such objects; 
c.  The person flees or obscures himself upon seeing law enforcement officers; 
d.  The person communicates the fact that law enforcement officers are in the vicinity to another person in a manner that suggests that the communication is a warning; or 
e.  The officer observes the person in possession of any instrument or object that is designed or marketed as useful primarily for one (1) or more of the following purposes: 
1.  To inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce marijuana or a controlled substance into the human body; 
2.  To enhance the effect of marijuana or a controlled substance on the human body; 
3.  To test the strength, effectiveness, or purity of marijuana or a controlled substance; 
4.  To process or prepare marijuana or a controlled substance for introduction into the human body; 
5.  To conceal any quantity of marijuana or a controlled substance; or 
6.  To contain or hold marijuana or a controlled substance while it is being introduced into the human body. 
(2)  One (1) of the following factors applies: 
a.  The officer is aware that, within the preceding three (3) years, the person has been convicted of an offense defined in O.C.G.A. Tit. 16, Ch. 13, or of complicity to commit such an offense, or of conspiracy to commit such an offense with in the preceding three (3) years; 
b.  The officer has knowledge of a specific reliable tip concerning unlawful drug-related activity at a specific location, and the person who is found loitering is doing so at a time, in a place or in a manner that is otherwise consistent with the details provided in the tip; 
c.  The person is loitering in an area that has been designated a notorious drug-related activity area as defined in subsection (g), below; 
d.  The person is in an area where he is prohibited by court order from being, and the officer is aware of the court order; 
e.  The officer knows that the person has been previously convicted of loitering with the intention of engaging in unlawful drug-related activity under this section; or 
f.  Any vehicle the person has approached or communicated through is registered to an individual who has been convicted of an unlawful drug-related activity in the previous three (3) years, and the officer is aware of that fact. 
(e)  No arrest may be made for a violation of this section unless the arresting officer first affords the person an opportunity to explain the person's presence and conduct, unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable to afford such an opportunity, and no one shall be convicted of violating this section if it appears at trial that the explanation given at the scene was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
(f)  If a police officer who detains a person pursuant to this Code section develops probable cause to believe that the person is in violation of this Code section, the officer may order the person to immediately leave the location and to remain at least five hundred (500) feet away from the location for at least five (5) hours. In the event that person refuses to comply with such an order, the police officer may arrest the person and charge him with a violation of this section. 
(g)  The county governing authority may, by written directive and after consultation with the chief of police, clearly and publicly designate areas of the unincorporated county that are frequently associated with excessive incidents of drug-related offenses, including offenses involving controlled substances, as defined in O.C.G.A. Tit. 16, Ch. 13, or marijuana. The chief of police shall file such designations with the clerk to the board of commissioners and with the clerk of the superior court. Prior to recommending such a determination under this subsection, the chief of police shall consult, as he or she deems appropriate, with persons who are knowledgeable about the effects of drug-related activity in areas in which this section may be enforced. Such persons may include, but need not be limited to, members of the department of police with special training or experience related to drug-related activity; other personnel of that department with particular knowledge of drug-related activities in the proposed designated area; appointed and elected officials of the area; and community-based organizations. The chief of police shall develop and implement procedures for the bi-annual review and update of any designations made under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 90-42, § 1, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 18-03, Pt. I, 7-22-03) 
Sec. 16-46. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-04, Pt. I, adopted July 13, 2004, repealed former § 16-46 of the Code, which pertained to noise and derived from the 1976 Code, § 10-2002. 
Sec. 16-47. - Smoking on public transportation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for occupants on Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) buses and railcars to smoke tobacco while the buses and railcars are transporting passengers within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, the word "occupants" shall mean any driver or passenger riding in and upon a bus or railcar operated by the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority. 
(c)  Violators of this section shall be subject to a fine which shall not be less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1976, § 10-4005) 
Sec. 16-48. - Unauthorized ambulances at scenes of emergency. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, representative or employee of any ambulance to go to any place where an emergency has occurred unless called there by a victim of the emergency, the victim's authorized representative, the police department or an observer of the emergency capable of being identified. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, representative or employee of any ambulance to go to the place of an emergency by reason of information received from police department radio. 
(c)  Any unauthorized or uncalled person appearing at the scene of an emergency to offer ambulance service shall be deemed a violator of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4006; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 16-49. - Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings or processions. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or knowingly commit any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Ord. No. 89-25, § 1, 6-27-89) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-25, adopted June 27, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as § 16-49 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference— Public meetings, § 16-92; parades, § 17-211 et seq. 
Sec. 16-50. - Throwing objects. 
No person shall recklessly or knowingly throw or propel any stone, brick, piece of wood or other object at any person, vehicle, house, building or other structure or object, or across or upon any private or public property. 
(Ord. No. 90-20, § 1, 7-24-90) 
Sec. 16-51. - Defecating or urinating on public property or in certain areas. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to defecate or urinate on or adjacent to any street or sidewalk, or in the halls, elevators, stairways, or any other area designated for public passage within any public or commercial buildings, or on any property open to public view. 
(Ord. No. 90-21, § 1, 7-24-90) 
Sec. 16-52. - False police alarms. 
No person shall knowingly and willfully harass or attempt to harass or mislead any police officer by false alarms or unauthorized use of any device of whatever nature to summon police aid without reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. 90-22, § 1, 7-24-90) 
Sec. 16-53. - Criminal impersonation. 
(a)  As used in this section, "intent to defraud" means the use of deception with the intention to injure another's interest which has economic or monetary value. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of criminal impersonation if the individual: 
(1)  Assumes a false identity and commits any act in their assumed character with the intent to defraud another; or 
(2)  Pretends to be a representative of some person or organization and commits any act in their pretended capacity with the intent to defraud another. 
(Ord. No. 90-23, § 1, 7-24-90) 
Sec. 16-54. - False representation of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatever for the purpose of gaining entrance to events or establishments that require a minimum age including, but not limited to, bars, nightclubs, movies, video stores, bookstores or bingo parlors. 
(Ord. No. 90-36, § 1, 10-9-90) 
Sec. 16-55. - Schools—Unauthorized persons entering school buildings. 
No person shall enter or remain in any public, private or parochial school building between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on days that school is in session (or until 10:00 p.m. at those schools which have extended sessions), who is not a regularly enrolled student, teacher or employee at that school, unless the person shall have first and immediately proceeded to the administrative offices and identified themself to the principal or the principal's agent and receives permission to remain on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 90-29, § 1, 8-14-90) 
Sec. 16-56. - Same—Unauthorized persons not to remain in school buildings or on school grounds after being requested to leave. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter and remain in any public, private, or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds after being directed to leave by the principal of the school or by someone with lawful authority. 
(Ord. No. 90-30, § 1, 8-14-90) 
Sec. 16-57. - Same—Creating a disturbance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to create a disturbance in any public, private or parochial school or on the surrounding school grounds lawfully used for school activities while such recreational areas are in use or other activities are in progress thereon. 
(b)  A disturbance, for purposes of this section, shall be defined as any act which may be reasonably expected to interfere with the activities within the school or school activities on the school grounds or fields while such activities are in progress thereon. 
(Ord. No. 90-31, § 1, 8-14-90) 
Sec. 16-58. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to act in a loud and boisterous, reckless, unruly or violent manner for the purpose of insulting, degrading, or inciting another or a group of individuals in a public place. 
(b)  It is not the intent of this section to restrict any individual's right to free speech. 
(Ord. No. 90-32, § 1, 8-14-90) 
Sec. 16-59. - Unauthorized persons entering vacant buildings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or to remain in a vacant or unoccupied building or on any portion of vacant land upon which such vacant building is located unless with permission of an authorized agent of said property; provided, such building or vacant property is prominently marked by a posted notice which is easily seen from a distance of at least fifty (50) feet that informs the public such property is vacant or unoccupied and unauthorized persons are prohibited from entering. 
(Ord. No. 92-06, § 1, 5-12-92) 
Sec. 16-60. - Public indecency—Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in sections 16-60—16-64, shall have the meanings indicated below: 
Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitalia, pubic area or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering; the showing of the female breast with less than fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple; the exposure of any device, costume, or covering which gives the appearance of or simulates male or female genitalia, pubic hair, natal cleft, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region; or the exposure of any device worn as a cover over the nipples and/or areola of the female breast, which device simulates and gives the appearance of nipples and/or areola. 
Public place includes, but is not limited to, buildings and enclosed places owned by or open to the general public, including stores, shopping malls, modes of transportation whether moving or stationary, including cars, buses, trains, where nudity might reasonably be expected to be viewed by members of the public, and places of entertainment, including bars, restaurants, clubs, theaters, dance halls, banquet halls, party rooms or halls whether limited to specific members, restricted to adults or to patrons invited to attend, or otherwise and whether or not an admission charge is levied and all outdoor places owned by or open to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 16-61. - Same—Prohibited conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in any of the following acts in a public place: 
(1)  An exposure of the sexual organs; or 
(2)  An appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 16-62. - Same—Exemptions. 
The prohibition set forth in section 16-61 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any child under ten (10) years of age; or 
(2)  Any female person exposing a breast in the process of breastfeeding an infant under two (2) years old. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 16-63. - Same—Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of section 16-61 shall be punished as provided in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 16-64. - Same—Repeal of ordinances expressly or implicitly permitting public nudity. 
Any ordinances in the Code of DeKalb County and parts thereof which expressly or implicitly permit public nudity are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 01-11, Pt. I, 6-26-01) 
Sec. 16-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Telephonic alarm system with public safety emergency telephone line, § 3-1. 

Sec. 16-66. - Unlawful possession of knives. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, for the purpose of offense or defense, to possess on such person or have at the person's immediate disposal on the streets and roads of the county or in any public place or place of business patronized by the public any of the following instruments: 
(1)  Any knife which has a spring-loaded blade that opens automatically by pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, commonly called a switchblade, swish blade or swiss blade for blades that open on the side and stiletto for blades extending from an end. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two (2) inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three (3) inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close. 
(4)  Any razor blade alone or inserted in a handle in such manner as to expose either a sharp corner or a sharp edge. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1007) 
Sec. 16-67. - Reckless operation of motor vehicle upon parking facility or walkway. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon any parking facility, public or private, vehicle-access or pedestrian walkway of any parking facility by sudden starting, stopping or turning so as to endanger the person or property of another. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1003(19)) 
Sec. 16-68. - Creating hazardous or offensive condition. 
No person shall create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by an act which serves no legitimate purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1003(22)) 
Sec. 16-69. - Consumption, transporting open containers of alcoholic beverages. 
No person shall consume alcoholic beverages or transport open containers of alcoholic beverages on or upon public areas, except where authorized under the provisions of section 19-30 pertaining to the issuance of a permit for the consumption of alcoholic beverages in county parks. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1003(23)) 
Sec. 16-70. - Aiding, encouraging minor to commit unlawful act. 
No person shall aid, abet or encourage a minor to do any act which constitutes disorderly conduct or a breach of the peace. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1003(24)) 
Sec. 16-71. - Interfering with operation of school bus. 
No person shall obstruct, hinder, interfere with or otherwise disrupt or disturb the operation or operator of a public school bus. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1003(25)) 
Sec. 16-72. - Discharge of weapons. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a gun, rifle, pistol, revolver, cannon, air rifle, firearm of any type or shoot a slingshot or bow and arrow within the unincorporated area of the county, within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of any residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer while in the discharge of official duties, nor to any person hunting upon such person's premises or the premises of another with the owner's consent in that area of the county zoned for agriculture by a zoning ordinance, order or resolution of the board of commissioners, nor to any person, or group of persons, who has first obtained the written permission for this from the chief executive. Permission will be granted upon a showing that the public safety will not be endangered. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1011) 
Sec. 16-73. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-01, adopted Feb. 27, 1996, repealed § 16-73, which pertained to registration, sale and disposition of weapons. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 16-74. - Halting or impeding flow of traffic. 
No person shall congregate with another or others in or on any public right-of-way or place so as to halt or impede the flow of vehicle or pedestrian traffic after having been directed to clear such public right-of-way or place by a police officer or any other authorized law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 90-24, § 1, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 90-41, § 1, 12-11-90) 
Secs. 16-75—16-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Telephonic alarm systems transmitting to public safety telephone lines, § 3-1. 

Sec. 16-91. - Soliciting, begging on county property. 
Without the express written consent of the chief executive, it shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit, or sell goods, wares or other objects or services within any building, or on any grounds, sidewalks or other ways owned by or under control of the county, its agencies, authorities, commissions, boards, bureaus or other county entities. 
(Code 1976, § 10-7001) 
Sec. 16-92. - Public meetings. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted as prohibiting use of county property for meeting purposes by citizens of the county, provided such meetings are to be held at a time which will not interfere with regular and/or official county administrative business, and that no unusual maintenance and security costs will be placed upon the county; provided, further, that written consent shall have been first obtained from the chief executive. 
(b)  As an exception to subsection (a) of this section, there shall be designated a location within the courthouse campus area which may be used as a public forum under peaceful and lawful conditions, at the will of any citizen, provided such assembly does not interfere with county business or encumber any person having or desiring to conduct business in the county facilities. The subject area shall be identified by the chief executive and shall be subject to change as conditions necessitate. 
(Code 1976, § 10-7002) 
Cross reference— Unlawful to disrupt, prevent, etc., lawful meetings, etc., § 16-49. 
Secs. 16-93—16-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH 
DIVISION I. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 16-96—16-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CLEAN INDOOR AIR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, adopted Dec. 19, 2002, deleted former Ch. 16, Art. VI, Div. 2, in its entirety and enacted new provisions as Ch. 16, Art. VI, Div. 2, as herein set out. Former Ch. 16, Art. VI, Div. 2, §§ 16-100—16-106, pertained to smoking in public places and derived from Ord. No. 92-32, § 1, adopted Nov. 10, 1992. 
Cross reference— Smoking prohibited in certain areas of airport, § 6-52; smoking in vehicles for hire, § 15-391; MARTA passengers prohibited from smoking, § 16-47. 

Sec. 16-100. - Title. 
This division shall be known, cited, and referred to as the DeKalb County Smoke-Free Air Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02 ; Ord. No. 12-17, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 16-101. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The DeKalb County Board of Commissioners does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke is a cause of disease in healthy non-smokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. 
(2)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities, and cancer. 
(b)  Accordingly, the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners finds and declares that the purposes of this division are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and public and private places of employment; and 
(2)  To guarantee the right of non-smokers to breathe smoke-free air; and 
(3)  To recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02) 
Sec. 16-102. - Definitions. 
Words or phrases not defined in this division, but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Child care facility means any institution, society, agency, or facility, whether incorporated or not, which either primarily or incidentally provides full-time care for children under seventeen (17) years of age outside of their own homes, subject to such exceptions as may be provided in rules and regulations of the State Board of Human Resources, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 49-5-3, as amended. 
Common area means only those outdoor areas of apartments, condominiums, townhomes, residential subdivisions, rooming houses, retirement facilities, nursing homes, personal care homes, and other multi-unit residential property that are either commonly used or owned by its residents and intended for the common enjoyment of its residents, or accessible to residents of more than one (1) dwelling located on the property. Common areas include, but are not limited to, outdoor recreational areas within a development, and common open space that is the central organizing feature of a development. 
Dining area means an interior or exterior (such as porch, patio or courtyard) area containing a counter or tables upon which food is served. 
E-cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, that creates a vapor of nicotine and simulates smoking. This term includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptive name. 
Employee means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit. 
Employer means any person who employs the services of an individual person. 
Enclosed means closed in by a roof and at least three (3) sides with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. It includes areas commonly described as public lobbies or lobbies when they are in an area that is enclosed as defined herein. 
Establishment means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture. The term "establishment" includes but is not limited to the following: 
(1)  Automobile dealerships, furniture or other showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale; 
(2)  Grocery, pharmacy, specialty, department and other stores which sell goods or merchandise; 
(3)  Service stations, stores or shops for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, motor vehicles or other items or products; 
(4)  Barbershops, beauty shops, cleaners, laundromats and other establishments offering services to the general public; 
(5)  Video arcade, pool hall, and other amusement centers; 
(6)  Offices providing professional services such as legal, medical, dental, engineering, and architectural services; 
(7)  Banks, savings and loan offices, and other financial establishments; 
(8)  Hotels and motels and other places that provide accommodations to the public; and 
(9)  Restaurants and cafeterias. 
Freestanding bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and which derives at least fifty (50) percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of beverages, including but not limited to taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
Health care facility means any licensed general or specialized hospital, institutional infirmary, public health center, or diagnostic and treatment center, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-7-1(2), as amended. 
Intermediate care (nursing) home means any long-term custodial care facility that provides for the physical and mental welfare of the aged. 
Outdoor recreational public place means any outdoor area of a place to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted that is used, or intended for use, as a recreational area, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "outdoor recreational public place" includes but is not limited to, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, athletic or sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, horseback riding trails, swimming pool facilities, aquatic areas, water parks, skateboard parks, amusement parks, stadiums, amphitheaters, beaches, lakes, and outdoor areas of roller- and ice-skating rinks, concert venues, sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, bingo facilities, video arcades, pool halls, bowling facilities, amusement centers, and theaters. 
Personal care home means a residential facility having at least twenty-five (25) beds and providing, for compensation, protective care and oversight of ambulatory, nonrelated persons who need a monitored environment but who do not have injuries or disabilities which require chronic or convalescent care, including medical, nursing, or intermediate care. Personal care homes include those facilities which monitor daily residents' functioning and location, have the capability for crisis intervention, and provide supervision in areas of nutrition, medication, and provision of transient medical care. Such term does not include old age residences which are devoted to independent living units with kitchen facilities in which residents have the option of preparing and serving some or all of their own meals, or boarding facilities which do not provide personal care. Personal care homes shall also mean residential care facilities for the elderly. 
Place of employment means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, restrooms, hallways, employee lounges, cafeterias and snack bars, conference and meeting rooms, lobbies and reception areas. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult day care facility, or a health care facility. The dining area of a restaurant shall be treated as a place of employment under this division. 
Playground means any outdoor area that is used or designed to be used by children for recreation, including areas containing play or sports equipment or designated or landscaped for play or sports activities if such outdoor area is located in a common area, or on public or private elementary or secondary school grounds, or on property owned, leased, or operated by DeKalb County. A playground in the outdoor area of a private residence is not a playground regulated by this division. 
Public place means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including but not limited to, restaurants, stores, waiting rooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, concession areas, public transit, restrooms, shopping malls, elevators, service lines, service stations, offices providing professional services, banks and other financial institutions, educational, recreational and health care facilities, childcare facilities, auditoriums, enclosed facilities in outdoor recreational public places, theaters, arenas, meeting rooms, repair shops, automobile dealerships, convention halls, and polling places. Porches, courtyards or decks with a contiguous connection to a public place shall be considered a public place. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a childcare facility, an adult daycare facility or a health care facility. 
Restaurant means any establishment or area which is primarily devoted to the serving of food to the public or guests and which contains a dining area. The term "restaurant" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a freestanding bar area as previously defined. The term "restaurant" shall include any dining area located within a health care, educational, or childcare facility. Food courts within enclosed shopping malls shall be treated as restaurants under this division. 
Retail tobacco store means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
Service line means any indoor or outdoor line at which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including but not limited to ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, e-cigarette, oral smoking device, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02 ; Ord. No. 12-17, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 16-103. - Prohibited smoking. 
Except as allowed in this division, smoking is prohibited in all public places, outdoor recreational public places, common areas, and places of employment. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02 ; Ord. No. 12-17, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 16-104. - Prohibition of smoking applicable to county property. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all common areas, public places, places of employment, outdoor recreational public places, parking lots, and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02 ; Ord. No. 12-17, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 16-105. - Reasonable distance. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited within: 
(1)  Twenty (20) feet of any outside entrance, operable window, or ventilation system of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place; 
(2)  Twenty (20) feet of outdoor seating or serving areas of restaurants; or 
(3)  Twenty (20) feet of any service line. 
(b)  Smoking shall be allowed in the parking lot(s) of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place owned, leased or operated by anyone other than DeKalb County, except in the following situations: 
(1)  Smoking in such parking lot(s) is prohibited if it occurs in an area of the parking lot that is within twenty (20) feet of any outside entrance, operable window or ventilation system of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place. 
(2)  Smoking is prohibited in the parking lot(s) of a common area, public place, place of employment, or outdoor recreational public place if the owner, operator, manager, employer, or other person who controls the common area, public place, place of employment or outdoor recreational public place has posted in the parking lot(s) "No Smoking" signs that comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02 ; Ord. No. 12-17, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 16-106. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The smoking prohibition shall not apply in the following areas: 
(1)  "Freestanding bar" areas; 
(2)  Retail tobacco stores; 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments, as defined by this Code; 
(4)  Private residences, including private residences which may serve as an office workplace, except if used as a childcare, an adult day care or a health care facility; 
(5)  Any property owned or leased by municipalities, the State of Georgia, or the federal government; 
(6)  Designated smoking rooms in hotels and motels rented by guests provided that such designated smoking rooms shall not comprise more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of rooms available for rent; and 
(7)  Outdoor areas of places of employment, except where an owner or employer declares that the outdoor area is a smokefree environment, as provided in this division. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this division, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this division may declare that the entire establishment is a non-smoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02) 
Sec. 16-107. - Employers' responsibility. 
(a)  It is the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees of public places, and places of employment but employers are not required to make expenditures or structural changes to create a smoke free work area. 
(b)  Each employer having an enclosed place of employment located within unincorporated DeKalb County is encouraged to adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy that incorporates the smoking prohibitions of this division. 
(c)  The written smoking policy should be provided to all employees. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02) 
Sec. 16-108. - Posting of signs and notification. 
(a)  At every entrance to every place where smoking is prohibited by this division, "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the owner, operator, manager, employer or other person having control of such building or area. 
(b)  In every area where smoking is prohibited by this division, all ashtrays shall be removed by the owner, operator, manager, employer or other person having control of the area. 
(c)  A copy of the DeKalb County Smoke-Free Air Ordinance shall be given to each applicant for a DeKalb County business license. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02 ; Ord. No. 12-17, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 16-109. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any police officer, as defined by Georgia law, may issue a citation for any violation of this division. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this division may initiate enforcement with the chief of police or designee. 
(c)  Any owner, operator or manager of any establishment regulated by this division shall inform persons whom they witness violate this division of the appropriate provisions, and request compliance. In the event persons violating this division refuse to comply with this division after being informed by such owner, operator, or manager, the person smoking, and not the owner, operator, or manager, shall be subject to an action for violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02) 
Sec. 16-110. - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because such employee, applicant, or customer exercises any right to a smoke-free environment as afforded by this division. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02) 
Sec. 16-111. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; 
(2)  A fine not exceeding seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for a second violation of this division within one (1) year; and 
(3)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional violation of this division within one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02) 
Sec. 16-112. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This division shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating smoking the county is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the county, its officers nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this division caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 41-02, Pt. I, 12-19-02) 
Secs. 16-113—16-199. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGULATION OF HAZARDOUS SPORTS ACTIVITY 

Sec. 16-200. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The governing authority recognizes that the DeKalb County Department of Parks and Recreation, with its numerous after-school and weekend athletic programs, plays an integral role in promoting physical activity among DeKalb County's youth. 
(b)  The governing authority also finds that coaches who require persons under the age of eighteen (18) to participate in exercise when the heat index is at or above ninety-five (95) degrees Fahrenheit may be putting those citizens in a hazardous situation. 
(c)  Accordingly, the governing authority finds and declares that the purpose of this division is to protect the public health and welfare of its children by prohibiting such exercise when it may be hazardous to their health. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, Pt. I, 8-22-06) 
Sec. 16-201. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Athlete means a person or group of persons under the age of eighteen (18) years who are participating in an individual or group sports activity. 
Coach means a person who trains or directs athletes in individual or group sports activities. 
Heat index means an accurate measure of how hot it actually feels when the relative humidity is added to the actual air temperature. 
Sports activity means any outdoor or non-air conditioned indoor activity involving physical exertion and skill governed by rules or customs and often undertaken competitively but does not include outdoor or indoor activities that occur in water. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, Pt. I, 8-22-06) 
Sec. 16-202. - Prohibited activity. 
Department of parks and recreation coaches and staff shall not allow athletes to participate in individual or group sports activities when the heat index is at or above ninety-five (95) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, Pt. I, 8-22-06) 
Sec. 16-203. - Policies. 
(a)  Parks and recreation coaches and staff involved in instructing or training athletes within unincorporated DeKalb County shall adopt, implement and maintain a heat illness prevention policy that incorporates the applicable provisions of this division. 
(b)  The DeKalb County Board of Health (DCBOH) shall assist the department of parks and recreation in educating their staff on signs and symptoms of heatstroke and heat exhaustion, providing literature and guidelines regarding hazardous sport activity. 
(c)  The DeKalb County Board of Health shall closely monitor the heat index, notifying the department of parks and recreation when the index has reached or exceeded ninety-five (95) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, Pt. I, 8-22-06) 
Sec. 16-204. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  Any police officer, as defined by Georgia law, may issue a citation for any violation of this division that occurs within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this division within the unincorporated area of the county may initiate enforcement with the chief of police or designee. 
(c)  Any person who violates any provision of this division in unincorporated DeKalb County shall be subject to the penalties in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, Pt. I, 8-22-06) 
Sec. 16-205. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This division shall not be interpreted or construed to regulate sports activities where such activity is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating sports activities in this manner the county is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the county, its officers, nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this division caused injury. 
(Ord. No. 06-14, Pt. I, 8-22-06) 
Secs. 16-206—16-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SANITARY AND FUNCTIONAL RESTROOM FACILITIES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 15-08 , Pt. I, adopted Nov. 10, 2015, repealed the former div. 4, §§ 16-211—16-215, and enacted a new div. 4 to read as set out herein. The former div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-01, Pt. I, adopted March 25, 2014. 

Sec. 16-211. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The governing authority of DeKalb County, Georgia, finds that the existence of public restroom facilities in bad repair constitutes a nuisance, as recognized in chapter 13, article III, section 13-51(1) of this Code. 
(b)  The governing authority of DeKalb County, Georgia, further finds that the existence of public restrooms in facilities must be regulated to avoid such a nuisance. 
(c)  Accordingly, the governing authority of DeKalb County, Georgia, finds and declares that the purpose of this division is to protect the public health and welfare of patrons and employees of facilities with public restrooms by prohibiting the existence of such restrooms in a state of bad repair. 
( Ord. No. 15-08 , Pt. I, 11-10-15) 
Sec. 16-212. - Definitions. 
Words or terms not defined in this section but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words terms and phrases, when used in this section 16-211 through 16-215, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bad repair means a state that does not permit the use of the restroom for the designed purpose, with adequate sanitary conditions. 
Facilities means any business, store, office or other place where goods or services are sold or provided as part of a commercial venture, public primary or secondary school, as well as DeKalb County buildings and parks. 
Owner means the business occupation tax certificate ("business license") holder or employee with supervisory authority for the facility and, as the agent for the county or board of education, the employee with supervisory authority for the facility, including but not limited to the superintendent, the principal of the facility, the county executive assistant, or director of facilities management. 
Public restroom means a room with toilet(s) within a facility that is designated for use as a bathroom by patrons and/or visitors. 
( Ord. No. 15-08 , Pt. I, 11-10-15) 
Sec. 16-213. - Prohibited nuisance. 
Facilities with public restrooms are prohibited from allowing those restrooms to exist in a state of bad repair during operating hours. 
( Ord. No. 15-08 , Pt. I, 11-10-15) 
Sec. 16-214. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  With respect to all facilities, the provisions of this division may be enforced by DeKalb County Code Enforcement Officers. Code enforcement officers are encouraged to issue warnings to obtain compliance with requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  When inspecting the cafeteria of a public primary or secondary school, the board of health shall also inspect the student's restroom closest to the cafeteria. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to report a violation may do so with code enforcement officers. 
(d)  The owner of any facility that is found to have public restroom(s) in bad repair may be subject to a fine in accordance with section 1-10, with the minimum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) citations issued against the county or board of education shall list the agent, but expressly seek convictions against the public entity with corresponding sentences/fines imposed against the county or board of education. 
( Ord. No. 15-08 , Pt. I, 11-10-15) 
Sec. 16-215. - Other applicable laws and disclaimer. 
This division shall not be interpreted or construed to permit public restrooms in bad repair where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. By regulating public restrooms the county is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general health and welfare of its citizens. By this enactment, neither the county, its officers nor its employees are liable in money damages to any person who claims that any breach of this division caused injury. 
( Ord. No. 15-08 , Pt. I, 11-10-15) 
Secs. 16-216—16-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - NOISE ORDINANCE 

Sec. 16-301. - Purpose. 
(a)  DeKalb County seeks to prevent plainly audible sound from disturbing the county's residents in their homes during typical sleeping hours, as such sound jeopardizes the public health, welfare, and safety of the county's residents and degrades the quality of life in the county. This article applies to the unincorporated areas of the county. 
(b)  This article applies to any sound projected, emitted or transmitted between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound is plainly audible anywhere within the interior of a single-family detached sealed dwelling in a residential area. This article further applies to any sound projected, emitted or transmitted between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound is plainly audible in a common area of a multifamily dwelling in a residential area. 
(c)  Most sound within a commercial area, industrial area, or a mixed-use development shall be regulated in division 2 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 16-302. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, certain phrases and words are defined below. Words or phrases not defined in this article, but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, Georgia, shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"A" weighted sound level means the sound level reported in units of dB(A) approximating the response of human hearing when measuring sounds of low to moderate intensity as measured using the "A" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
"C" weighted sound level means the sound level reported in units of dB(C) as measured using the "C" weighting network with a sound level meter meeting the standards set forth in ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
Commercial area means any parcel of land which is zoned for any commercial use, including regional commercial centers, neighborhood and community-oriented stores, shopping centers and other developed centers where commercial land uses predominate. Such area includes property zoned O-I, O-I-T, C-2, O-D, NS, C-1 and any property zoned OCR, excluding property used for residential use. 
Common area means any portion of residential property that is either commonly used or owned by its residents, is intended for the common enjoyment of its residents, or is accessible to residents of more than one (1) dwelling located on the property and includes, but is not limited to, closed and open hallways, stairwells, stairways, elevators, lobbies, parking lots, parking garages, indoor and outdoor recreational areas within the development, laundry rooms, mailbox areas, yards, and open space that is the central organizing feature of a development. 
Decibel (dB) means the unit for the measurement of sound pressure based upon a reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals (zero (0) decibels), i.e., the average threshold of hearing for a person with very good hearing. 
Dwelling means one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for humans. 
Industrial area means any parcel of land which is zoned for industrial use, including property used for light and heavy distribution, warehouses, assembly, manufacturing, quarrying, truck terminals and landfills. Such area includes property zoned M-1 and M-2 and includes any commercial land uses allowed in M-2. 
Mixed-use development means a development which incorporates a variety of two (2) or more different land uses, buildings or structures that include both primary residential uses and primary nonresidential uses as part of the same development. Such uses may include, but not be limited to, residential, office, commercial, institutional, recreational, or public open space in a compact urban setting that encourages pedestrian-oriented development that can result in measurable reductions in traffic impacts. Such a development would have interconnecting pedestrian and vehicular access and circulation. 
Multifamily dwelling means a building designed for and containing more than one (1) dwelling, and shall include single-family attached dwellings, multifamily dwelling units, apartments, duplexes, triplexes, condominiums and attached townhomes. 
Plainly audible means any sound which can be heard or detected by the unaided and unimpaired human ear. Words and phrases need not be discernable in order for them to be considered plainly audible. 
Residential area means any parcel of land which is zoned for any residential use, including single-family detached or attached dwellings, multifamily dwellings, or mobile home parks. Such area includes any property zoned O-1 or OCR which is used for multifamily dwellings, and any property zoned C-1 which is used for multifamily dwellings. 
Sealed dwelling means any dwelling that has all of its windows and doors closed. 
Single-family detached dwelling means a dwelling on an individual lot unattached to another dwelling. 
Sound means any oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and frequency. Bass reverberations constitute sound. Sound includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Mechanical sound-making devices such as radios, stereos, boom boxes, televisions, musical instruments, horns, whistles, bells, chimes or carillons, phonographs, sound amplifiers or other machines or devices for the producing, reproducing or amplifying of sound; 
(2)  Human-produced sounds such as yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, speaking or arguing; 
(3)  Commercial advertising sounds; 
(4)  Party noise; 
(5)  Sound coming from motorized landscape maintenance devices such as lawn mowers, weed-whackers, leaf blowers, and chain saws; 
(6)  Animal vocalizations from pets or nondomesticated animals; 
(7)  Testing of burglar, fire or car alarms; and 
(8)  Sound coming from construction and demolition activities such as hammering, nailing, drilling, sawing, and paving. 
Sound level meter means an instrument that conforms to ANSI S1.4-1983 or its successors. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
DIVISION 1. - NOISE IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS 

Sec. 16-303. - Sound between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(a)  Single-family detached dwellings. It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., to make, cause, or allow any sound from a source within his ownership or control that projects, emits or transmits into any single-family detached dwelling in a residential area owned or occupied by another, such that the sound is plainly audible anywhere within the interior of a sealed dwelling. 
(b)  Multifamily dwellings. It is unlawful for any person, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., to make, cause, or allow any plainly audible sound from a source within his ownership or control that projects, emits or transmits within the common area of a multifamily dwelling in a residential area. 
(c)  Exclusions. The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to the following sounds: 
(1)  Sound by public safety vehicles, emergency signaling devices, or authorized public safety personnel for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency; 
(2)  Sound from an exterior burglar or fire alarm of any building, provided such burglar or fire alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted, or ten (10) minutes, if intermittent, but the testing of burglar and fire alarms shall not be allowed between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; 
(3)  Sound from any automobile alarm, provided such alarm shall terminate its operation within five (5) minutes of its activation if the sound is uninterrupted, or ten (10) minutes, if the sound is intermittent; 
(4)  The generation of sound in situations within the jurisdiction of the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration; 
(5)  National Warning System (NAWAS) sounds used to warn the community of attack or imminent public danger such as flooding, explosion or hurricane; 
(6)  Sound of aircraft operations, where federal regulations preempt the local regulation of such specific operations; 
(7)  Protests, marches, parades, or an event sanctioned by the federal, state or county government(s); 
(8)  Surface carriers engaged in commerce by railroad; 
(9)  Any other activity solely controlled and within the jurisdiction of federal or state law; 
(10)  Sound projected, emitted or transmitted from motor vehicles, as such sound is regulated by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14(a); 
(11)  An emergency which is a serious urgent situation or occurrence that happens unexpectedly and requires immediate attention; 
(12)  Sound from agricultural activities; 
(13)  Sound from the travel of properly muffled motor vehicles on a public right-of-way; 
(14)  Sound from residential air conditioner units; 
(15)  Sound from swimming pool filtering systems; and 
(16)  Sound resulting from activities for which a special administrative permit has been issued pursuant to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 16-304. - Animal vocalizations, construction and landscaping activities, and the testing of burglar and fire alarms. 
(a)  [Residential areas.] Instead of the limitations set forth in section 16-303, the sound limitations set forth in this section 16-304 apply to the following activities in all residential areas. 
(b)  Animal vocalizations. Animal vocalizations in a residential area during the hours from 7:01 a.m. until 10:59 p.m. shall be regulated as follows. Pets and nondomesticated animals may not make any vocalizations for more than fifteen (15) minutes without interruption or more than thirty (30) minutes if intermittent. The limitations in subsections 16-303(a) and (b) apply to animal vocalizations between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The limitations in this subsection and in section 16-303 do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
(c)  Landscaping. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall only be operated between the hours of 7:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler. 
(d)  Construction and demolition activity. Construction and demolition activity or deliveries shall only be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays. There shall be no construction or demolition activity or deliveries on Sundays or New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Memorial Day, July 4, or Labor Day unless such activity arises from an emergency which puts the site or neighboring property owners and their property at risk of harm or loss. 
(e)  Testing burglar and fire alarms. The testing of burglar or fire alarms shall not exceed five (5) minutes in duration, and shall not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Fire drills may be conducted outside of these hours no more than once a month, and with prior notification to all properties within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property line where the testing will take place. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
DIVISION 2. - NOISE IN COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL AREAS AND IN MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENTS. 

Sec. 16-305. - Maximum permissible sound levels and sound during certain hours. 
(a)  This division applies to all sound emitting from property in all commercial and industrial areas and all mixed-use developments within the unincorporated limits of the county. 
(b)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any source of sound on any property within commercial areas, industrial areas, mixed-use developments that exceeds seventy (70) dB(A) in commercial areas; eighty (80) dB(A) in industrial areas; and seventy (70) dB(A) or seventy-three (73) dB(C) in mixed-use developments from the hours of 7:01 a.m. until 10:59 p.m. or sixty (60) dB(A) or sixty-three (63) dB(C) from the hours of 11:00 p.m. until 7:00 a.m. Sound shall be measured at any location at or within the property line of the affected property, and sound levels in excess of those established in this section shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is in violation of this article. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. to make, cause or allow any sound from a source within his ownership or control that projects, emits or transmits from a commercial area, industrial area, or a mixed-use development if such sound is plainly audible within the interior of a single-family detached sealed dwelling in a residential area or in a common area of a multifamily dwelling in a residential area. 
(d)  The exclusions listed in subsection 16-303(c) apply as exclusions in all commercial and industrial areas and all mixed-use developments as if fully set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 16-306. - Animal vocalizations, construction and landscaping activities, and the testing of burglar and fire alarms. 
(a)  [Time limitations.] Instead of the limitations set forth in section 16-305, the time limitations set forth in this section 16-306 apply as specified in this section. 
(b)  Animal vocalizations in commercial and industrial areas and mixed-use developments. Animal vocalizations in commercial and industrial areas and in mixed-use developments during the hours from 7:01 a.m. until 10:59 p.m. shall be regulated as follows. Pets and nondomesticated animals may not make any vocalizations for more than fifteen (15) minutes without interruption, or more than thirty (30) minutes, if intermittent. The limitations in subsection 16-303(a) and (b) apply to animal vocalizations between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The limitations in this subsection and in section 16-303 do not apply if the vocalizations are given as a warning to the presence of an intruder. 
(c)  Landscaping in mixed-use developments. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall only be operated between the hours of 7:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on weekends in a mixed-use development. Power tools used for landscaping or yard maintenance shall not be operated between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 9:01 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on weekends. All motorized equipment used in these activities shall be operated with a muffler. 
(d)  Construction and demolition activity in mixed-use developments. Construction and demolition activity or deliveries shall only be performed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on weekdays, or between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on Saturdays in mixed-use developments. There shall be no construction or demolition activity or deliveries on Sundays, New Year's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Memorial Day, July 4, or Labor Day in mixed-use developments unless such activity arises from an emergency which puts the site or neighboring property owners and their property at risk of harm or loss. 
(e)  Testing burglar and fire alarms in a mixed-use development. The testing of burglar or fire alarms in a mixed-use development shall not exceed five (5) minutes in duration, and shall not occur between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Fire drills may be conducted outside of these hours no more than once a month, and with prior notification to all properties within two hundred fifty (250) feet of the property line where the testing will take place. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
DIVISION 3. - SOUND CONTROL OFFICERS, MEASUREMENT OF SOUND, ADMINISTRATION, VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. 

Sec. 16-307. - Sound control officers. 
Where the provisions of this article require the measurement of sound with the use of a sound level meter, sound control officers shall make such measurement. A person shall be qualified to be a sound control officer if the person meets the criteria set forth by the sound control administrator and completes, at a frequency specified by the sound control administrator, a sound certification and recertification course which has been approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 16-308. - Procedures for the determination of sound levels. 
(a)  Insofar as practicable, sound will be measured while the source under investigation is operating at normal, routine conditions and, as necessary, at other conditions, including but not limited to, design, maximum and fluctuating rates. All sound measurements shall be made at or within the property line of the affected property, unless otherwise directed in this article. When instrumentation cannot be placed at or within the property line, the measurement shall be made as close thereto as is reasonable. For the purposes of this ordinance, sound measurements are measured on the A- or C-weighted sound scale, as applicable, of a sound level meter of standard design and quality having characteristics established by ANSI. 
(b)  The sound level meter and calibrator must be recertified annually at a laboratory approved by the sound control administrator. A field check of meter calibration and batteries must be conducted before and after every set of measurements, and at least every hour as necessary. 
(c)  Total and neighborhood residual sound level measurements shall be taken in accordance with procedures established and approved by the sound control administrator. Calculation of sound levels shall conform with accepted practice established by ANSI. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 16-309. - Sound control administrator, special administrative permits. 
(a)  Sound control administrator. The police chief or his/her designee shall be designated as the sound control administrator and he or she shall have the power to: 
(1)  Coordinate the sound control activities of all departments in DeKalb County and cooperate with all other public bodies and agencies to the extent practicable; 
(2)  Review, consider, grant, deny and revoke special administrative permits, pursuant to the procedures and standards contained in this article; 
(3)  Determine if the exclusions listed in this article apply to a particular set of circumstances; 
(4)  Promulgate application forms in conformity with the requirements of this article and recommend application fees to be set by official action of the governing authority; 
(5)  Provide testimony, evidence, and documents in the prosecution of violations of this article; 
(6)  Issue warnings to alleged violators of this article prior to or in lieu of citations; 
(7)  Promulgate rules and procedures to enforce this article and to govern the issuance and revocation of special administrative permits; and 
(8)  Provide clarification, interpretation, and implementation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Initiation of applications; special administrative permits. Any person requesting temporary relief or a stay from the enforcement of this article shall apply for a special administrative permit for a period of time not to exceed a total of fifteen (15) days within any one (1) year. The sound control administrator has discretion to consider and then grant or deny the special administrative permit, pursuant to the procedures and standards contained in this article, if strict enforcement of this article will result in unnecessary hardship to the applicant. 
(c)  Application forms; filing of applications; application fees. Applications for special administrative permits shall be filed on forms promulgated by the sound control administrator and shall not be considered authorized or accepted unless complete in all respects. By official action, the governing authority shall establish application fees for special administrative permits and the fee schedule shall be maintained by the clerk to the chief executive officer and the board of commissioners. 
(d)  Application forms; criteria. Applications for special administrative permits shall be considered complete when the applications include all of the following information: 
(1)  The nature and location of the sound source for which such application is made; 
(2)  The reason for which the permit is requested, including the unnecessary hardship that will result to the applicant, his/her client, or the public, if the permit is not granted; 
(3)  An explanation of how the permit, if granted, will not exceed the minimum necessary to afford relief to the applicant, and does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with sound or time limitations imposed on other similarly situated persons; 
(4)  The times, nature and intensity of sound that will occur during the period of the permit; 
(5)  A description of the sound control measures to be taken by the applicant to minimize the sound and the impact therefrom; and 
(6)  The name, address, and means of contacting a responsible party during the hours of operation for which the permit is issued. 
(e)  Issuance of special administrative permits; required enumerated conditions. The sound control administrator shall grant or deny the special administrative permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. If the sound control administrator does not grant or deny the permit within thirty (30) days, the permit shall stand denied. Upon issuance of a special administrative permit, the sound control administrator shall enumerate the conditions of the permit including, but not limited to, specific dates and times for which the permit is valid, not to exceed a total of fifteen (15) days within any one (1) year. 
(f)  Revocation. A special administrative permit may be revoked by the sound control administrator, and the issuance of future special administrative permits withheld, if there is a: 
(1)  Violation of one (1) or more conditions of the permit; 
(2)  Material misrepresentation of fact in the permit application; or 
(3)  Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the sound control administrator in granting the permit. 
(g)  Appeals. Appeals of any special administrative permit decision made by the sound control administrator or his/her designee shall be to the executive assistant or his/her designee. The executive assistant shall have the authority to promulgate procedural rules to govern the appeal, and the decision of the executive assistant shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
Sec. 16-310. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The provisions of this article may be enforced by police officers, code enforcement officers, and/or the sound control administrator. 
(b)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon citation by a police officer, a code enforcement officer, or the sound control administrator and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10, with the following minimum penalties. 
(1)  Upon a first conviction of any violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(2)  Upon a second conviction of a violation of this article within twelve (12) months measured from the date of the first conviction, the court shall impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(3)  Upon a third conviction of a violation of this article within twenty-four (24) months measured from the date of the first conviction, the court shall impose a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 10-20, Pt. I, 11-16-10) 
Chapter 17 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Vehicular traffic at DeKalb-Peachtree Airport, § 6-122 et seq.; operation of motorized vehicle on school property, § 16-1; transporting building materials at night, § 16-26; motor vehicles and parks, § 19-28; selling or soliciting on public rights-of-way, § 16-3; vehicles for hire, § 15-375 et seq.; wreckers, Ch. 26; local laws pertaining to motor vehicles and traffic, App. B, § 801 et seq. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; motor vehicles and traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; general powers of local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Adoption of State of Georgia Motor Vehicles Regulations. 
(a)  The following provisions are adopted by reference as if set out at length in this chapter: 
(1)  O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1. 
(2)  O.C.G.A. title 40, chapter 6 [§ 40-6-1 et seq.]. 
(3)  O.C.G.A. title 46, chapter 7 [§ 46-7-1 et seq.]. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-10. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1000; Ord. No. 01-06, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
State Law reference— Adoption of rules of the road by reference, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372 et seq. 
Sec. 17-2. - Chapter does not affect property rights. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of real property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner, and not as matter of right, from prohibiting such use, or from requiring other or different or additional conditions than those specified herein, or otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1011) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-8. 
Sec. 17-3. - Applicability to public officers and employees. 
The provisions of this chapter applicable to the drivers of vehicles upon the streets and highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United States, any state or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1008) 
Sec. 17-4. - Owners or persons directing drivers of vehicles not to permit violation. 
It is unlawful for the owner or any other person employing or otherwise directing the driver of any vehicle to require or knowingly permit the operation of that vehicle upon a street or highway in any manner contrary to this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1002.1) 
Sec. 17-5. - Use of vehicle without consent of the owner. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to take, use or operate any motor vehicle or motorcycle upon the public streets and highways of the county without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1002.2) 
Sec. 17-6. - Obstructions to right-of-way. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the right-of-way of any public road, street or other easement in the unincorporated area of the county by placing or maintaining thereon any obstruction, whether it is in the nature of shrubbery, signs, fences or whatever, which interferes with the clear view of motorists or the free passage of pedestrians thereon. 
(b)  Notice to remove. Wherever any obstruction prohibited by subsection (a) has been placed and is being maintained, the police department shall notify in writing the owner of the obstruction and the owner of the land abutting the right-of-way where the obstruction is found and also the person in possession of the property. Such notice shall state the nature of the obstruction and the fact that the obstruction is an interference with the clear view of motorists or the free passage of pedestrians and that it shall be removed within ten (10) days from the date of the notice. 
(c)  Issuance of summons upon failure to remove. Whenever the person so notified as provided by subsection (b) of this section fails or refuses to remove the obstruction within the time allowed in the written notice, the police department shall issue a summons to this person to appear in recorder's court on a day certain to stand trial for the violation. 
(d)  Continued violations; issuance of summons without notice. If upon conviction for the first offense the person continues to refuse to remove the obstruction, each day that it remains intact shall constitute a new violation of subsection (a) of this section for which the police department shall issue a summons, without first issuing the written notice. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-2005.1—8-2005.4; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Cross reference— Corner visibility clearance, § 27-669. 
Secs. 17-7—17-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-26. - Authority of chief of police to delegate powers. 
The chief of police may delegate to any other officer in the department the duties and responsibilities conveyed to the chief of police by this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1010; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-27. - Authority of police and fire officers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of police officers or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of the county and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the county. 
(b)  Police officers or such officers as are assigned by the director may direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformity with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Fire officers, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1009; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of police officers, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(2). 
Sec. 17-28. - Issuance of special permits for operation otherwise prohibited. 
The county may issue special permits authorizing the operation upon a street or highway of traction engines or tractors having movable tracks with transverse corrugations upon the periphery of these movable tracks, the operation of which would otherwise be prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 8-16020) 
Secs. 17-29—17-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS AND MARKINGS 

Sec. 17-41. - Removal of signs from public rights-of-way. 
The public works department may remove any signs located in public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2005.5) 
Sec. 17-42. - Installation. 
The public works department shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the county to make effective the provisions of this chapter and those ordinances. The public works department may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic-control devices as deemed necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the county or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2007) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate traffic by means of official traffic-control devices, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(2). 
Sec. 17-43. - Designation of crosswalks; establishment of safety zones; marking of traffic lanes. 
The public works department may, upon approval of the board of commissioners: 
(1)  Designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as deemed necessary. The county shall make proper studies of all existing crosswalks not at roadway intersections and shall abolish those which are unnecessary. 
(2)  Establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  Mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at places consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2008) 
Sec. 17-44. - Specifications for traffic-control devices. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the county. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2009) 
State Law reference— Uniform regulations governing erection of traffic-control devices, O.C.G.A. § 36-2-50. 
Sec. 17-45. - One-way streets and alleys. 
Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the county designates any one-way street or alley, the public works department shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective unless these signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2010) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(4); one-way streets generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-47. 
Sec. 17-46. - Stop signs or yield signs—Generally. 
Whenever any ordinance of the public works department designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the county to place and maintain a stop sign or yield right-of-way sign on each street intersecting that portion thereof so described and designated by this chapter or any ordinance of this county. 
(Code 1976, § 8-4003.1) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish yield streets and yield signs, stop streets and stop signs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(6), (a)(8). 
Sec. 17-47. - Same—Specifications. 
Every sign erected pursuant to section 17-46 shall at nighttime be rendered luminous by steady or flashing internal illumination, by a fixed floodlight projected on the face of the sign or by efficient reflecting elements on the face of the sign. This sign shall be located as near as practicable to the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in conformity with the recommendation of the Manual on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices. Every stop sign shall be in letters not less than six (6) inches in height. 
(Code 1976, § 8-4003.2) 
Sec. 17-48. - Through streets. 
(a)  Those streets and parts of streets as are designated by this chapter or by ordinance and marked as provided in this chapter are hereby declared to be through streets. 
(b)  In accordance with the foregoing, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, drivers of vehicles shall stop at every intersection before entering any of the streets or parts of streets listed in 17-351. 
(Code 1976, § 8-4011) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(6). 
Sec. 17-49. - Stop signs at grade level crossings. 
The county shall erect and maintain stop signs in accordance with state standards at all grade level crossings where the need for these signs is determined by an engineering study. 
(Code 1976, § 8-7002.1(b)) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate hazardous grade crossings and erect stop signs at same, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(15), 40-6-141. 
Sec. 17-50. - Restricted turn signs. 
The public works department, upon the approval of the board of commissioners, may determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at these intersections. The making of these turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the hours shall be plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when these turns are permitted. 
(Code 1976, § 8-6007(a)) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit turns, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(9). 
Secs. 17-51—17-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Abandoned vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; authority to remove junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

Sec. 17-61. - Establishment of vehicle pounds. 
The chief of police may create a vehicle pound or pounds to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by police officers. The pound may be located at such place as may be designated by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17001; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, §§ 1, 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-62. - Reasons for impoundment. 
Whenever any vehicle is found parked in any place within the county where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by the police department to a vehicle pound. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17002; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-63. - Report of impoundment. 
It shall be the duty of the person impounding a vehicle pursuant to this division immediately to report the fact of this impounding, together with any other information which will definitely identify the vehicle, to the police department, which shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17003; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-64. - Pound records; disposition of fees collected. 
It shall be the duty of the police department to keep a permanent record of all vehicles committed to the pound, the names and addresses of the owners of the vehicles, the number of the state license tags and the nature and circumstances of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case, and to account for all fees collected under this division and pay them to the finance director or clerk of the recorder's court, taking a receipt therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17004; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-65. - Fees. 
A fee to cover the cost of removal, plus a storage fee for each day or fraction of a day the impounded vehicle is stored in excess of the first twenty-four (24) hours the vehicle is impounded under this division, shall be assessed against the owner or other person having the right to the possession of the impounded vehicle. The specific amounts of such fees shall be established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17005) 
Sec. 17-66. - Release of impounded vehicle—Generally. 
Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this division shall produce evidence of identity and ownership or right of possession to the person in charge of the pound in order for the pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver it to the person. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle may be surrendered by the person in charge thereof, except where the impounded vehicle is retained as evidence or incidental to a search for evidence. Impounded vehicles retained as evidence or incidental to a search for evidence cannot be released without prior permission of the law enforcement agency. A receipt shall be obtained for all impounded vehicles upon their surrender. Such receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle and shall become a permanent record of the county. These fees shall be paid to the person in charge of the pound and a receipt shall be written. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17006; Ord. No. 96-12, § 1, 6-11-96) 
Sec. 17-67. - Same—Protest and bond. 
In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fees, the police department may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge it upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such person shall be charged with violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for appearance and trial. 
(2)  Thereupon, the police department shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. 
(3)  If such person is convicted of violating this chapter or any other traffic ordinance, in addition to other costs, the court shall assess as cost the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of the vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17007; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-68. - Impoundment does not preclude other prosecution. 
The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic. 
(Code 1976, § 8-17008) 
Secs. 17-69—17-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE OPERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-86. - Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles. 
Slowly moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven upon the streets or highways abreast, but one must follow behind the other and keep as near the right-hand curb as possible. 
(Code 1976, § 8-3001.1) 
Sec. 17-87. - Vehicles propelled by human or animal power prohibited on limited-access highways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to push or drive any vehicle upon the limited-access highways of the county which is propelled by human or animal power, including any bicycle, tricyle, pushcart, animal-drawn vehicle of any kind and any vehicle incapable of a speed of at least forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 8-3013.1) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate persons propelling pushcarts and persons upon skates, coasters and other toy vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(17), (a)(18). 
Sec. 17-88. - Manner of driving in procession. 
Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street or roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1976, § 8-3014) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit processions in highways, O.G.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); operation of vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 
Sec. 17-89. - Leaving street or highway at other than intersection or driveway. 
No driver of any vehicle shall operate it in such a manner so as to enter or leave any street or highway except at an intersection or at an alley or private drive. 
(Code 1976, § 8-3015) 
Sec. 17-90. - Sanitation vehicles. 
All employees and vehicles of the county, when engaged or used in performance of sanitation or solid waste collection and disposal service, shall have the right-of-way in the use of the streets, and may use any part thereof in cleaning up and washing streets. 
(Code 1976, § 8-4007) 
Sec. 17-91. - Identification, right-of-way of vehicles in funeral procession. 
(a)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles; provided, that each vehicle shall identify itself by burning regular headlights, shall keep in close formation and shall display a windshield sticker carrying the word "funeral." The identifying windshield sticker on vehicles shall be at least twelve (12) inches long and three (3) inches high, with dark letters at least one and one-half (1½) inches high on a white background. 
(b)  When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though the signal may change to red. 
(Code 1976, § 8-4009) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate processions on highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3). 
Sec. 17-92. - Driving through processions. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when these vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in section 17-91. 
(Code 1976, § 8-4010) 
Sec. 17-93. - Limitations on turning around. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn that vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street in a business district, or upon any street between intersections. These turns may be made outside of a business district at intersections not controlled by a traffic signal. 
(Code 1976, § 8-6002.1) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit turning, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(9); U-turns, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-121. 
Sec. 17-94. - Truck routes. 
(a)  All motor vehicles having a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of thirty-six thousand (36,000) pounds, or having an overall length in excess of thirty (30) feet, except vehicles designed to carry passengers, are prohibited from using any street within the county except those authorized by ordinance and designated as truck routes. When the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters of the restricted motor vehicle is not on a designated truck route, ingress to and egress from such places shall be made by the most direct route available between the terminal, parking lot, repair garage or headquarters and nearest designated truck route. 
(b)  Any person driving or in charge or control of any of the restricted vehicles defined in subsection (a) of this section, when upon streets other than those designated as truck routes, shall be prepared to present for the inspection of police officers a log book, weight slips, delivery slips and other written evidence of such person's destination and point of origin to justify the presence of the restricted vehicle on a street other than a designated truck route. 
(c)  If any designated truck route or portion thereof shall be under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, restricted vehicles as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall use such other temporary truck route as may be designated by the county. 
(d)  The routes designated as truck routes are as listed in section 17-361. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-15001, 8-15004; Ord. No. 01-05, Pt. I, 4-26-01; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-95. - Tractors, semitrailers, trailer combinations. 
Tractors, semitrailers and trailer combinations shall not be operated upon any road, thoroughfare, street or alley maintained by the county, except when authorized by the police department. With authorization, vehicles may be operated on commercial or industrial roads, thoroughfares or streets for the distance approved by the county. Such distance shall not exceed one (1) mile from the interstate exit ramp. Any such authorization shall be made for a specific designated route and shall begin at the exit point from the interstate as approved by the state department of transportation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-15006(g); Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Secs. 17-96—17-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPEED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to establish speed limits, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(10), 40-6-183; speed restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-180 et seq. 

Sec. 17-111. - Generally; zones designated. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by ordinance, the interstate highways and higher speed main arterial highways shall be designated as zone number 1, reduced speed interstate highways as zone number 2A and typical main arterial highways as zone number 2B, the through roads and streets as zone numbers 3, 4, 5 and 6, and higher residential streets, road, alleys on residential streets as zone number 7. Such zones are as designated in sections 17-352 through 17-357. 
(b)  On all highways which comprise a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways and having not less than four (4) traffic lanes, or zone 1, the minimum speed shall be forty (40) miles per hour and the maximum speed shall be sixty-five (65) miles per hour. 
(c)  On all highways which comprise a part of the national system of interstate and defense highways and having not less than four (4) traffic lanes, where the total gross combined weight of trucks or truck-tractors and trailers and load in pounds is less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, the maximum speed shall not exceed fifty-five (55) miles per hour; where the total gross combined weight of trucks or truck-tractors and trailers and load in pounds is between ten thousand (10,000) and sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds, the maximum speed shall not exceed fifty (50) miles per hour; where the total gross combined weight of trucks or truck-tractors and trailers and load exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds, the maximum speed shall not exceed forty-five (45) miles per hour. This subsection shall not apply to buses; provided, however, that no school bus while transporting schoolchildren shall exceed a speed of forty (40) miles per hour; provided, however, that buses owned or operated by a street railroad or other company engaged in the operation of an urban transit system which are used for the transportation of schoolchildren may be operated at speeds in excess of forty (40) miles per hour provided these speeds are within the maximum speed limits of the municipalities in which these buses are operated. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon the main arterial highways designated as zone number 2 at a rate of speed in excess of fifty-five (55) miles per hour, from one-half hour before sunrise until one-half hour after sunset; at other times fifty (50) miles per hour. 
(e)  In zone number 2, where the total gross combined weight of trucks or truck-tractors and trailers and load in pounds is less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds, the maximum speed shall not exceed fifty-five (55) miles per hour; where the total gross combined weight of trucks or truck-tractors and trailers and load in pounds is between ten thousand (10,000) and sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds, the maximum speed shall not exceed fifty (50) miles per hour; where the total gross combined weight of trucks or truck-tractors and trailers and load exceeds sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds, the maximum speed shall not exceed forty-five (45) miles per hour. This shall not apply to buses; provided, that no school bus while transporting schoolchildren shall exceed a speed of forty (40) miles per hour. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon the streets, roads and alleys designated as zone number 3 at a rate of speed in excess of fifty (50) miles per hour, unless a higher rate of speed has been specifically authorized for that particular street by this chapter or an appropriate ordinance. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon the streets, roads and alleys designated as zone number 4 at a rate of speed in the excess of forty-five (45) miles per hour, unless a higher rate of speed has been specifically authorized for that particular street by this chapter or an appropriate ordinance. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon the streets, roads and alleys designated as zone number 5 at a rate of speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour, unless a higher rate of speed has been specifically authorized for that particular street by this chapter or an appropriate ordinance. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon the streets, roads and alleys designated in this section as zone number 6 at a rate of speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour, unless a higher rate of speed has been specifically authorized for that particular street by this chapter or an appropriate ordinance. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive within or upon the streets, roads and alleys designated in section 17-357 as zone number 7 at a rate of speed in the excess of thirty (30) miles per hour, unless a higher rate of speed has been specifically authorized for that particular street by this chapter or an appropriate ordinance. 
(k)  On the remaining streets, roads and alleys of the county not included in zone numbers 1 through 7, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, unless a higher rate of speed has been specifically authorized for the particular street, road or alley by this chapter or an appropriate ordinance. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-8012—8-8018; Ord. No. 07-25, Pt. I, 11-13-07 ; Ord. No. 12-14, Pt. I, 9-25-12 ) 
Sec. 17-112. - Regulation by traffic signs. 
The public works department may regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speeds otherwise applicable within the district or at intersections and shall erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8011) 
Sec. 17-113. - Maximum speed in parks. 
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in parks in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8009) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate speed limits in parks, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(5). 
Sec. 17-114. - Minimum speeds on streets and highways. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle within the left-hand lane on any expressway within the county at a speed of less than forty (40) miles per hour. This section shall not apply to portions of the expressway system known as connectors or bypasses. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8010) 
Sec. 17-115. - School crossing zones. 
No person shall drive a vehicle in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour on any street where flashing yellow traffic beacons and twenty-five-mile-per-hour speed signs are installed and operating or where standard school or school crossing signs and twenty-five-mile-per-hour speed signs are installed, thereby designating the area as a school speed zone. The reduced speed limit shall be in effect only on days and hours when the school is in operation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8019) 
DIVISION 3. - TRAFFIC-CALMING MEASURES 

Sec. 17-116. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, certain terms and words are defined. Where words have not been defined, but are defined in a subsequent sub-section of this article, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
AASHTO means the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
Affected area means a geographic portion of a neighborhood consisting of all property owners whose quality of life as a resident in the neighborhood, and not necessarily as a traveler through the neighborhood, is being directly impacted by the cut-through or speeding traffic problem being addressed. The affected area will include all lots from which residents must traverse the traffic calming measure. The affected area will also include all lots from which residents may have an alternate route without traffic calming measures but whose lots have driveways that access the residential street for which traffic calming measures are sought. 
Department means the public works department. 
Eligible petitioner means the person whose name is recorded as a property owner in the tax records maintained by the county's tax commissioner and board of tax assessors for the address listed on the petition that falls within the affected area. 
Initiator is a real property owner who has requested an initial interest petition form and/or has assumed a primary role in circulating the initial interest petition and the subsequent traffic-calming petition and undertakes to serve as the county's sole contact with respect to the progress of the initial interest petition and any subsequent traffic study and traffic-calming petition. 
I. T. E. means the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
MUTCD means the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
Real property owners means homeowners or other real property owners as indicated in the tax records maintained by the county's tax commissioner and board of tax assessors. 
Reference number means the number assigned to a completed initial interest petition which meets the county's criteria for a study that will be used to determine the order in which traffic studies will be conducted. 
Residential street means a street classified and defined as "residential" in the records of the DeKalb County Planning Department. 
Traffic-calming measures means those methods and processes, prescribed by "AASHTO" or other nationally recognized organizations, that the county may use to reduce aggressive driving behavior that impairs the quality of life of its citizens in any neighborhood in which the posted speed limit is no greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. Such measures include, but are not limited to, speed humps, bicycle lanes, center traffic islands, splitter islands, and striping and turn restriction lanes. 
Traffic-calming program guidelines means the guidelines for the design and application of speed humps and alternative traffic-calming measures adopted by the county with the traffic-calming program in May 1995 and revised thereafter in March 2001. 
Traffic study means the process by which data pertinent to the flow, rate of speed and density of traffic, collected over a defined period of time, is measured and analyzed to determine its impact on the safety of citizens within a neighborhood or affected area. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-117. - Application. 
The provisions of this division shall govern in the event that there is any conflict between the provisions of this division and the provisions in the Speed Humps and Alternative Traffic-Calming Measures Program adopted by the county in 1995 and amended thereafter, as well as the Guidelines for the Design and Application of Speed Humps and Alternative Traffic-Calming Measures Manual adopted by the county in 1995 and amended thereafter, collectively referred to herein as the traffic-calming program. All initial interest petitions and traffic studies pending as of the effective date of the ordinance adopting this division shall be required to comply with and shall be subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-118. - Reserved. 
Sec. 17-119. - Procedure for requesting a traffic study. 
(a)  The county shall require the filing of the initial interest petition on a form promulgated by the department director or designee. 
(b)  Any person(s) interested in pursuing the installation of traffic-calming measures on a residential street, upon request to the department, will be provided with an initial interest petition for the department to perform a traffic study. The initial interest petition must be marked with the date on which it is required to be returned to the department, hereinafter referred to as the return date. Such return date shall be forty-five (45) days after the date the department issues the initial interest petition. The initial interest petition will allow for persons to sign in favor of requesting a traffic study or to register their opposition to the conduct of a traffic study. 
(c)  All persons signing an initial interest petition to request that the department carry out a traffic study shall hereinafter be referred to as applicants. All persons opposed shall hereinafter be referred to as opponents. 
(d)  All applicants and opponents must be either real property owners or rental occupants. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-120. - Initial interest petition. 
(a)  The department will not consider an initial interest petition unless it is complete, as that term is defined herein, and unless at least twenty (20) percent of the real property owners or rental occupants on the residential street are in favor of the traffic study. 
(b)  The completed initial interest petition shall be filed with the department by the return date as provided for in section 17-119(b) or it shall be deemed abandoned and any further action by the county will require a new initial interest petition. 
(c)  In order to be considered complete, the initial interest petition shall include all of the following: 
(1)  The full name, signature, home address, and daytime telephone number of each person that signed the initial interest petition. 
(2)  The date upon which each person signed the initial interest petition. 
(3)  A description of the precise area for which the traffic study is requested by reference to the name of the subdivision or popular name of the neighborhood, or the bridges, streets, roads and where appropriate with house numbers that identify the area where a perceived speeding or cut-through problem exists. 
(4)  The name, address and telephone number of an initiator. 
(d)  Only one (1) real property owner or renter for each street address may sign the initial interest petition. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-121. - Evaluating the initial interest petition and informing the initiator. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed initial interest petition, the department will make a determination as to whether at least twenty (20) percent of the real property owners or rental occupants on the residential street are in favor of the traffic study. 
(b)  After the department has received the complete initial interest petition, no signature will be withdrawn from an initial interest petition unless the department is notified in writing within thirty (30) days, that there is reasonable proof that fraud or other impropriety occurred regarding the obtaining of the petitioner's signature. 
(c)  Within sixty (60) days, the initiator of the initial interest petition will be notified in writing by the department as to whether the initial interest petition meets the criteria for a traffic study. In the event that the department decides to conduct a traffic study, the written notification to the initiator will include a reference number assigned to the initial interest petition for the conduct of the study. 
(d)  In the event that the initiator moves away or is otherwise no longer a point of contact for the department and a new initiator's name or address has not been provided to the department, the department shall consider the initial interest petition abandoned and shall cease all work on processing of the initial interest petition and any subsequent traffic study. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-122. - Traffic study to comply with national standards. 
National standards promulgated by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, the Institute of Transportation and other national standards shall govern the execution of traffic studies and the design and installation of traffic-calming measures. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-123. - Priority for the conduct of traffic studies. 
(a)  The department will conduct traffic studies based on the reference number assigned to the completed initial interest petition. 
(b)  The department reserves the right to change the order in which a traffic study is conducted where the department determines that there is an initial interest petition further down the waiting list for an area that may relate to, or be affected by, another traffic study to be conducted on a neighboring street or in a neighboring area. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-124. - The affected area and the traffic-calming plan. 
(a)  Where a traffic study is warranted it will be conducted at a time to be determined by, and within the sole discretion of, the department. 
(b)  Upon completion of a traffic study, the department shall make a determination as to whether the results clearly demonstrate that the installation of traffic-calming measures are warranted based upon the criteria established in the traffic-calming program guidelines. 
(c)  When considering traffic-calming program guidelines relating to speeding, the determination regarding whether the established criteria for traffic-calming measures have been met will be based on a comparison of actual study speeds obtained to the posted speed limit. When considering the criteria in traffic-calming program guidelines that relate to cut-through, the determination will include a comparison of cut-through traffic volumes obtained in a study to allowable volumes of cut-through traffic established in those guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-125. - Notification that traffic-calming measures are not warranted. 
Following the completion of the study, if the department director or designee determines that no traffic-calming measures are warranted, then the department director or designee shall notify the initiator of that conclusion in writing. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-126. - Notification to initiator for commencement of traffic-calming conceptual design and presentation of the traffic-calming plan for public hearing. 
(a)  Where traffic-calming measures are warranted the department shall, within a reasonable time following the completion of the traffic study, not to exceed twelve (12) months, prepare a traffic-calming conceptual plan and notify the initiator in writing about the traffic-calming conceptual plan. 
(b)  The traffic-calming conceptual plan must identify the affected area and include a recommendation for a specific traffic-calming measure or a combination of such measures that the department has determined to provide the most effective solution to the speeding and/or cut-through problems identified in the traffic study for installation in the affected area, having regard to the pavement width, grades, the physical features of the proposed location for the installation measures and any structures that facilitate drainage. The plan may also include alternative measures that could be installed to provide some relief to the speeding and/or cut-through problems identified in the traffic study for installation in the affected area, having regard to the pavement width, grades, the physical features of the proposed location for the installation measures and any structures that facilitate drainage. 
(c)  A public comment period, not to exceed twelve (12) months, shall commence on the date that the letter of notification is sent to the initiator pursuant to subsection (a). During that public comment period, department staff assigned to work on the traffic-calming conceptual plan shall meet with the initiator(s) and other interested persons for neighborhood input and public comment on the traffic-calming conceptual plan. 
(d)  The department shall, within 60 days of the completion of the public comment period present the traffic-calming conceptual plan to the board of commissioners for a public hearing at a regularly scheduled meeting, of the board of commissioners. 
(e)  The date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing must be advertised in the county's legal organ at least once within three (3) weeks prior to the hearing. The department shall also post signs within the affected area informing residents of the date, time and place of the public hearing and its purpose. 
(f)  The board of commissioners may vote to accept or reject the department's recommendation for installation of the most effective traffic-calming measures, or to accept any alternative measures provided by the department. Additionally, the board of commissioners may vote to defer the item for up to sixty (60) days for additional review by staff with respect to the traffic-calming measures recommended and the affected area to which the proposed measures would apply. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-127. - Traffic-calming petition; choice of measures. 
(a)  Following the public hearing at which the board of commissioners accepts the recommended or alternative measures, the department director or designee shall provide the initiator with a traffic-calming petition form to be used for recording all of the signatures. The petition must set forth the traffic-calming measures approved by the board of the commissioner that shall be the subject of the vote and the eligible petitioners will thereby have the opportunity to vote in favor or in opposition to the approved measures. No other measure may be included on the petition. 
(b)  The initiator is responsible for circulating the traffic-calming petition to all eligible petitioners in the affected area. 
(c)  A traffic-calming petition must be returned to the department within ninety (90) days of the board of commissioners' decision allowing the installation of traffic-calming measures or it will be deemed abandoned and no further action shall be taken on the traffic calming petition or the initial interest petition from which it arose. 
(d)  The traffic-calming petition shall indicate the full name, signature, home address date, and daytime telephone number for each person signing the selection petition. 
(e)  The tax records maintained by the county's tax commissioner and board of tax assessors shall control in determining whether a signatory to the petition is a real property owner and thus an eligible petitioner. 
(f)  In the event that the board of commissioners votes to reject the department's recommendation no further action shall be taken with respect to traffic calming measures for at least twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-128. - Creation of a special tax district and assessment of costs associated with the maintenance of the traffic-calming measure. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for the creation of special tax district the petition must secure signatures in favor of the installation of traffic-calming measures from eligible petitioners representing sixty-five (65) percent of properties in the affected area. 
(b)  In the event that the petition secures the requisite percentage of signatures in favor of the approved traffic-calming measure or combination of traffic calming measures, the director of the department shall present a resolution to the board of commissioners at a regularly scheduled meeting and the board of commissioners shall thereafter by said resolution approve the creation of a special tax district. Advertising for said meeting must comply with section 17-126(e). 
(c)  The special tax district shall be created to include all of real property in the affected area for which the traffic-calming measure was approved. An annual maintenance charge in an amount to be determined by the board of commissioners shall be assessed to and collected from property owners within the affected area as part of their annual property tax assessment for the maintenance of the traffic-calming measures installed pursuant to the creation of the special tax district. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-129. - Removal of traffic-calming measures. 
(a)  Upon presentation of a petition from eligible petitioners representing sixty-five (65) percent of the properties in the affected area, traffic-calming measures previously installed may be removed. No such petition shall be presented earlier than twelve (12) months after initial installation of the traffic-calming measure(s). 
(b)  A removal petition may be obtained from the department director or the director's designee. 
(c)  The removal petition shall be returned and filed with the department within ninety (90) days of the date on which it was provided pursuant to a request or it shall be deemed abandoned and any further action by the county shall require a new removal petition. 
(d)  The removal petition shall be presented to the board of commissioners at a public hearing within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the petition. The date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing must be advertised in the county's legal organ at least once within three (3) weeks of the hearing. The department shall also post signs within the affected area informing residents of the date, time and place of the public hearing and its purpose. 
(Ord. No. 05-06, Pt. I, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 17-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Parking at DeKalb-Peachtree Airport, § 6-132. 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-131. - Signs required for enforcement. 
When by this chapter or any other ordinance or order of the public works department any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the public works department to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no regulations shall be effective unless these signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. At least one (1) sign shall be erected in each block on each side of the street where parking is either prohibited or restricted. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10022) 
Sec. 17-132. - Emergency parking restrictions. 
When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the chief of police has authority in an emergency to prohibit the parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street or to close a street to traffic. All these orders shall be temporary only. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10023; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-133. - Authority to prohibit parking on certain streets. 
When not inconsistent with this chapter or any other ordinance, the chief of police may prohibit parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street when traffic and engineering surveys indicate that stopping or parking may impede the free flow of traffic on the street. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10020; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-134. - Loading and unloading at angle to curb; permit. 
The chief of police may issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms or conditions of these permits. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to that person the privilege as therein stated in this section. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10004.1; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-135. - Leaving vehicle unattended; setting brakes, stopping motor. 
No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of the vehicle and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of this vehicle to the curb or the side of the street or highway. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10007) 
Sec. 17-136. - Parking prohibited in certain places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device, at any place prohibited by ordinance and indicated by official signs or markings. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle, not lawfully under such person's control, either into any prohibited area or move and leave such vehicle away from a curb such distance as is prohibited by this chapter or other ordinance. 
(c)  At the locations listed in section 17-362, as indicated by official signs or markings, parking is prohibited as indicated. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10007.1; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-137. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10008) 
Sec. 17-138. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying the vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in such emergency the vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  Displaying advertising. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10009) 
Sec. 17-139. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The public works department may erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10010) 
Sec. 17-140. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The public works department may erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in section 17-363, no person shall park a vehicle upon the streets listed in section 17-363 in violation of the sign. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10011) 
Sec. 17-141. - Parking on one-way streets. 
The public works department may erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles. When these signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10012) 
Sec. 17-142. - Parking on one-way roadways. 
If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway, unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The public works department may determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway and erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10013) 
Sec. 17-143. - Hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The public works department may determine and designate by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in such designated place. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10014) 
Sec. 17-144. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
The public works department may determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating them and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10015) 
Sec. 17-145. - Freight curb loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a truck for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to these zones are in effect, nor stop, stand or park any other vehicle for the unloading or loading of materials. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10016) 
Sec. 17-146. - Parking of taxicabs and buses regulated. 
The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, or taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading and unloading passengers, and except for making emergency repairs. The provisions of this section shall not apply to common carriers stopping at regular designated passing or layover locations. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10017) 
Sec. 17-147. - Use of bus and taxicab stands restricted. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter the zone. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10018) 
Sec. 17-148. - Bus stops. 
(a)  A no parking zone of eighty (80) feet shall be created at all bus stops for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
(b)  These no parking zones shall be marked by signs and, in addition, these zones in all congested areas shall have the curbs painted yellow. This proper marking of zones shall be maintained by the companies operating buses in and out of these zones. 
(c)  Buses or any vehicles parked in these zones for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers shall pull as close to the curb as possible. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit buses from loading and unloading at platforms at loading zones where they are provided for that purpose in the street. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10019) 
Sec. 17-149. - Restrictions on parking heavy or oversize vehicles, campers, boats, etc., on residential streets. 
(a)  No person shall park or stand any bus, truck or other freight- or passenger-carrying vehicle in excess of one-half-ton capacity upon any public street or highway for a period longer than one (1) hour at any time during the day or night. 
(b)  No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight (8) feet (or 2.4384 m.) wide or ten (10) feet (or 3.048 m.) high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(c)  No person shall park or stand any truck camper, camper trailer, motor home, boat, boat trailer or other recreational vehicle on any residential street or public place for more than one (1) hour at any time during the day or night. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10025) 
Sec. 17-150. - Fire zones. 
The chief of police may designate any area on public property or private property used for public purposes as restricted areas to be known as fire zones. Standing or parking a vehicle in a fire zone shall be a violation of this section and the county may enforce this section by the issuance of a citation and the immediate removal of the vehicle to an impound lot. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10026; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-151. - Use of parking facilities on county property. 
Parking facilities on county property designated for this use by the chief executive shall be used only in accordance with regulations for this use established by the chief executive. The chief executive may designate certain spaces or areas as reserved for all elected officials, designated administrative officials whose position responsibilities require the provision of a reserved parking space for efficiently discharging those responsibilities and for other general purposes such as court and visitor parking. Occupancy of these reserved spaces or areas by other than those individuals assigned to use the spaces or areas shall be deemed a violation of this section. The public works department shall be responsible for posting of signs to ensure effective notice to parking facility users as to the regulations governing and limitations on the use thereof. It shall be unlawful to park any private vehicle in any county parking facility for a period of more than twelve (12) hours in any one (1) day or to park a commercial or freight-carrying vehicle or trailer in these lots except by written permission of the chief executive. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10024) 
Sec. 17-152. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
(a)  When prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance or by order of the county, no person shall park a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by official signs. 
(b)  When so indicated as provided in subsection (a) of this section, parking is prohibited on the streets or portions thereof listed in section 17-362. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10021) 
DIVISION 2. - RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING 

Sec. 17-153. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block face means that portion of one side of a street located between an intersecting street and the next occurring side street or between the termination of a street and the first occurring side street. 
Commuter vehicle means a motor vehicle, parked in a residential area, which is not registered to or operated by a resident of such area. 
Curb parking space means a twenty-four-foot-long section of street, adjacent to the curb or edge or roadway, where a motor vehicle may lawfully park. 
Director means the associate director of public works, transportation division. 
Residential area means a contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public roadways which are primarily abutted by residential property and nonbusiness property, such as parks, churches and schools. 
Street address means the lot number assigned to a lot of record as shown on the official tax maps of the county. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-154. - Program established. 
There is established a residential permit parking program whereby motor vehicles bearing a special parking permit issued pursuant to this division may be parked in excess of the time limits posted on streets within certain areas known as residential permit parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-155. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to furnish false information in an application for any permit authorized by this division or to represent falsely that such person is eligible for such permit. 
(b)  A person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant to this division shall not allow the use or display of such permit on a vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued. Such conduct shall be unlawful and a violation of this division both by the person holding the valid permit and the person who so uses or displays the permit improperly. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for a person to produce or display a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations on parking in a residential permit parking area. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall constitute an offense and shall be punishable as provided under section 1-10 of the DeKalb County Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-156. - Petition required. 
(a)  Residents of a residential area who desire to have such an area designated as a residential permit parking area shall submit to the director a petition requesting such designation. To warrant consideration, the request must be supported by the signature of one (1) adult resident from sixty-five (65) percent or more of the residences within the area, provided only one (1) signature is needed for each street address. Apartment buildings and other multiple-family dwellings shall be considered as one residence and shall be limited to one (1) signature, which shall be the signature of the property owner or the signature of a person who is legally authorized to sign on behalf of the owner. 
(b)  The petition shall clearly define the boundaries of the proposed residential permit parking area. 
(c)  The petition shall identify a resident petition coordinator and shall conform in form and content with requirements established by the director. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a petition referred to in this section, the director shall undertake evaluations and studies as needed to determine whether such residential area is eligible for designation as a residential permit parking area. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-157. - Eligibility of area. 
(a)  In establishing the eligibility of a proposed residential permit parking area, the director shall consider the following factors: 
(1)  The petition shall meet all of the requirements as stated in section 17-156. 
(2)  The residential area proposed for designation as a residential permit parking area shall contain no less than fifty (50) single-family street addresses or shall contain no less than four thousand (4,000) linear feet of street frontage, measured from the center of adjacent intersections. 
(b)  Having determined that the requirements for a residential permit parking area are met, the director shall assign an appropriate and unique identification letter to the area and shall notify the petition coordinator that the area has been approved as a residential permit parking area. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-158. - Application for permit. 
(a)  The application for a resident parking permit shall provide the name of the owner or operator of the motor vehicle to be permitted; the residential address; the operator's state driver's license number; the motor vehicle make, model and license number; and other information requested on the application form. The applicant shall provide proof of residency as required by the director. 
(b)  Visitor permits shall require no written application except as provided in section 17-160(3); however, the director may require that previously issued and used permits be surrendered prior to placement. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-159. - Permit terms; fees. 
(a)  All resident parking permits issued for a discrete residential permit parking area shall have a common expiration date. Full-term permits shall be valid for one year. 
(b)  The permit fee shall be twelve dollars ($12.00). 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-160. - Issuance of permits. 
Following approval of a residential permit parking area, the director shall issue resident permits and visitor permits as follows: 
(1)  Each residential permit parking area shall have a unique permit expiration date. One (1) permit may be issued to the owner of a motor vehicle who resides on property fronting or at a residential street address on a block face located within the residential permit parking area, upon application, payment of the applicable fee, and approval by the director. Residential street addresses include apartments, condominiums, attached dwellings, row houses, town houses and the like. 
(2)  Upon request, three (3) visitor permits may be issued without charge to the recipient of a resident permit, and such visitor permits may be renewed or replaced in accordance with procedures established by the director. Additional visitor permits may be issued, at a cost of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per visitor permit. In no event, however, shall a motor vehicle owner who is eligible for a permanent parking permit receive more than seven (7) visitor permits (three (3) free permits, plus no more than four (4) additional permits) during any twelve-month period. 
(3)  A resident of a residential permit parking area who is eligible for a resident permit but does not apply for such permit may be issued three (3) visitor permits by making application as provided in subsection (1) of this section and omitting information which is not applicable. No fee shall be charged for such visitor permits. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-161. - Permit form and display. 
(a)  The resident parking permit shall be a decal and shall be affixed only to the motor vehicle for which it was issued. The decal shall be permanently attached to the inside lower corner of the rear window driver's side, and must be clearly visible from outside the vehicle. Information shown on the permit decal shall include but not be limited to the residential permit parking area identification letter, the permit number and the expiration date. 
(b)  The visitor permit shall be a temporary permit designed for use by transient visitors and guests of residents of a residential permit parking area. Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, each visitor permit shall be valid for the same period of time on the period given to owner of the motor vehicle who resides on property fronting or at a residential street address on a block face located within the residential permit parking area and shall provide all the rights and privileges of a resident permit. The visitor permit shall be of a form and shall be displayed as determined by the director. 
(c)  The director may issue temporary permits, valid for not more than one (1) year, for a vehicle operated by persons who provides health care services or other essential services on a regular basis at an address within a residential permit parking area. Such temporary permit shall be a visitor permit bearing special validation and which is issued by the director upon satisfactory proof of need presented by the resident at such address. A temporary permit shall not be issued for use by a person who provides services for a commercial activity conducted at a residence. 
(d)  A vehicle bearing a resident permit for one residential permit parking area may display a visitor permit for a different residential permit parking area when the vehicle is in a valid visitor status within the area identified on the visitor permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-162. - Uniformity of parking regulations. 
Within each discrete residential permit parking area there shall be uniform parking regulations applied to all locations where parking is allowed. Upon approval of a residential permit parking area, the director shall have parking regulation signs installed within the area indicating the time, location and conditions of the restricted parking. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-163. - Adding or removing block faces. 
(a)  All block faces of a discrete residential permit parking area shall have identical parking regulations where parking is allowed, and such regulations shall not be removed or modified on individual interior block faces. 
(b)  The director may add or remove block faces along the boundaries of a residential permit parking area upon receipt of a petition in which more than sixty-five (65) percent of the residences request such action. The petition shall conform to section 17-156. 
(c)  Eligibility for a block face to be added to or removed from a residential permit parking area shall be determined by the director, who shall, to the extent possible, avoid approving changes which will create an isolated block face, which is considered as one which: 
(1)  Is not across the street from a residential permit parking area block face for its entire length; or 
(2)  Neither end of the block face is connected to an existing residential permit parking area block face by a continuous curb or edge of roadway. 
(d)  During the initial process of approving a residential permit parking area or as related to the addition or removal of block faces, the director may determine the appropriate status for any block face abutting a park or other property which has no street address or which has no resident qualified to sign a related petition. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-164. - Termination of parking area. 
Upon receipt of an appropriate petition signed by a representative of sixty-five (65) percent or more of the qualified street addresses, as identified in section 17-156(a), the county will terminate residential permit parking area subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The parking regulations which will replace those installed as provided in section 17-154 must be determined on a block-by-block basis by consultations between the director and the affected residents prior to the termination of the residential permit parking area. The final determination shall be made by the director. 
(2)  The county shall not refund any fees which residents have paid for permits, as provided for in section 17-159, as a consequence of the termination of a residential permit parking area. 
(3)  Any street section which has been part of a residential permit parking area and which is terminated under this section shall be ineligible for inclusion in a future residential permit parking program for a period of twenty-four (24) months after such termination. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 17-165. - Limitation on permit use. 
A motor vehicle which displays a valid resident parking permit or visitor permit shall be allowed to stand or park in the residential permit parking area for which the permit has been issued without being limited by time restrictions. Such permits shall not authorize a motor vehicle to stand or park in any place where or during any time when the stopping, standing or parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited or the area is designated for other uses. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve the holder a parking space within a designated residential permit parking area. 
(Ord. No. 07-02, Pt. I, 11-13-01) 
Secs. 17-166—17-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDESTRIANS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Pedestrians, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-90 et seq. 

Sec. 17-171. - Use of crosswalks. 
Pedestrians shall not cross any street or roadway in a business district or any designated streets or highways except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1976, § 8-5003.1) 
Sec. 17-172. - Crossing at right angles. 
No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, except in a crosswalk. 
(Code 1976, § 8-5003.2) 
Secs. 17-173—17-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BICYCLES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference— Bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq. 

Sec. 17-191. - Method of parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at a curb, in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1976, § 8-12012) 
Sec. 17-192. - Operation on roadways and paths. 
(a)  The operator of a bicycle, upon entering a bicycle lane or path, shall yield the right-of-way to all bicycles approaching upon the lane or path and, upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles and bicycles in the roadway. 
(b)  Any bicycle being operated on a public roadway shall yield to the right following an audible signal when overtaken by another vehicle. The driver of a vehicle overtaking a bicycle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken bicycle. 
(c)  No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to which or upon which bicycle lanes have been designated, except within this bicycle lane or except as otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter. No person shall ride or operate a bicycle upon a roadway adjacent to which there is a bicycle path which is less than seventy-five (75) feet from the roadway and which is in a safe condition for bicycle riding. 
(d)  When a roadway is determined to be unsafe for bicycling by the county, bicycle users may be restricted from the roadway by the erection of a sign prohibiting bicycle use and directing bicycle users to a suitable alternative route similar in directness and surface quality to the roadway. 
(Code 1976, § 8-12013.1) 
Sec. 17-193. - Turning movements. 
(a)  When completing a left turn on two-way roadways, bicyclists shall merge to the portion of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof and shall negotiate the left turn so as to enter the intersecting roadway near the right side of the centerline, giving right-of-way to all vehicles proceeding through the intersection in the opposite direction. 
(b)  When completing a right turn, motor vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to bicycles crossing the intersecting roadway or completing a right turn. 
(c)  All vehicles or bicycles making turns at intersections shall not proceed into the intersection nor make this turn without first yielding the right-of-way to all bicycles or other vehicles within or approaching the intersection and shall proceed only when it is safe to do so. 
(d)  A bicyclist may also negotiate a left turn by dismounting the bicycle and crossing as a pedestrian, leading the bicycle to the other side of the intersecting roadway, and hence to the other side of the traffic roadway. When the person dismounts from a bicycle, such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(e)  When a bicycle "ride" control signal is shown, the bicyclist may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and while so proceeding across the roadway has the right-of-way over other vehicles. When a bicycle "wait" control signal is shown: 
(1)  The bicyclist facing the signal shall not commence to cross the roadway until bicycle ride control signal is shown. 
(2)  A bicyclist proceeding across the roadway when a wait signal is shown after the bicyclist has entered the roadway shall quickly proceed across the roadway and has the right-of-way for that purpose over other vehicles. 
(Code 1976, § 8-12013.4) 
Sec. 17-194. - Acrobatic or fancy riding; racing. 
No rider of any bicycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars, or feet from the pedals, or practice any acrobatic or fancy riding on any street. No person operating a bicycle upon a street shall participate in any race or speed or endurance contest with any other bicycle or vehicle, unless the street has been temporarily set aside for such purposes. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-12014, 8-12014.1) 
Secs. 17-195—17-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARADES[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(3); operation of motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 17-211. - Definition. 
In this article "parade" means an assemblage of persons, groups of persons, vehicles, bands, floats or devices gathered together in public with some circumstance of show and shall not include a funeral procession or an assemblage of public officials gathered for any purpose in the public interest. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11018) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 17-212—17-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 17-221. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to hold or participate in a parade in the unincorporated area of the county, without first securing a parade permit from the county. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11019) 
Sec. 17-222. - Application; contents. 
To obtain a parade permit the person or group of persons desiring to hold a parade shall file with the police department an application form which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number, both business and residential, of the applicant. 
(2)  The date and hours when the parade is to be held. 
(3)  The location and time of the point of assembly. 
(4)  The location and time of the disbursal. 
(5)  The parade route. 
(6)  The anticipated number of marching persons. 
(7)  The anticipated number and types of motorized and other vehicles and devices. 
(8)  The number of bands and floats in the parade. 
(9)  A statement by the applicant agreeing to assume all responsibility for the mechanical condition of each vehicle in the parade, and all damages caused by mechanical failure of any vehicle, float or other device in the parade. 
(10)  A statement by the applicant agreeing to assume all responsibility for keeping the parade route free and clear of litter and other debris during the time such parade is carried on or conducted. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11020; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 16-03 , Pt. I, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 17-223. - Application to be made in advance; notice to county departments. 
The application for a parade permit shall be made at least five (5) days before the date of the scheduled parade during which time the police department shall notify public utility companies and all affected persons in county government of the time, place, route and other circumstances of the parade. If either or any of the county departments are in the process of utility improvements or contemplated improvements along the parade route during the time of the parade which cannot be interrupted, the chief of police shall deny the application for a parade permit or shall reroute it. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11021; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, §§ 1, 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-224. - Bonds. 
(a)  Police bond. The chief of police may require the applicant for a parade permit to furnish to the county a bond in an amount not to exceed two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00). Any police bond submitted shall be given from a good and sufficient surety or sureties approved by the county. Such police bond shall secure the faithful acceptance by the permittee and shall be issued for the protection of the county and shall be made payable to the county or to any person in the county who may suffer any injury or damage from any vehicle, float, device or person participating in the parade. The bonds shall be of a forfeiture type. All sureties should be licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, must have the ratings established by the finance department and be listed in the Department of Treasury's publication of companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable reinsuring companies. 
(b)  Sanitation bond. 
(1)  In order to ensure that all rights-of-way used for the parade route are kept free and clear of all litter and other debris and such route is properly cleaned up and cleared at the termination of the parade, the chief of police may require an applicant to furnish to the county a sanitation bond in the amount of five-thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Any sanitation bond submitted shall be given from a good and sufficient surety or sureties approved by the county. Such sanitation bond shall secure the faithful acceptance by the permittee and shall be issued for the protection of and payable to the county. The bonds shall be of a forfeiture type. All sureties should be licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, must have the ratings established by the finance department and be listed in the Department of Treasury's publication of companies holding certificates of authority as acceptable reinsuring companies. Release of said bond will be conditioned upon the permittee completely clearing and cleaning the parade route of any litter or other debris. 
(2)  The permittee shall have up to six (6) hours following the end of the event to clean the parade route of any litter or other debris, after which time the sanitation department will inspect the area to determine if the permittee has complied with all clean-up requirements. If the sanitation department is satisfied that the area has been sufficiently cleared of any litter or other debris, the sanitation department will release the bond. If the area has not been cleaned sufficiently, the sanitation department will photograph the uncleaned area, dispatch crews to the parade route to remove any remaining litter or debris, and the county shall maintain an action against the bond for the cost of the clean-up. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11022; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01; Ord. No. 16-03 , Pt. I, 4-12-16) 
Sec. 17-225. - Issuance. 
The chief of police shall determine whether or not the parade permit application is properly made and, after analyzing the information contained therein, the information from the departments consulted and any other information gathered, shall determine whether or not the parade permit should be granted. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11023; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-226. - Appeals from denial. 
Any applicant who has been denied a parade permit by the chief of police has the right to file an appeal to the board of commissioners within five (5) days from the date the application is denied. It shall be incumbent upon the board to hear the appeal at any regular or special meeting of the board, to be held at any time not less than thirty (30) nor more than ninety (90) calendar days from the date the appeal is received by the chief executive. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11024; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 4, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 17-227. - Hours restricted. 
No parade permit shall be issued for any parade to be held between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11025) 
Sec. 17-228. - Exemptions. 
No parade sanitation bond shall be required for: 
(1)  Students participating in school sponsored activities where the parade route does not involve a major or minor arterial street; 
(2)  Neighborhood associations where the parade route is within the geographic area of the subdivision/neighborhood and includes only residential streets; and 
(3)  County-sponsored activities. 
( Ord. No. 16-03 , Pt. I, 4-12-16) 
Secs. 17-229—17-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFF-ROAD VEHICLES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Off-road vehicles at DeKalb-Peachtree Airport, § 6-123. 
State Law reference— Off-road vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 17-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Off-road vehicle means any motorized vehicle designed for or capable of cross-country travel on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice, marsh, swampland or other natural terrain and not intended for use predominantly on public roads. "Off-road vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, four-wheel drive or low-pressure tire vehicles, two-wheel vehicles, amphibious machines, ground effect or air cushion vehicles, and any other means of transporation deriving power from any source other than muscle or wind, except that such term excludes any motorboat; any military, fire or law enforcement vehicle; any vehicle used exclusively on airports; all farm machinery, farm tractors, and other self-propelled equipment for harvesting and transportation of forest products, for clearing land for planting, for utility services and maintenance, for earth moving, construction or mining; and self-propelled lawnmowers, snowblowers, garden or lawn tractors, or golf carts, while such vehicles are being used exclusively for their designed purposes. 
Operate means to ride in or on and control the operation of an off-road vehicle, whether in motion or at rest. 
Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of an off-road vehicle. 
Ride means to ride in or on as a passenger but not control the operation of an off-road vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 8-19002) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-242. - Enforcement. 
Any law enforcement officer whose duty it is to enforce the provisions of this article may stop and examine any off-road vehicle for the purpose of ascertaining whether it is being operated in compliance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 8-19007) 
Sec. 17-243. - Operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an off-road vehicle off the roadway or on the property of another under the following circumstances: 
(1)  On the private property of another without first obtaining permission from the landowner, lessee or other person in control of the property; permission shall not be required where notice is conspicuously posted on the property declaring it open to off-road vehicles; 
(2)  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place between 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. except where the off-road vehicle operator is the owner, lessee or invited guest of the owner or lessee of the residence, place of worship, business or public meeting place. 
(Code 1976, § 8-19003) 
Secs. 17-244—17-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MISCELLANEOUS RULES 

Sec. 17-261. - Manner of riding on vehicle. 
No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in a space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11012) 
Sec. 17-262. - Play streets—Authority to establish; signing. 
The county may declare any street or part thereof a play street and place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect it. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11013) 
Sec. 17-263. - Same—Driving on; speed limit. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then the driver shall exercise the highest degree of care in driving upon such street or portion thereof, and at no time shall the driver's speed exceed five (5) miles per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11014) 
Sec. 17-264. - Roller skates, coasters, etc. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coasters, toy vehicles or similar devices, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so coasting such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds, or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to take hold of or hang onto any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of automobiles or other vehicles along and in the streets of the county, or for two (2) or more persons to join hands while skating on the sidewalk. Any person so skating or riding shall give right-of-way to, and in no way interfere with, persons walking on the sidewalks. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for violation of this chapter; provided, however, that an offender under the age of seventeen (17) years shall be dealt with as provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 15, ch. 11 [§ 15-11-1 et seq.]. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person or any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11015) 
Sec. 17-265. - Towing. 
No vehicle shall tow more than one (1) other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11016) 
Sec. 17-266. - Speed of trains. 
The maximum speed limit for grade crossings in the unincorporated area of the county is established as designated in section 17-358, and all train operators or engineers shall reduce the speed of their trains to a maximum of the stated speed limits within one thousand (1,000) feet before crossing each of these grade crossings. 
(Code 1976, § 8-8020) 
Sec. 17-267. - Railroad trains not to block streets. 
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate it in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five (5) minutes. This provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(Code 1976, § 8-11017) 
Sec. 17-268. - Motor vehicles using bike lanes or paths. 
(a)  No motor vehicle or motorcycle shall be operated on any bicycle lane or path for any purpose including parking, passing or turning unless otherwise permitted by the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  No person shall at any time drive, stop or park any vehicle except an emergency vehicle within a bike lane or bike path. 
(c)  No person shall drive upon or across a bicycle lane except after giving the right-of-way to all bicycles within the lane. 
(Code 1976, § 8-12013.2) 
Sec. 17-269. - Contributing factor to a collision. 
(a)  If a driver improperly uses a mobile telephone while he or she operates a moving motor vehicle and it is proven that the mobile telephone's improper usage distracted the driver from safe operation of such a vehicle and was a contributing factor in any collision resulting in death, physical injury, and/or property damage; then the court is authorized to impose an additional fine up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court for the violation of the underlying traffic offense. The total fine amount shall not exceed the maximum fine amount allowed by section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-13, Pt. I, 8-22-06) 
Sec. 17-270. - Outdoor advertising spotlights, definitions. 
Outdoor advertising spotlight in sections 17-270 through 17-272 means a mobile or fixed projector designed to produce an approximately parallel beam of light which is aimed above the horizontal plane, the use of which includes, but is not limited to, advertising for special events or an apparatus containing a source of light and a reflector that projects the light produced in a concentrated, far-reaching beam and can be mounted on a swivel so that the beam can be directed. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, Pt. I, 12-18-07) 
Sec. 17-271. - Outdoor advertising spotlight permit and time restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use an outdoor advertising spotlight in the unincorporated area of the county without first securing a permit from the county. No permit issued by the county shall allow outdoor advertising spotlights to be used for a period exceeding fourteen (14) days from date of issuance. It shall be unlawful for any person to use a permitted outdoor advertising spotlight after midnight. 
(b)  Outdoor advertising spotlights shall not be mounted in a way that is distracting to motorists or pilots who operate aircraft or in a way that interferes with the safe operation of a motor vehicle or aircraft, as may be determined by the police chief or designee. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, Pt. I, 12-18-07) 
Sec. 17-272. - Application and issuance of permit. 
(a)  Application. To obtain an outdoor advertising spotlight permit, the applicant shall file with the police chief or designee a written application on a form promulgated by the police chief or designee. The police chief or designee shall have the authority to determine what pertinent information is required in the application. The application for a permit shall be made at least fifteen (15) days before the date of use of the outdoor advertising spotlight. 
(b)  Issuance. The chief of police or designee shall determine whether or not the permit application is complete; that is if it contains all of the pertinent information required in the application form to grant the permit. After receipt of a complete application the police chief or designee shall grant or deny the permit within ten (10) days. If the permit is issued, it shall be granted for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days from date of issuance. If the permit is denied, the police chief or designee shall provide written notice to the applicant setting forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such denial. 
(c)  Appeals from denial. The decision of the police chief or designee to deny an outdoor advertising spotlight permit shall be final unless the applicant files a petition for writ of certiorari to the DeKalb County Superior Court within fifteen (15) days of the date of the police chief or designee's decision. 
(d)  Exemptions. The following properties are exempt from obtaining an outdoor advertising spotlight permit and exempt from the time restrictions set forth in section 17-271: 
(1)  Any property owned or operated by the federal government, state government, any municipality or any public authority of the state, including, but not limited to, Stone Mountain Park. 
(e)  Renewals. A permit for an outdoor advertising spotlight shall indicate an expiration date which is fourteen (14) days from the date of issue. Application for renewal may be made at any time following the ninetieth day after the date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, Pt. I, 12-18-07) 
Sec. 17-273. - Denial. 
No permit for an outdoor advertising spotlight shall be issued under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The outdoor advertising spotlight compromises safety, security and visibility through excessive glare; 
(2)  The outdoor advertising spotlight diminishes the privacy of the surrounding neighborhood or neighbors; or 
(3)  The applicant has violated any provision of this code or any other applicable state or federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, Pt. I, 12-18-07) 
Sec. 17-274. - Suspension or revocation. 
An outdoor advertising spotlight may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police or designee for failure of a permit applicant to comply with the provisions of this article or where the applicant furnishes fraudulent or false information on the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, Pt. I, 12-18-07) 
Sec. 17-275. - Permit fees. 
No outdoor advertising spotlight permit shall be issued until a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which will be on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, is paid to the county. 
(Ord. No. 07-31, Pt. I, 12-18-07) 
Secs. 17-276—17-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLES X—XX. - RESERVED 

Secs. 17-301—17-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XXI. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 

Sec. 17-351. - Through streets. 
The following are through streets: 
Allgood Road. 
Ashford-Dunwoody Road. 
Austin Drive. 
Boring Road. 
Bouldercrest Road. 
Brannen Road. 
Briarcliff Road. 
Briarwood Road. 
Brockett Road. 
Browns Mill Road. 
Buford Highway. 
Candler Road. 
Carroll Avenue. 
Cedar Grove Road. 
Cedar Street. 
Chamblee-Dunwoody Road. 
Chamblee-Tucker Road. 
Cheshire Bridge Road. 
Clairmont Road. 
Clifton Road. 
Clifton Springs Road. 
College Avenue. 
Columbia Drive. 
Constitution Road. 
Cooledge Road. 
Coventry Road. 
Covington Drive. 
Covington Road. 
Crestline Road. 
Dekalb Industrial Way. 
Dresden Drive. 
East Clifton Road. 
East Custer Avenue. 
East Lake Drive. 
Eastland Road. 
East Mountain Street. 
East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
East Roxboro Road. 
Evans Mill Road. 
Fair Oaks Road. 
Flakes Mill Road. 
Flat Shoals Road. 
Frazier Road. 
Glendale Avenue. 
Glendale Road. 
Glenwood Road. 
Gresham Road. 
Hairston Road. 
Hambrick Crossing Road. 
Harts Mill Road. 
Henderson Road. 
Henderson Mill Road. 
Hill Street. 
Houston Mill Road. 
Howard Avenue. 
Howard Street. 
Hugh Howell Drive. 
Idlewood Road. 
Indian Creek Drive. 
Indian Creek Drive, North. 
Johnson Road. 
Johnson Ferry Road. 
Kelly Chapel Road. 
Kensington Road. 
Klondike Road. 
Lanier Avenue. 
Laredo Way. 
LaVista Road. 
Lawrenceville Highway. 
Lullwater Road. 
Mason Mill Road. 
McAfee Road. 
McDonough Street. 
Meadow Lane. 
Medlock Road. 
Memorial Drive. 
Midway Road. 
Miller Road. 
Montreal Road. 
Moreland Avenue. 
Mountain Drive. 
Mountain Industrial Boulevard. 
Mount Vernon Road. 
New Peachtree Road. 
Norman Road. 
Norris Lake Road. 
North Clarendon Avenue. 
North Decatur Road. 
North Druid Hills Road. 
North Hairston Road. 
North Peachtree Road. 
Northcrest Road. 
Northern Avenue. 
Oak Cliff Road. 
Oak Grove Road. 
Old Lawrenceville Road. 
Old Lilburn Road. 
Old Norcross Road. 
Old Stone Mountain Road. 
Osborne Road. 
Oxford Road. 
Panola Road. 
Peachcrest Road. 
Peachtree Industrial Boulevard. 
Peachtree Road. 
Peeler Road. 
Pleasantdale Road. 
Pleasant Hill Road. 
Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Ray's Road. 
Redan Road. 
River Road. 
Roberts Road. 
Rockbridge Road. 
Rock Chapel Road. 
Rock Mountain Boulevard. 
Rock Springs Road. 
Salem Road. 
Scott Boulevard. 
Second Avenue. 
Shadow Rock Drive. 
Shallowford Road. 
Sheridan Road. 
Snapfinger Road. 
South Deshon Road. 
Spalding Drive. 
Stephenson Road. 
Stillwater Road. 
Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road. 
Stone Mountain-Redan Road. 
Sycamore Drive. 
The By-Way. 
Thompson Mill Road. 
Tilly Mill Road. 
Tilson Road. 
Tucker-Stone Mountain Road. 
Union Grove Road. 
Waldrop Road. 
Ward Lake Road. 
Wellborn Road. 
Wesley Chapel Road. 
West Mountain Street. 
Whites Mill Road. 
Wilkerson Drive. 
Willivee Drive. 
Windsor Parkway. 
Winters Chapel Road. 
Young Road. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 101) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(6). 
Sec. 17-352. - Speed zone numbers 1 (65 mph) and 2 (55 mph). 
(a)  Zone number 1. The streets referred to in section 17-111 as zone number 1 in which the speed limit is sixty-five (65) miles per hour shall consist of the following streets or portions of streets: 
Interstate 20 (Southeast Expressway), from Snapfinger Creek to the Rockdale County line. 
Georgia Highway 410 (Stone Mountain Freeway), from Brockett Road/Cooledge Road to Georgia Highway 10 (Stone Mountain Freeway Connector). 
Georgia Highway 10 (Stone Mountain Freeway), from Georgia Highway 410 (Stone Mountain Bypass) to Hugh Howell Road (Georgia Highway 236). 
Interstate 675 (Georgia Highway 413), from the Clayton County Line to Cedar Grove Road (overpass). 
(b)  Zone number 2A. The streets referred to in section 17-111 as zone number 2A in which the speed limit is fifty-five (55) miles per hour shall consist of the following streets or portions of streets: 
Interstate 20 (Southeast Expressway), from the Atlanta City limits to Snapfinger Creek. 
Interstate 85 (Northeast Expressway), from the Fulton County line to the Gwinnett County line. 
Interstate 285 (Circumferential Expressway), from the Fulton County line (between Moreland Avenue and Jonesboro Road) to 0.33 miles south of Buford Highway (E. Doraville City limits). 
Georgia Highway 410 (Stone Mountain Freeway), from Lawrenceville Highway to Brockett Road/Cooledge Road. 
Interstate 675 (Georgia Highway 413), from Cedar Grove Road (overpass) to Interstate 285 (Circumferential Expressway). 
(c)  Zone number 2B. The streets referred to in section 17-111 as zone number 2B in which the speed limit is fifty-five (55) miles per hour shall consist of the following streets or portions of streets: 
Browns Mill Road (Georgia Highway 212), from Panola Road to the Rockdale County line. 
Snapfinger Road (Georgia Highway 155), from Dogwood Farm Road to the Henry County line. 
Stone Mountain Bypass (Georgia Highway 10), from Goldsmith Road to the Gwinnett County line. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 102; Ord. No. 07-25, Pt. I, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 10-01, Pt. I, 1-26-10 ; Ord. No. 12-14, Pt. I, 9-25-12 ) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate speed, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(10), 40-6-184. 
Sec. 17-353. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-25, Pt. I, adopted Nov. 13, 2007, deleted § 17-353, which pertained to speed zone number 3 (50 mph). 
Sec. 17-354. - Speed zone number 4 (45 mph). 
The streets referred to in section 17-111 as zone number 4 in which the speed limit is forty-five (45) miles per hour shall consist of the following streets or portions of streets: 
Browns Mill Road (Georgia Highway 212), from Snapfinger Road to 0.10 miles east of Panola Road. 
Browns Mill Road (Georgia Highway 212), Arabia Mountain Academy School Zone, from two hundred thirty (230) feet east of Latchwood Drive to three hundred seventy (370) feet east of Garden City Drive. 
Buford Highway (Georgia Highway 13), from the Fulton County line to Shallowford Terrace (S. Chamblee City limits). 
Candler Road (Georgia Highway 155), from 0.10 miles south of Memorial Drive to Flat Shoals Road. 
Cedar Grove Road, from fourteen hundred (1,400) feet west of Bouldercrest Road to Moreland Avenue. 
Chamblee-Tucker Road, from Shallowford Road to Interstate 85. 
Clevemont Road, from River Road to Linecrest Road. 
Constitution Road, from Fayetteville Road to Bouldercrest Road. 
Covington Highway (Georgia Highway 12), from the Avondale Estates city limits to Interstate 20. 
DeKalb Industrial Way, from Lawrenceville Highway to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
East Conley Road, from Cedar Grove Road to the Clayton County line. 
Expressway frontage-access-service road; all expressways: Expressway frontage or access or service roads, not otherwise named, in the unincorporated portions of the county, unless a different rate of speed has been specifically authorized for that particular street by ordinance. 
Flakes Mill Road, from Flat Shoals Parkway to the Henry County line. 
Flat Shoals Parkway (Georgia Highway 155), from Flat Shoals Road to Snapfinger Road. 
Flat Shoals Road (Georgia Highway 155), from Candler Road to Interstate 285. 
Hugh Howell Road (Georgia Highway 236), from Lawrenceville Highway to Stone Mountain Bypass. 
Kensington Road, from Memorial Drive to Holcombe Road. 
LaVista Road (Georgia Highway 236), from Northlake Parkway to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Lawrenceville Highway (Georgia Highway 8), from Scott Boulevard to the Gwinnett County line. 
Linecrest Road, from River Road to Ward Lake Road. 
Lithonia Industrial Boulevard, from South Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road to Hillandale Drive. 
Mall Parkway, from Evans Mill Road to Interstate 20 Frontage Road. 
Memorial Drive (Georgia Highway 10), from Covington Highway to Goldsmith Road. 
Memorial Drive (Georgia Highway 154), from Candler Road to Mountain Drive. 
Mercer University Drive, from Henderson Mill Road to Chamblee Tucker Road. 
Moreland Avenue (Georgia Highway 42), from the Atlanta city limits to the Clayton County line. 
Mountain Industrial Boulevard, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to the Gwinnett County line. 
Norris Lake Drive, from Norris Lake Road to Pleasant Hill Road. 
North Arcadia Avenue, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to DeKalb Industrial Way. 
North Decatur Road, from Scott Boulevard to North Indian Creek Drive. 
North Druid Hills Road, from Buford Highway to East Roxboro Road. 
North Hairston Road, from Rockbridge Road to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
North Stone Mountain Lithonia Road, from Rockbridge Road to the Stone Mountain city limits. 
Oakvale Road, from Panthersville Road to River Road. 
Old Covington Road (Georgia Highway 12), from Turner Hill Road to the Rockdale County line. 
Old McDonough Road, from Cedar Grove Road to Conley Road. 
Panola Industrial Boulevard, from Panola Road to Miller Road. 
Panola Road, from Thompson Mill Road to South Stone Mountain Lithonia Road. 
Panthersville Road, from Flat Shoals Parkway to Bouldercrest Road. 
Peachtree Road (Georgia Highway 141), from 0.10 miles north of Brookhaven Drive/Dresdan Drive to 0.24 miles north of Redding Road. 
Pleasantdale Road, from Tucker Norcross Road to the Gwinnett County line. 
Pleasant Hill Road, from Rock Chapel Road to the Rockdale County line. 
Redan Road, from Covington Highway to South Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road. 
River Road, from Bouldercrest Road to Snapfinger Road. 
Rockbridge Road, from North Clarendon Avenue to the Pine Lake city limits and from the Pine Lake city limits to the Gwinnett County line. 
Rockdale Road, from Evans Mill Road to the Rockdale County line. 
Shallowford Road, from Briarcliff Road to the Chamblee city limits and Shallowford Terrace. 
Silver Hill Road, from Hugh Howell Road to Lilburn-Stone Mountain Road (at the Stone Mountain Bypass). 
Sims Road, from Linecrest Road to Pleas Road. 
Snapfinger Woods Drive, from Panola Road to Snapfinger Road. 
South Deshon Road, from Rockbridge Road to Wellborn Road. 
South Goddard Road, from Klondike Road to the Rockdale County line. 
Stephenson Road, from Rockbridge Road to Rock Chapel Road. 
Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road, from Rockbridge Road to the Lithonia City limits. 
Turner Hill Road, from Interstate 20 to Rockland Road. 
Union Grove Road, from Rock Chapel Road to the Rockdale County line. 
Waldrop Road, from Flat Shoals Parkway to River Road. 
Ward Lake Road, from Bouldercrest Road to the Henry County line. 
Wesley Chapel Road, from Covington Highway to Flat Shoals Parkway. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 104; Ord. No. 88-14, 1-26-88; Ord. No. 88-23a, 12-27-88; Ord. No. 89-12, 3-28-89; Ord. No. 89-17, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 89-32, 7-25-89; Ord. No. 89-39, 10-24-89; Ord. No. 89-44, 11-14-89; Ord. No. 90-34, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 90-35, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 90-37, 10-9-90; Ord. No. 93-07, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 94-12, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-13, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-14, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-16, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-17, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-19, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-20, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-21, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-22, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-24, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 97-16, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 07-25, Pt. I, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 10-01, Pt. I, 1-26-10 ; Ord. No. 12-14, Pt. I, 9-25-12 ) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate speed, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(10), 40-6-184. 
Sec. 17-355. - Speed zone number 5 (40 mph). 
The streets referred to in section 17-111 as zone number 5 which the speed limit is forty (40) miles per hour shall consist of the following streets or portion of streets: 
Austin Drive, from Redwing Circle to Snapfinger Road. 
Bouldercrest Road, from Blue Creek to Loveless Drive. 
Brockett Road, from Lawrenceville Highway to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Cedar Grove Road, from Bouldercrest Road to one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet west thereof. 
Chamblee Tucker Road, from Interstate 285 to LaVista Road. 
Clairmont Road (Georgia Highway 155), Cliff Valley School Zone, from 0.06 miles north of Pine Forest Drive to 0.04 miles north of Grace Arbor Court. 
Clairmont Road, from Desmond Drive to Buford Highway and from Buford Highway to Tobey Road. 
Cleveland Road, from between Snapfinger Road and Rock Springs Road. 
Columbia Drive, from Interstate 20 to Memorial Drive. 
Cooledge Road, from Brockett Road to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Durham Park Road, from Kensington Road to South Indian Creek Drive. 
East Ponce de Leon Avenue, from Sams Crossing to Pecan Street. 
East Ponce de Leon Avenue, from West Smith Street to the entrance ramp to eastbound State Route 10. 
Evans Mill Road, from Interstate 20 to Browns Mill Road. 
Fairington Road, from Panola Road to Hillandale Drive. 
Glenwood Avenue, from Winthrop Drive to Bernice Street. 
Glenwood Road, from Hooper Street to Covington Highway, 
Hayden Quarry Road, from Klondike Road to Turner Hill Road. 
Hillandale Drive, from Panola Road to Fairington Road. 
Klondike Road, from Lithonia city limits to the Rockdale County line. 
Lilburn-Stone Mountain Road, from Silver Hill Road to the Gwinnett County line. 
North Druid Hills Road, from Briarcliff Road to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Northlake Parkway, from LaVista Road to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Old Stone Mountain Road, from Lilburn-Stone Mountain Road to the Gwinnett County line. 
Phillips Road, from South Stone Mountain Lithonia Road to Covington Highway. 
Rainbow Drive, from Wesley Chapel Road to Chandler Road. 
Salem Road, from Evans Mill Road to Browns Mill Road. 
Scott Boulevard (Georgia Highway 8), from West Ponce de Leon Avenue to the Decatur city limits and from the Decatur city limits to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Snapfinger Road, from Austin Drive to Snapfinger Woods Drive. 
South Hairston Road, from Wesley Chapel Road to Rockbridge Road. 
Stewart Mill Road, from Rockbridge Road to Bermuda Road. 
Thompson Mill Road, from Panola Road to Snapfinger Road. 
Wellborn Road, from South Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road to Covington Highway. 
Young Road, from Covington Highway to Redan Road. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 105; Ord. No. 88-23a, 12-27-88; Ord. No. 89-12, 3-28-89; Ord. No. 89-39, 10-24-89; Ord. No. 90-34, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 90-35, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 93-07, 3-23-93; Ord. No. 94-13, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-14, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-16, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-17, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-19, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-20, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-22, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-24, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 07-25, Pt. I, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 10-01, Pt. I, 1-26-10 ; Ord. No. 12-14, Pt. I, 9-25-12 ) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate speed, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(10), 40-6-184. 
Sec. 17-356. - Speed zone number 6 (35 mph). 
The streets referred to in section 17-111 as zone number 6 in which the speed limit is thirty-five (35) miles per hour shall consist of the following streets or portion of streets: 
Allgood Road, from Rockbridge Road to Redan Road. 
Bankers Circle, from Bankers Industrial Drive to Bankers Industrial Drive. 
Boring Road, from Flat Shoals Road to Wesley Chapel Road. 
Bouldercrest Road, from Loveless Drive to Eastland Road. 
Brannen Road, from Gresham Road to Fayetteville Road. 
Briarcliff Road, from North Druid Hills Road to the east intersection with LaVista Road. 
Briarlake Road, from Briarcliff Road to LaVista Road. 
Briarwood Road, from North Druid Hills Road to Interstate 85 (Northeast Expressway) access/frontage/service road. 
Britt Road, from Tucker Norcross Road to the Gwinnett County line. 
Brockett Road, from Lawrenceville Highway to LaVista Road. 
Candler Road (Georgia Highway 155), from the Atlanta city limits to Interstate 20. 
Central Drive, from Goldsmith Road to Rays Road. 
Chamblee-Tucker Road, from Interstate 85 to Interstate 285. 
Chestnut Drive, from Aztec Road to DeKalb Technology Parkway. 
Church Street, from Decatur city limits to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Clairmont Road (Georgia Highway 155), from the Decatur city limits to Desmond Drive. 
Clifton Road, from Briarcliff Road to Haygood Drive. 
Clifton Church Road, from Flat Shoals Road to Bouldercrest Road. 
Clifton Springs Road, from Clifton Church Road to Panthersville Road. 
Columbia Drive, from Katie Kerr Drive to Memorial Drive. 
Covington Drive (Georgia Spur 154), from Memorial Drive to Covington Highway. 
Covington Highway (Georgia Highway 10), from Covington Highway (E. Avondale Estates City limits) to 0.10 miles east (of Covington Highway). 
Crestline Road, from Oak Grove Road to Briarcliff Road. 
Dresden Drive, from Peachtree Road to Chamblee-Tucker Road. 
East College Avenue (Georgia Highway 10), from Sams Street to fifty (50) feet west of Livingston Place. 
East Lake Road (Georgia Highway 10), from Ponce de Leon Avenue to East Parkwood Road. 
East Roxboro Road, from North Druid Hills Road to the Fulton County line. 
Eastland Road, from Moreland Avenue to Bouldercrest Road. 
Elam Road, between Rowland Road and South Hairston Road. 
Ellis Road, from Rowland Road to Redan Road. 
Evans Mill Road, from Interstate 20 to Reagin Street. 
Evans Road, from Henderson Mill Road to Chamblee-Tucker Road. 
Fairington Parkway, from Fairington Drive to the dead end. 
Fayetteville Road, from Moreland Avenue to Key Road and from Flat Shoals Road to Glenwood Avenue. 
Fellowship Road, from Lawrenceville Highway to LaVista Road. 
Flat Shoals Road, between Fayetteville Road and Candler Road. 
Frazier Road, from Lawrenceville Highway to LaVista Road. 
Georgia Luther Drive, between Memorial Drive and Durham Drive. 
Glenfair Drive, from Glenwood Road to Snapfinger Road. 
Greer Circle, from Saar Parkway to Mountain Industrial Boulevard. 
Gresham Road, from Flat Shoals Road to Clifton Church Road. 
Hambrick Road, from Rockbridge Road to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Harts Mill Road, from Ashford-Dunwoody Road to one hundred seventy (170) feet east of Flowerland Drive. 
Henderson Mill Road, from LaVista Road to Chamblee-Tucker Road. 
Henrico Road, from Moreland Avenue to West Side Place. 
Hillandale Drive, from Fairington Road to Lithonia Industrial Boulevard/Chubb Road. 
Holt Road, from Shadow Rock Road to South Deshon Road. 
Honeysuckle Lane, from McCall Drive to McElroy Road. 
Idlewood Road, from Lawrenceville Highway to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Indian Creek Way, from Northern Avenue to North Indian Creek Drive. 
Johnson Ferry Road, from Keswick Drive to Fulton County Line. 
Juliette Road, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to the dead end. 
Katie Kerr Drive, from Columbia Drive to Arcadia Avenue. 
Kelley Chapel Road, from Rainbow Drive to Flat Shoals Road. 
Kelley Lake Road, from Candler Road to Whites Mill Road, 
Kelton Drive, from Central Drive to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Key Road, from Moreland Avenue to Bouldercrest Road. 
Lake Hearn Drive, from Ashford-Dunwoody Road to the Fulton County line. 
Laredo Drive, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to North Clarendon Avenue. 
LaVista Road (Georgia Highway 236), from Northlake Parkway to the Fulton County line. 
Lewis Road, from Roadhaven Drive to Rock Mountain Boulevard. 
Lloyd Road, from Flat Shoals Road to Whites Mill Road (at Kelley Lake Road). 
Maddox Road, from Rogers Lake Road to Rock Chapel Road. 
Marbut Road, from Panola Road to Lithonia Industrial Boulevard. 
Martin Road, from Rockbridge Road to Selene Drive. 
McAfee Road, from Second Avenue to Columbia Drive. 
McCall Drive, Interstate 85 Access Road to Honeysuckle Lane. 
McDaniel Mill Road, from Rockland Road to the Rockdale County line. 
McElroy Road, from Buford Highway to the cul-de-sac. 
McLendon Road, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Medlock Road, from Wood Trail Lane to 0.10 miles north of Church Street. 
Memorial College Drive, from North Indian Creek Drive to Memorial Drive. 
Memorial Drive (Georgia Highway 141), from 0.05 miles east of Candler Road (Atlanta City limits) to 0.10 miles east of Candler Road. 
Midvale Road, from LaVista Road to Henderson Mill Road. 
Midway Road, from Covington Highway to Memorial Drive. 
Miller Road, from Covington Highway to Rock Springs Road. 
Montreal Road, from Lawrenceville Highway to Juneau Court and from LaVista Road to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Moore Road, from Cedar Grove Road to Bouldercrest Road. 
Norman Road, from Rays Road to one hundred (100) feet west of Belle Gade Drive. 
North Clarendon Avenue, from Church Street to the Avondale Estates city limits. 
North Decatur Road, from the Decatur city limits to Scott Boulevard and from the Decatur city limits to Lullwater Road. 
North Decatur Road, Druid Hills High School Zone, from one hundred fifty (150) feet west of Westminster Way to one thousand one hundred ten (1,110) feet in a westerly direction. 
North DeKalb Drive, from Buford Highway to McElroy Road. 
North Deshon Road, from Rockbridge Road to the Gwinnett County line. 
North Druid Hills Road, from Peachtree Road to East Roxboro Road. 
North Indian Creek Drive, from Rockbridge Road to Jamieson Place. 
North Royal Atlanta Drive, from Lawrenceville Highway to South Royal Atlanta Drive. 
Northcrest Road, from Oakcliff Road to Chamblee-Tucker Road. 
Northern Avenue, from Memorial Drive to Church Street. 
Northlake Parkway, from LaVista Road to Henderson Mill Road. 
Oakcliff Road, from Pleasantdale Road to the Doraville city limits. 
Oak Grove Road, from Briarcliff Road to LaVista Road. 
Old Norcross Road, from Lawrenceville Highway to the Gwinnett County line. 
Osborne Road, from Peachtree Road to Windsor Parkway. 
Parklake Drive, from LaVista Road to Northlake Parkway. 
Peachcrest Road, from Midway Road to Columbia Drive. 
Peachtree Road (Georgia Highway 141), from the Fulton County line to 0.10 miles north of Brookhaven Drive/Dresdan. 
Plaster Road, from Dresden Drive to Johnson Road. 
Ponce de Leon Avenue (Georgia Highway 8, 10), from 0.05 miles east of Clifton Road to 0.01 miles east of East Lake Road. 
Ponce de Leon Avenue (Georgia Highway 8), from East Lake Road to 0.01 miles east of East Parkwood Road. 
Presidential Drive, from Presidential Parkway to Presidential Parkway, 
Rays Road, from Rockbridge Road to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Redwing Circle, from Covington Highway to Covington Highway. 
Rice Road, from South Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road to South Deshon Road. 
Rockbridge Road, Avondale Middle School Zone, from twenty-five (25) feet east of North Clarendon Avenue to Creighton Avenue. 
Rock Mountain Boulevard, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Lewis Road. 
Rowland Road, from Rockbridge Road to South Indian Creek Drive. 
Sarr Parkway, from Idlewood Road to Mountain Industrial Boulevard. 
Second Avenue, from Glenwood Road to Flat Shoals Road. 
Shadow Rock Drive, from South Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road to South Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road. 
Sheppard Road, from Rockbridge Road to the Stone Mountain city limits. 
Silver Hill Road, from Lilburn-Stone Mountain Road to the Stone Mountain city limits. 
Snapfinger Road, from Columbia Drive to Austin Drive. 
South Flowers Road, from Chamblee-Tucker Road to Mercer University Drive. 
South Indian Creek Drive, from Covington Highway to Rockbridge Road. 
South Royal Atlanta Drive, from Mountain Industrial Boulevard to the dead end. 
Sycamore Drive, from Church Street to the Decatur city limits. 
Tilson Road, from Second Avenue to Candler Road. 
Tucker Industrial Boulevard, from Hugh Howell Road to dead end. 
Valley Brook Road, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to North Druid Hills Road. 
West Mountain Street, from Memorial Drive to the Stone Mountain city limits. 
Whites Mill East, from Lloyd Road to Candler Road. 
Whites Mill Road, from Lloyd Road to Flat Shoals Road. 
Woodstock Boulevard, from Interstate 85 Access Road to Flowers Road South. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 106; Ord. No. 88-14, 1-26-88; Ord. No. 89-17, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 89-44, 11-14-89; Ord. No. 90-37, 10-9-90; Ord. No. 94-12, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-15, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-18, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-21, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-23, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 97-13, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 97-16, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 97-19, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 07-25, Pt. I, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 10-01, Pt. I, 1-26-10 ; Ord. No. 12-14, Pt. I, 9-25-12 ) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate speed, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(10), 40-6-184. 
Sec. 17-357. - Speed zone number 7 (30 mph). 
Zone number 7. The streets referred to in section 17-111 as zone number 7 in which the speed limit is thirty (30) miles per hour shall consist of the following streets or portions of streets: 
Alford Road, from Stephenson Road to South Deshon Road. 
Asbury Drive, from Stephenson Road to Rock Chapel Road (S.R. 124). 
Covington Highway (Georgia Highway 12), Bethune Middle School Zone, from 0.30 miles east of Gregory Road to 0.74 miles east of Gregory Road. 
Fellowship Road, from Idlewood Road to Lawrenceville Highway. 
Goldsmith Road, from Memorial Drive to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Houston Mill Road, from LaVista Road to Clifton Road. 
King Road, from North Born Road to Walker Road. 
Mabry Road, from Windsor Parkway to East Brookhaven Drive. 
Mill Creek Road, from Johnson Ferry Road to the Fulton County line. 
Mainstreet Park Drive, from South Hairston Road to Forest Path. 
North Decatur Road, from Lullwater Road to Briarcliff Road. 
North Goddard Road, from Klondike Road to Rockland Road. 
Rock Springs Road, from Thompson Mill Road to Panola Road. 
Weelaunee Road, from River Road to Flakes Mill Road. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 107; Ord. No. 89-32, 7-25-89; Ord. No. 94-15, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 94-18, 9-13-94; Ord. No. 97-19, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 07-25, Pt. I, 11-13-07; Ord. No. 10-01, Pt. I, 1-26-10 ; Ord. No. 12-14, Pt. I, 9-25-12 ) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate speed, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(10), 40-6-184. 
Sec. 17-358. - Speed of trains at certain railroad grade crossings. 
(a)  The speed limit of all at-grade crossings in the county on the Seaboard Coastline Railroad and the Southern Railroad is forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(b)  The speed limit of all at-grade crossings on the Georgia Railroad between the Decatur city limits and the Stone Mountain city limits is forty-five (45) miles per hour, and between the Stone Mountain city limits and the Lithonia city limits is sixty (60) miles per hour except as otherwise provided herein. At those grade crossings on the Georgia Railroad where there is a traffic signal at the nearby street and no preempt circuit is in effect, the speed limit is fifteen (15) miles per hour. The crossings having a speed limit of fifteen (15) miles per hour are as follows: 
Goldsmith Road and Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Main Street and East Mountain Street. 
Market Street and Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
North Clarendon Avenue and Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Rays Road and Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road and Rockbridge Road. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 108) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate speed, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-371(a)(10), 40-6-184. 
Sec. 17-359. - One-way streets. 
The following are one-way streets in the directions indicated: 
East Osborne Road, one way, westbound from Caldwell Road to Apple Valley Road. 
McDaniel Road, one-way, southbound from Rockbridge Road to Field Glen Road. 
Ridgewood Drive, one-way, northbound from North Decatur Road to Lowergate Drive. 
Sarr Parkway, one-way, westbound from Mountain Industrial Boulevard to Greer Circle. 
(Code 1976, § 8-2010(a) ; Ord. No. 08-15, Pt. I, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 15-02 , Pt. I, 1-27-15) 
Sec. 17-360. - No left turn zones. 
No left turns are allowed at the following locations: 
For southbound traffic on Azalea Circle on to eastbound North Druid Hills Road. 
For northbound and southbound traffic on Caldwell Road onto westbound Oaklawn Avenue, at all times. 
For northbound traffic on Chamblee-Dunwoody Road on to westbound Valley View Road, at all times. 
For westbound traffic on Chamblee-Tucker Road onto Embry Circle (east side) from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
For northbound traffic on Clifton Road onto westbound Dantzler Drive, at all times. 
For eastbound traffic on East Ponce de Leon Avenue onto Brockett Road (west side), at all times. 
For westbound traffic on Mount Vernon Road onto southbound Corners Drive, at all times. 
For westbound traffic on North Decatur Road onto southbound Clifton Road, at all times. 
For eastbound traffic on North Druid Hills Road on to northbound Azalea Circle. 
For westbound traffic on North Druid Hills Road on to northbound Azalea Circle. 
For northbound traffic on Tilly Mill Road onto westbound Stonington Road and onto westbound Dunkerrin Lane, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., Monday through Friday. 
For northwestbound and southeastbound traffic on Tilly Mill Road onto westbound Cherring Drive, at all times. 
For eastbound traffic on Valley View Road onto northbound Chamblee-Dunwoody Road, at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 8-6007(b); Ord. No. 89-36, 10-24-89; Ord. No. 91-28, 11-12-91; Ord. No. 92-35, 11-24-92; ; Ord. No. 96-05, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 96-06, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 96-08, 4-25-96; Ord. No. 97-08, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 08-02, 11-13-01; Ord. No. 16-02, 1-8-02) 
Sec. 17-361. - Truck routes. 
The following are truck routes: 
All sections of road adjoining property zoned for industrial use by the board of commissioners. 
Ashford Dunwoody Road (county road), from Perimeter Center West to Interstate 285 North/Interstate 285 South Ramps. 
Bailey Street (county road), from Moreland Avenue (State Route 42) to Fayetteville Road. 
Briarcliff Road (State Route 42), from Ponce de Leon Avenue to North Druid Hills Road. 
Bouldercrest Road (county road), from Constitution Road to the Interstate 285 East/Interstate 285 West Ramps. 
Browns Mill Road (State Route 212), from Snapfinger Road (State Route 155) to the Rockdale County line. 
Buford Highway (State Route 13 and U.S. Highway 23). 
Chamblee-Dunwoody Road (county road), from Interstate 285 north to Roberts Drive. 
Chamblee-Dunwoody Road (county road), from Peachtree Boulevard (State Route 141) to Buford Highway (State Route 13). 
Chamblee-Tucker Road (county road), from Peachtree Boulevard (State Route 141) to Interstate I-285. 
Chapman Road (county road), from South Stone Mountain Lithonia Road to Rogers Lake Road. 
Clairmont Road/Clairemont Avenue (State Route 155), from Commerce Drive (State Route 155) to Buford Highway (State Route 13 and U.S. Highway 23). 
Clairmont Road (county road), from Buford Highway (State Route 13 and U.S. Highway 23) north to New Peachtree Road. 
Clevemont Road (county road), from Seminole Road to River Road. 
College Avenue (State Route 12), from Park Place (State Route 10) to East Lake Drive. 
Columbia Drive (county road), from Commerce Drive (State Route 155) to the Southeast Expressway (Interstate 20). 
Commerce Drive (State Route 155), from Clairemont Avenue (State Route 155) to Columbia Drive. 
Constitution Road (county road), from Fayetteville Road to Bouldercrest Road. 
Covington Drive (State Route 154), from Memorial Drive (State Route 154) to Covington Highway (State Route 12). 
Covington Highway (State Route 12), from Stratford Road to Turner Hill Road (State Route 124). 
Covington Road (State Route 12), from North Avondale Road (State Route 12) to Stratford Road. 
DeKalb Industrial Way (county road), from North Arcadia to Lawerenceville Highway (State Route 8). 
East College Avenue (State Route 12), from South McDonough Street (State Route 155) to South Avondale Road. 
East Lake Drive (State Route 10), from East Lake Road to Park Place (State Route 10). 
East Lake Road (State Route 10), from Ponce de Leon Avenue (State Route 8) to East Lake Drive (State Route 10). 
East Ponce de Leon Avenue (county road), from Memorial Drive to the Decatur city limits. 
Evans Mill Road (county road), from Covington Highway (State Route 12) to Browns Mill Road (State Route 212). 
Fayetteville Road (county road), from Bailey Street to Constitution Road. 
Fayetteville Road (county road), from Bouldercrest Road to Flat Shoals Road. 
Flakes Mill Road (county road), from Flat Shoals Parkway (State Route 155) to the Henry County line. 
Flat Shoals Parkway (State Route 155), from Interstate 285 to Snapfinger Road (State Route 155). 
Flat Shoals Road (State Route 155), from Candler Road (State Route 155) to Interstate 285. 
Flat Shoals Road (county road), from Interstate 20 to Fayetteville Road. 
Glenwood Avenue (State Route 260), from the Fulton County line to Interstate 20. 
Glenwood Avenue (county road), from Interstate 20 to Candler Road (State Route 155). 
Glenwood Road (county road), from Candler Road (State Route 155) to Covington Highway (State Route 12). 
Hugh Howell Road (State Route 236), from Lawrenceville Highway (State Route 8) to Stone Mountain Freeway (State Route 10). 
Interstate 285, all of Interstate 285 in the county. 
Klondike Road (county road), from Covington Highway (State Route 12) south to the Rockdale County line. 
LaVista Road (State Route 236). 
Lawrenceville Highway (State Route 8), from the Gwinnett County line to Church Street. 
Lithonia Industrial Boulevard (county road), from Rock Chapel Road (State Route 124) to Interstate 20. 
Malone Drive (county road), from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141) south to Peachtree Road. 
Marbut Road (county road), from Jabco Boulevard to Stone Mountain-Lithonia Road. 
McGaw Drive (county road), from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141) south to Peachtree Road. 
Memorial Drive (State Route 154 and State Route 10). 
Miller Drive (county road), from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141) south to Peachtree Road. 
Montreal Road (county road), from LaVista Road (State Route 236) south to Lawrenceville Road (State Route 8). 
Moreland Avenue (State Route 42), from Ponce de Leon Avenue (State Route 8) south to the Clayton County line. 
Motors Industrial Way (State Route Connector 13), from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141) to Buford Highway (State Route 13). 
Mount Vernon Road (county road), from the Fulton County line (eastern bound) to the Fulton County line (northern bound). 
Mountain Drive (State Route 10), from Covington Road (State Route 12) east to Memorial Drive (State Route 154). 
Mountain Industrial Boulevard (county road), the from Gwinnett County line to East Ponce de Leon Avenue. 
New Peachtree Road (county road), from Clairmont Road to Buford Highway (State Route 13). 
North Arcadia (county road), from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to DeKalb Industrial Way. 
North Avondale Road (State Route 12), from East College Avenue (State Route 12) to Covington Road (State Route 12). 
North Decatur Road (county road), from Clairmont Road (State Route 155) to North Indian Creek Drive. 
North Deshon Road (county road), from Rockbridge Road to the Gwinnett County line. 
North Druid Hills Road (county road and State Route 42), from Peachtree Road (State Route 141) south to Lawrenceville Highway (State Route 8). 
Northeast Expressway (Interstate 85), from the Fulton County line north to the Gwinnett County line. 
North Hairston Road (county road), from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Rockbridge Road. 
Oakcliff Road (county road), from Winters Chapel Road to Buford Highway (State Route 13). 
Panola Road (county road), from Redan Road to Snapfinger Road (State Route 155). 
Park Place (State Route 10), from East Lake Drive (State Route 10) to College Avenue (State Route 10). 
Peachtree Boulevard (State Route 141), from Peachtree Road (State Route 141) to Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141). 
Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141), from Peachtree Road (State Route 141) to the Gwinnett County line. 
Peachtree Road (State Route 141), from the Fulton County line to Peachtree Boulevard (State Route 141). 
Peachtree Road (county road), from Peachtree Boulevard (State Route 141) to Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141). 
Perimeter Center West (county road), from the Fulton County Line to Ashford Dunwoody Road. 
Pierce Drive (county road), from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141) south to New Peachtree Road. 
Ponce de Leon Avenue (State Route 8), from the Fulton County line east to Scott Boulevard (State Route 8). 
Redan Road (county road), from Covington Road east to South Stone Mountain-Redan Road. 
River Road (county road), from Clevemont Road to Flakes Mill Road. 
Rockbridge Road (county road), from North Indian Creek Drive to Rock Chapel Road (State Route 124). 
Rockbridge Road (State Route 124), from Rock Chapel Road (State Route 124) to the Gwinnett County Line. 
Rock Chapel Road (State Route 124), from Turner Hill Road (State Route 124) to Rockbridge Road. 
Rock Mountain Road (county road), from Rock Chapel Road (State Route 124) to Terminus. 
Rogers Lake Road (county road), from Lithonia Industrial Boulevard to Chapman Road. 
Sams Crossing (county road), from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to East College Avenue (State Route 10). 
Scott Boulevard (State Route 8), from Ponce de Leon Avenue (State Route 8) to Church Street. 
Seminole Road (county road), from the Seminole Road landfill to Clevemont Road. 
Snapfinger Road (State Route 155), from Flat Shoals Parkway (State Route 155) to the County Line (south). 
South Candler Street (State Route 155), from East College Avenue (State Route 10) to Flat Shoals Road. 
South Hairston Road (county road), from Rockbridge Road to Wesley Chapel Road. 
South Stone Mountain Lithonia Road (county road), from Wellborn Road to Marbut Road. 
Thurman Drive (State Route 54), from the Fulton County Line to Moreland Avenue (State Route 42). 
Turner Hill Road (State Route 124), from Union Grove Road (State Route 124) to Interstate 20 East and Interstate 20 West Ramps. 
Valley Brook Road (county road), from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to Lawrenceville Highway (State Route 8). 
Wesley Chapel Road (county road), from Covington Highway (State Route 12) south to Flat Shoals Parkway (State Route 155). 
West College Avenue (State Route 12), from East Lake Drive to South McDonough Street. 
West Park Place (State Route 10), from East Lake Drive to West College Avenue (State Route 12). 
Winters Chapel Connector (county road), from Oakcliff Road to Winters Chapel Road. 
Winters Chapel Road (county road), from Peachtree Industrial Boulevard (State Route 141) to Oakcliff Road. 
Winters Chapel Road (county road), from Winters Chapel Connector to Woodwin Road. 
Woodwin Road (county road), from Woodwin Court to Winter Chapel Road. 
(Code 1976, App. A, § 109; Ord. No. 88-30, 5-24-88; Ord. No. 88-15a, 11-8-88; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 14-03 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(4). 
Sec. 17-362. - No parking generally. 
The streets referred to in section 17-136 in which there shall be no parking are as follows: 
Afton Lane, both sides, 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
Alford Road, east side, from Stephenson Road to the northern property line of # 810 Alford Road, at all times. 
Asgard Court, both sides, from Valhala Drive to end of street, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 
Ashentree Court, from Ashentree Drive to the end of the street, no parking, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., Sundays. 
Ashentree Drive, from Chamblee Dunwoody Road to the end of street, no parking, 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 p.m., Sundays. 
Back Trails, both sides, from Country Address to the end of the street, no parking, 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
Belva Avenue, east side, from Catalina Drive to Belvedere Lane, no parking anytime. 
Bolero Drive, north side, from Henderson Mill Road to the school bus driveway exit, no parking anytime. 
Briarwillow Drive, south side, from Briarcliff Road to Heritage Drive, no parking from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Brookhaven Drive, odd side, from the southern property line of number 0001 to East Brookhaven Drive, no parking, 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
Brookhaven Drive, even side, from the southern property line of number 0004 to East Brookhaven Drive, no parking, 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
Broughton Court, from Vernon Oaks Drive to where the street ends, no parking from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., school days. 
Burlington Road, east side, between 477 Burlington Road and Ridgewood Drive, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Casa Woods Lane, from the western property line of Number 3402 to the western property line of Number 3409, no parking anytime. 
Church Street, both sides, from Scott Boulevard to the city limits of Decatur. 
Clayhill, both sides, from Country Address to the end of the street, no parking, 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
Clifton Road, odd-numbered side, from the southern property line of number 793 to the northern property line of number 865, no parking, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Saturdays and Sundays. 
Cornell Road, south side, from Springdale Road to Emory Road, no parking, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Corners Drive, from Vermack Road to Mount Vernon Road, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Country Address, both sides, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to the end of the street, no parking, 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
Cove Circle, both sides, from the northern property line of number 2561 to the southern property line of number 2515, at all times. 
Cresent Centre Boulevard, both sides, from Lawrenceville Highway to where street ends, no parking anytime. 
Custer Avenue, both sides, from Moreland Avenue to Donzi Lane, at all times. 
Durand Drive, both sides, from North Decatur Road to Emory Circle, no parking, 8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Durand Drive, odd-numbered side, from Durand Drive to the northern property line of block number 503. 
Edinburgh Terrace, north side, from the northerly property line of 1882 to the easterly property line of 1918, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on school days. 
Eidson Road, both sides, from Andover Drive to the end of the street, no parking anytime. 
Elegance Court, both sides, from Elegance Drive to the end of the street, at all times. 
Emory Road, north side, from Oxford Road to Harvard Road, 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Emory Circle, even-numbered side, from Durand Drive to the northern property line of block number 508. 
Fernwood Circle, one-way section, north side, from the two-way section of Fernwood Circle to Apple Valley Road, no parking any time. 
Flintstone Drive, both sides, from Granite Drive to a point four hundred (400) feet north of Granite Drive, at all times. 
Glaze Drive, both sides, from Peeler Road to the end of the pavement, at all times. 
Granite Drive, both sides, from Flintstone Drive to a point eight hundred (800) feet west of Flintstone Drive, at all times. 
Hambrick Road, east side, from the southern property line of Hambrick Elementary School to King Lear Drive, at all times. 
Harvest Run, both sides, from Otello Avenue to end of street, no parking, 7:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
Heritage Drive, north side, from eastern property line of number 2197 to east driveway of Heritage School and from west driveway of Heritage Drive to Lundown Drive, at all times. 
Heritage Drive, north side, from the eastern property line of number 2197 to the eastern property line of Heritage School, at all times. 
Heritage Drive, north side, from the eastern property line of Heritage School to the driveway to Heritage Park, no parking from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. school days. 
Heritage Drive, south side, from western property line of number 2264 to eastern property line of number 2200, at all times. 
International Park Drive, from South Constitution Road to the cul-de-sac, no parking except for designated spaces. 
Kelley Chapel Road, east side, from the southern property line of number 2901 to the northern property line of number 2901, at all times except Sundays. 
King Lear Drive, south side, from Hambrick Road to where the street ends, from 8:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. on school days. 
Koppers Court, from Koppers Road to the end of the street, no parking anytime. 
Koppers Road, from Henrico Road to the end of the street, no parking anytime. 
Landover Drive, both sides, between North Decatur Road and the northeastern end of house number 444, 12:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
Long Green Lane, from Muirfield Drive to end of street, no parking, 8:00 to 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
Lullwater Road, east side, from North Decatur Road to the southern property line of block number 1075. 
Lullwater Road, west side, from North Decatur Road to the Atlanta city limits. 
Lynburn Drive, on the south side from LaVista Road to Fourth Street, one-hour parking. 
Main Street (Tucker), on west side from LaVista Road to First Road, one-hour parking. 
Mainstreet Park Court, both sides, from Mainstreet Park Drive to its end, at all times. 
Mainstreet Park Drive, south side, from Martin to Willow Run, 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. on school days. 
Mainstreet Park Drive, south side, from South Hairstone Road to the Barbashela Creek Bridge, at all times. 
Manitoba Trail, both sides, from Montreal Road to end of street, at all times. 
Market Drive , from International Park Drive to cul-de-sac, no parking anytime. 
Michael Street, east side, from Dantzler Drive to Clifton Road, at all times. 
Moreland Avenue, both sides, from I-285 to the South River, at all times. 
Murphey Street, both sides, from East Ponce de Leon Avenue to the northern property line of 719 Murphey Street and the northern property line of 720 Murphey Street, no parking anytime. 
North Decatur Road , south side, from Clifton Road to Oxford Road, no parking any time. 
North Decatur Road , north side, from Clifton Road to North Oxford Road, no parking any time except Sundays from 8:00 a.m. to 1:00 p.m. 
North Decatur Road , both sides, from Oxford Road to Lullwater Road, no parking any time except in designated spaces. The public works director may establish, in writing, maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces, and if so established, he/she shall install signage showing the maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces. 
Oakdale Road, west side, opposite the recreation park, from Pantersville Road to the southernmost driveway into the park, at all times. 
Olde Village Court, from Olde Village Run to end of street, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Olde Village Run, from Vermack Road to the eastern property line of Number 4912 Olde Village Court, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Oxford Road , both sides, from North Decatur Road to Clifton Road, no parking any time except in designated spaces. The public works director may establish, in writing, maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces, and if so established, he/she shall install signage showing the maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces. 
Oxford Road , west side, from North Decatur Road to Peavine Creek, no parking from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday to Friday, except in designated spaces. The public works director may establish, in writing, maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces, and if so established, he/she shall install signage showing the maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces. 
Oxford Road , east side, from North Decatur Road to Peavine Creek, no parking any time except in designated spaces. The public works director may establish, in writing, maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces, and if so established, he/she shall install signage showing the maximum parking-time limits for the designated spaces. 
Panola Way Court, west side, from Olde Street to northern driveway of Panola Way Elementary School, no parking on school days from 7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m., and 2:30 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
Park Gate Place, both sides, from Central Drive to Rockstile Way. 
Parliament Drive, from Leeds Court to Vermack Road, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Parliament Way, from Vermack Road to Parliament Drive, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on school days. 
Pineway Drive, both sides, from Sheffield Drive to the end of street, no parking anytime. 
Ponce de Leon Manor, both sides, from Ponce de Leon Avenue to the end of street, no parking, 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
Princeton Way , from North Decatur Road to 512 Princeton Way: No Parking, 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday. 
Redan Court, from Martin Road to where the street ends, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on school days. 
Redan Trail Court, both sides, from Redan Trail to end of street, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Ridgewood Drive, east side, from Vickers Drive to Burlington Place, at all times. 
Ridgewood Drive, south side, from Clifton Road to Emory Drive, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Rockbridge Trail, left side, from Rockbridge Road to the end of street, no parking anytime. 
Rockland Road, both sides, from the bridge at Stephenson Creek to the eastern property lines of block numbers 6514 and 6419, at all times. 
Roseheath Lane, north side only from 3105 Roseheath Lane to 3195 Roseheath Lane. 
Roseheath Court, west side from Roseheath Lane to the northerly property line of 3179. 
Roseheath Lane east side from Roseheath Lane to the northerly property line of 3092 Roseheath Court. 
Skyland Road, south side, from Stoland Drive to Clairmont Road, no parking anytime. 
Snapfinger Road, both sides, from Treadway Drive to Thompson Mill Road, at all times. 
South Deshon Road, north side, from Phillips Road to the western property line of block number 2155 South Deshon Road. 
South Hope Springs Road, both sides, between Granite Springs Lane and South Hope Springs Court, at all times. 
Steel Drive, both sides, from Lawrenceville Highway to the end of the street, no parking, 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
Tyndall Court, both sides, from Vermack Oaks Drive to the end of the street. 
Uppergate Drive, both sides, at all times. 
Valhalla Drive, both sides, from Oak Grove Road to end of street, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. 
Vanderlyn Drive, north side, from Hensley Drive to Trumball Drive, from 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Vermack Road, from the southern property line of Number 5054 to Mount Vernon Road, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Vermack Road, east side, from Corners Drive to Mt. Vernon Road, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on school days. 
Webster Drive from Desmond Drive to Clairmont Circle, no parking, 8:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
Wellborn Creek Court, both sides, from Wellborn Creek Drive to end, no parking, 6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday thru Friday. 
Wellborn Creek Drive, both sides, from Wellborn Road to end, no parking, 6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday thru Friday. 
Wellborn Hills Court, both sides, from Wellborn Creek Drive to end, no parking, 6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday thru Friday. 
Wellborn Hills Place, both sides, from Wellborn Creek Drive to end, no parking, 6:30 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., Monday thru Friday. 
Woodridge Drive, both sides, from Lawrenceville Highway to Whelchel Drive, at all times. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-10007.1, 8-10021(b); Ord. No. 88-16, 2-23-88; Ord. No. 88-03a, 7-26-88; Ord. No. 88-05a, 8-9-88; Ord. No. 88-06a, 8-23-88; Ord. No. 88-12a, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 88-13a, 10-11-88; Ord. No. 88-14a, 11-4-88; Ord. No. 88-17a, 11-22-88; Ord. No. 88-18a, 11-22-88; Ord. No. 88-22a, 12-27-88; Ord. No. 89-01, 1-10-89; Ord. No. 89-03, 2-14-89; Ord. No. 89-04, 2-14-89; Ord. No. 89-20, 5-9-89; Ord. No. 89-30, 6-27-89; Ord. No. 89-35, 10-10-89; Ord. No. 89-38, 10-24-89; Ord. No. 90-07, 4-26-90; Ord. No. 90-08, 4-26-90; Ord. No. 90-26, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 90-33, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 90-38, 10-23-90; Ord. No. 91-05, 3-12-91; Ord. No. 91-11, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 91-12, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 91-13, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 91-16, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 91-19, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 92-09, 5-26-92; Ord. No. 92-10, § 1, 5-26-92; Ord. No. 92-26, 8-11-82; Ord. No. 92-27, 8-25-92; Ord. No. 92-33, 11-10-92; Ord. No. 92-39, 12-8-92; Ord. No. 93-10, § 1, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 94-04, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 94-05, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 95-05, 4-11-95; Ord. No. 95-06, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 95-10, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 95-11, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 95-12, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 96-04, 3-12-96; Ord. No. 00-71, 6-13-00; Ord. No. 01-22, 8-14-01; Ord. No. 27-03, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 28-03, 10-28-03; Ord. No. 04-16, Pt. I, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 05-11, Pt. I, 7-26-05; Ord. No. 07-01, Pt. I, 1-9-07; Ord. No. 07-08, Pt. I, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 07-23, Pt. I, 10-23-07; Ord. No. 08-10, Pt. I, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 08-11, Pt. I, 6-10-08; Ord. No. 08-16, Pt. I, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 09-13, Pt. I, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 10-17, Pt. I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 11-14, Pt. I, 8-23-11; Ord. No. 11-19, Pt. I, 11-8-11 ; Ord. No. 12-15, Pt. I, 10-9-12 ; Ord. No. 13-06 , Pt. I, 3-12-13; Ord. No. 13-07 , Pt. I, 3-12-13; Ord. No. 13-13 , Pt. I, 8-13-13; Ord. No. 13-17 , Pt. I, 11-12-13) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Sec. 17-363. - No parking on narrow streets. 
The streets referred to in section 17-140 in which there shall be no parking are: 
McConnell Drive, north side, from Avis G. Williams Library to Mason Mill Road, at any time. 
(Code 1976, § 8-10011) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Sec. 17-364. - [List of roadways for the use of speed detection devices.] 
( Ord. No. 13-19 , 12-10-13) 
Editor's note— The list of roadways is incorporated herein by reference as if fully set out at length. A copy is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the county. 
Chapter 18 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-03, Pt. I, adopted Feb. 25, 2003, deleted former Ch. 18 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as Ch. 18 as herein set out. Former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-4, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 10-4002, 10-4003; Ord. No. 97- 03, § 1, adopted March 11, 1997; and Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, adopted Nov. 27, 2001. 
Cross reference— Animals, Ch. 5; health nuisances, § 13-51 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Purpose and findings. 
The governing authority of the DeKalb County finds that nuisances are such activities and conditions that cause a demonstrable adverse impact on the community. These activities and conditions may be associated with illegal criminal activity that has also been proven to have a demonstrable adverse impact on community residences and results in neighborhood blight. The county finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizens to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of DeKalb County in enacting this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To state that it is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the unincorporated jurisdiction of this county to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinance; 
(2)  To preserve the value of property and prevent neighborhood blight that arises from poorly maintained property; 
(3)  To maintain and promote an attractive residential area and commercial area by requiring that dilapidated property be repaired or removed; 
(4)  To maintain for the county's residents, workers and visitors an aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the county; 
(5)  To protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of DeKalb County by the removal of both criminal perpetrators and the housing blight on the community; 
(6)  To require owners of real property to keep their property in compliance with building, safety and fire codes to minimize the occurrence of illegal criminal activity therein; 
(7)  To promote the safety of its citizens, to preserve property values, to provide for the convenience and enjoyment of public areas, to attract tourists, settlers and industry, to serve the public health, safety and aesthetics, to advance the general prosperity of the community and to serve the general welfare; and 
(8)  To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, Pt. I, 2-25-03) 
Sec. 18-2. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings set out in this section, unless the context indicates otherwise:] 
Closing means securing and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Tit. 16, Ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act," as may hereinafter be amended. 
Dwelling, building, or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any portion of the public way that abuts the parcel of property when it is used in conjunction with the abutting property for the commission of nuisance activity described in section 18-3 of this chapter. The term "dwelling, building, or structure" shall not mean or include any farm, and building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Interest holder. See Party-in-interest, below. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record including any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. 
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as the owner. 
Party-in-interest or interest holder means an individual, association, entity or corporation, executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee, that has a legal interest in or possession of a dwelling, building, or structure. 
Public officer means the chief of police or his/her designee. 
Public authority means any member of the county board of commissioners, the director of the department of public works, the fire chief or his or her designee, or the chief of police or his or her designee. 
Repair means closing a dwelling, building or structure or the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, Pt. I, 2-25-03) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-3. - Drug and illegal gambling houses, houses of prostitution and other disorderly houses. 
(a)  Any dwelling, building, or structure used for prostitution, illegal gambling, or in connection with the commission of drug crimes is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. However, consistent with the public policy of the State of Georgia, this chapter shall not apply to any publicly owned cultural facility pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-1-8, as may hereinafter be amended. 
(b)  It is the affirmative duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, or structure within unincorporated DeKalb County to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, or structure in conformance with applicable codes in the Official Code of Georgia, and all ordinances in force within unincorporated DeKalb County. 
(c)  An owner or party-in-interest of a dwelling, building or structure shall not be subject to proceedings described in subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), (f), (h), (i) or (j) of this section if it is established that the owner or party-in-interest: 
(1)  Did not know and could not reasonably have known of the public nuisance described in subsection (a), above, occurring on the subject premises; and 
(2)  Does not hold the subject property for the benefit of or as nominee for any person whose conduct gave rise to the public nuisance described in subsection (a) above, and, if the owner or party-in-interest acquired the interest through any such person, the owner or party-in-interest acquired it as a bona fide purchaser for value without knowingly taking part in the public nuisance; or 
(3)  Acquired ownership or legal interest after the completion of the public nuisance giving rise to proceedings under this chapter or at the time the title was acquired, was reasonably without cause to believe that the dwelling, building or structure was subject to be deemed a public nuisance or likely to become subject to being deemed a public nuisance under this chapter. 
(d)  The public officer shall have all powers to carry out and effectuate the purpose of this chapter as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11, as may hereinafter be amended. 
(e)  The public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of a dwelling, building, or structure whenever a charge is made that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of activities described in subsection (a) above; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The charge must be made in writing to the public officer by a public authority or by at least five (5) residents of DeKalb County if the dwelling, building or structure in question is located in the unincorporated area of the county. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of activities described in subsection (a) above; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may both: 
(1)  Issue a citation for violation of any applicable state minimum standard codes, building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance. The citation shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain; and 
(2)  Issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. Service of the complaint shall be in the manner as mandated by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12, as may hereinafter be amended. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain and at a place within the county where the dwelling, building or structure is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(f)  After notice and a hearing conducted pursuant to subsection (e)(1) or (e)(2) above, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of activities described in subsection (a); or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall assess any joint and several fine against the owner and all parties in interest of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation of this section continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. In hearings conducted pursuant to subsection (e)(2) above, the court shall also state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order of abatement: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, the order of abatement shall require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, shall require the taking of reasonable measures designed to prevent the recurrence of the nuisance activity described in subsection (a) in light of the magnitude of the harm caused by the nuisance. Those measures may include, but are not limited to, making improvements to real estate and installing lighting to enhance security, the hiring of licensed and insured security personnel, the hiring of a receiver, the initiation and execution of eviction proceedings against tenants engaged in illegal activity; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  The court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided by Georgia law, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the county. 
(g)  The court may authorize the issuance of ex parte administrative search warrants reasonably calculated to determine whether the nuisance has been abated or whether the order of the court has been obeyed. 
(h)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with illegal activities or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(i)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. 
(1)  DeKalb County, the public officer and the board of commissioners are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
(2)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(j)  The lien provided for in subsection (i)(2), above, shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county where the real property is located and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g), as amended. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. Tit. 48, Ch. 4 ; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the board of commissioners. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(k)  The board of commissioners may waive and release any lien imposed on property pursuant to subsection (i)(2) of this section if the owner of such property enters into a contract with DeKalb County agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property; demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation; fully completes the rehabilitation; and fulfills all terms of the contract. 
(l)  The board of commissioners may appropriate revenue as necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(m)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the Superior Court of DeKalb County, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Superior Court of DeKalb County under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29, as may hereinafter be amended. Notice of an appeal shall act as a supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 06-03, Pt. I, 2-25-03) 
Sec. 18-4. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-5. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. "Accessory structure" includes, but is not limited to, any portable, demountable or permanent enclosure, shade structure and carport or garage. 
Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction. 
Approved means approved by the county. 
Basement means a portion of a building located partly underground, but having less than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Bathroom means a room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower. 
Bedroom means any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes. 
Boarding house means a building containing one (1) or more dwelling units but not more than twenty (20) dwelling units, all of which offer non-transient lodging accommodations, available only at weekly or longer rental rates to the general public. Meals may only be provided from a single central kitchen and compensation for such meals, if provided, shall be included in the weekly or longer rental rate. No restaurant, meeting, reception, or banquet facilities shall be provided. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing, or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind. 
Cellar means that portion of a building having more than one-half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining ground. 
Chief of police means the chief of the county police department or designee. 
County means DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Dangerous structure means any of the following: 
(1)  An abandoned or vacant structure that constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which the structure is located and which is not fenced in or otherwise protected to reasonably prohibit public access thereto. 
(2)  A structure that is severely damaged by fire, storm or other natural or manmade causes and which has remained in such damaged condition for a period of six (6) months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. 
(3)  A structure that is in a condition of being partially constructed and construction thereon has ceased for a period of twelve (12) months or more and which constitutes a hazard to the health or safety of persons who may come on or near the property on which it is located. 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing that would constitute a hazard to the safety and welfare of any person living on property located adjacent thereto. 
Department means the police department or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce the provisions of this article. 
Director means the chief of police or designee. If a department other than the police department is designated to enforce this article the term means the director of that department or designee. 
Domestic sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designated or intended to dispose of domestic sewage that includes byproducts of domestic activities. 
Dwelling means any structure which is wholly or partly used or intended to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, whether or not such structure is occupied or vacant. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single-family maintaining a household. 
Egress means a way to exit from a structure or dwelling unit. 
Exterior property means open space on the premises and on any adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises. 
Extermination means the control or eradication of insects, rodents, or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods. 
Family means a group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, guardianship or other custodial relationship, or not more than four (4) persons not so related, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. This definition shall specifically include four (4) or fewer mentally handicapped, developmentally disabled persons, or other handicapped persons, as defined in the Fair Housing Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 3601 et seq., as amended, living as a housekeeping unit and otherwise meeting the definition of "family" herein. 
Floor area means the gross heated horizontal areas of the floors of a building, exclusive of open porches and garages, measured from the interior face of the exterior walls of the building. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the preparation, cooking and serving of food and the storage of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
Habitable room means a space in a building for living, sleeping, eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces. 
Heated water means water that has been heated sufficiently to ensure a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit at the outlets. 
Infestation means the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests within or contiguous to a structure or premises. 
Inoperable vehicle means: 
(1)  A vehicle which is incapable of operation or use upon a highway; or 
(2)  A vehicle that has no resale value except as a source of parts or scrap; or 
(3)  Any wrecked or non-operable automobile, truck or other vehicle. 
Inspection warrant means a warrant authorizing a search or inspection of private property where such search or inspection is necessary for the enforcement of any of the provisions of this article. 
Lavatory means a washbowl or basin permanently installed with running hot and cold water. 
Maintenance means the act of keeping buildings, structures and equipment in a proper condition so as to prevent their decline or failure. 
Major overhaul means the repair, alteration or restoration of a motor vehicle which involves the removal of the paint or major parts of or the disassembly of major parts of a motor vehicle, including, without limitation, the following major parts: engine, body, interior seats, interior equipment necessary for the operation of the vehicle, and/or drive train. 
Multiple dwelling means any dwelling which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two (2) families living independently of each other, each doing its own cooking in such dwelling. "Multiple dwelling" includes a flat or apartment. 
Occupant means any person, over one (1) year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating or having actual possession of a dwelling unit. 
Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part thereof, in which dwelling units are let. 
Owner means any person, firm, corporation or entity who, alone or jointly or severally with others: 
(1)  Has legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof; or 
(2)  Has charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix, administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the provisions of this article to the same extent as the owner. 
Party-in-interest or interest holder means an individual, association, entity or corporation, executor, administrator, guardian, or trustee, that has a legal interest in or possession of a dwelling, building, or structure. 
Plumbing means the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, repair, extension and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting systems and the public or private water supply systems within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, repair, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid waste or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with a point of public disposal or other approved terminal. 
Premises means a lot, plot or parcel of land including dwellings, buildings, or structures thereon. 
Proper or properly means in accordance with the general provisions of this article and in accordance with standards of cleanliness, stability and safety as required by this article. 
Property means land and whatever is erected or growing upon or affixed thereto. 
Public authority means any member of the county board of commissioners, the director of the department of public works, the fire chief or his or her designee, or the chief of police or his or her designee. 
Reckless means the conscious disregard of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that an act or omission will cause harm or endanger the safety of another person and the disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care which a reasonable person would exercise in the situation. 
Repair means the replacement of existing work with approved material of a similar kind to that used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of this article. 
Rooming house means boarding house. 
Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches or trunks, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust or other similar materials. 
Safety means the condition of being free from danger and hazards that may cause accidents or disease. 
Sanitary sewage disposal system means a sewage disposal system designed and intended to dispose of sanitary and domestic wastes including all liquid and solid wastes from the flush toilet, lavatory, bathtub or shower and clothes washing machine. 
Stairway means one (1) or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one (1) story to another in a building or structure. 
Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. 
Trash means putrescible solid wastes, consisting of combustible and noncombustible materials such as, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, yard clippings, wood, glass, crockery and similar materials. 
Toilet means a bowl flushed with water under pressure with a water-sealed trap above the floor level, used primarily for human elimination. 
Townhouse means one (1) of a row of houses connected by common sidewalls. 
Unfit for human habitation means designation of dwellings or dwelling units as so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe, or vermin-infested that such create a serious hazard to the health or safety or which lack illumination, ventilation, or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
Unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not necessarily for cooking or eating purposes. 
Unsanitary condition means the presence of a condition that is conducive to the spreading of disease or illness, or is conducive to harboring insects, rodents or other pests. 
Ventilation means the process of supplying and removing air by natural or mechanical means to or from any space. 
Water and sewer system includes private wells, public water utility mains, private septic tanks, sewage disposal systems and public sewer mains. 
Water closet means a room containing a toilet or urinal but not a bathtub or shower. 
Weeds means vegetative growth including but not limited to kudzu, poison ivy, jimsonweed, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion, plants of obnoxious odors, or other similar unsightly vegetative growths. This term shall not include cultivated flowers, fruits and vegetables and gardens. 
Workmanlike condition of maintenance and repair means that such maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner and in accordance with the requirements of all applicable manufacturer's specifications, ordinances and law. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-6. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish minimum standards governing the use, occupancy, condition and maintenance of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures. Left completely unregulated, the failure to properly maintain property can become a threat to public safety and a detriment to property values and to the county's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. The county finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of DeKalb County in enacting this article is as follows: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of DeKalb County, and to implement the policies and objectives of a comprehensive property management plan throughout the county through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing property maintenance in DeKalb County; 
(2)  To preserve the value of property and maintain for the county's residents, workers and visitors a safe and aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the county; 
(3)  To establish minimum standards governing supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to make dwellings, buildings and structures and surrounding premises safe, sanitary and fit for human use and habitation; 
(4)  To establish minimum standards governing the use, occupancy, condition and maintenance of property, dwellings, buildings, and structures; 
(5)  To promote and protect the public health and safety through the control of weeds and grass which constitute a fire hazard and a public nuisance; 
(6)  To fix certain responsibilities and duties of owners, operators and occupants of dwellings; 
(7)  To provide for the condemnation of buildings and structures deemed unfit for human use and habitation and provide for removal of such buildings at public expense after hearing; 
(8)  To authorize the inspection of dwellings and structures; and 
(9)  To prohibit property owners from maintaining property in a manner not expressly authorized by this article, to provide for the maintenance of property, and to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-7. - Scope and application. 
(a)  Every building, dwelling or structure in the unincorporated area of the county, whether occupied or vacant, shall conform to the requirements of this article, regardless of when such building may have been constructed, altered or repaired. However, when a building, dwelling or structure is vacant, the owner shall only maintain the exterior of the property in compliance with this article, ensure the interior has been cleaned of trash, rubbish and debris, and secure the building, dwelling or structure in a closed and inaccessible manner until occupied. Any building, dwelling or structure that is vacant and closed shall be boarded to minimum specifications as determined by the chief of police. Owners shall conform their property to the full requirements of this article prior to the occupation of any vacant property. Where applicable, this article also governs the condition of unimproved property. 
(b)  Repairs and alterations in restoring a building to its condition previous to damage or deterioration, or altering such building in conformity with this article in such manners as will not extend or increase an existing nonconformity or hazard may be made with approved materials similar in kind to those of which such building is constructed and are authorized by law. 
(c)  Where repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance and work required to meet the provisions of this article are regulated and/or required to be permitted by other ordinances, such repairs, alterations, construction, maintenance and work shall comply with all provisions of this Code. In the event of a conflict between two (2) regulations, the regulation most recently enacted shall govern. 
(d)  The provisions of this Code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings, dwellings or structures designated by the state or the county as historic buildings when such buildings, dwellings or structures are judged by the public authority to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-8. - Vehicles. 
(a)  Unregistered and unlicensed motor vehicles. No person shall park or permit any other person to park any motor vehicle, except a motor vehicle parked in an enclosed building, on any premises in a residential district, if the vehicle: 
(1)  Is unregistered; or 
(2)  Has expired registration; or 
(3)  Does not have a lawful license plate or lawful temporary tag, which plate or tag is currently registered to that vehicle displayed thereon. 
(b)  Inoperable vehicles. No owner or occupant of any premises shall park any inoperable vehicle or permit any other person to park any inoperable vehicle on the owner's or occupant's premises for more than seventy-two (72) hours, unless the inoperable vehicle is parked in an enclosed structure. This section does not apply to premises for which the zoning code permits the storage of junk vehicles (as defined by section 27-31) outside an enclosed building. No person shall park any inoperable vehicle upon any public street, alley, or other public property. A court of competent jurisdiction shall have the authority, upon conviction of a violation of this subsection, to order the owner and/or occupant of the premises to replace ground cover beneath the inoperable vehicle, if appropriate. 
(c)  Major overhaul. 
(1)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on premises in a residential zone unless: 
a.  The person performing the overhaul is the occupant of the premises; 
b.  The person performing the overhaul is the owner of the vehicle; and 
c.  The work is done inside a garage or enclosed structure; however, the major overhaul of such a vehicle on premises in a residential zone must be completed within three (3) days if such overhaul takes place outside of a garage or enclosed structure. 
(2)  No person shall perform a major overhaul of any vehicle or permit any other person to perform a major overhaul of any vehicle on any premises in a business, commercial or industrial district, unless the overhaul is performed at an approved automobile sales or repair establishment. 
(d)  Storage of vehicles used for recreational purposes. No person shall park or permit any other person to park any unlicensed, unregistered, inoperable or junk vehicles which are used for recreation purposes including, but not limited to, boats, snowmobiles, travel trailers, cargo trailers, campers, all-terrain vehicles and motor homes, on premises in a residential district, unless they are stored within an enclosed building. No person may park or permit any other person to park a vehicle used for recreation purposes except in the manner described in section 27-784, as amended. 
(e)  Storage of machinery, implements and equipment. No person shall park or permit any other person to park any machinery, implements or equipment designed for use in agriculture, construction or other commercial enterprise, unless the machinery, implement or equipment is parked in an enclosed garage. This requirement does not apply to single parcels zoned for commercial or industrial purposes or to single agricultural parcels greater than five (5) acres. This requirement does not apply to such machinery, implements or equipment that is being used in construction of structures or dwellings so long as such machinery, implements or equipment is removed after fifteen (15) days. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-9. - Vegetation and debris. 
(a)  Vegetation. There shall be no dead or hazardous trees, shrubs, ground cover or weeds likely to harbor vermin or insects, restrict or impede access to or public use of adjacent sidewalks and streets, obstruct traffic-control signs and devices and fire hydrants, or pose a risk of physical injury to the public. 
(b)  Debris. There shall not be maintained on a property for more than seven (7) calendar days any used or damaged lumber, junk, trash, debris, scrap metal, concrete, sand, asphalt, cans, bottles, tires, salvage materials, boxes, containers, bins, and abandoned, discarded, inoperative or unusable furniture, stove, refrigerator, freezer, sink, toilet, cabinet or other household fixtures, yard waste or equipment stored so as to be visible from public street, alley or from an adjoining property unless appropriate permits have been obtained from the county. Nothing herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for use on the premises in the side or rear yards of the premises. 
(c)  Shared property. Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two (2) or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas free of garbage and trash shall be the joint and several responsibility of the owners and tenants. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Secs. 18-10—18-27. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DWELLINGS, ROOMING AND BOARDING HOUSES 

Sec. 18-28. - Compliance. 
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let or sublet to another for occupancy, any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating therein which does not comply with the provisions of this division. No person shall operate a rooming or boarding house, or shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit in any rooming house, except in compliance with this article and Code. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-29. - Minimum environmental, occupancy and space requirements. 
(a)  Sanitation. All exterior property areas and the interior of every dwelling shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be in accordance with Chapter 22 (Solid Waste) of this Code, as amended. 
(b)  Stairs, porches, handrail and guards. Every stair, porch, balcony, elevated floor, exterior and interior stairs including required handrails and guards shall be constructed per locally adopted building codes. They shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads. All components that are broken, show excessive wear or are missing shall be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-30. - Minimum requirements for safety. 
(a)  Dwelling prohibited in certain locations. A dwelling shall not be located within a building or structure housing a business that handles, dispenses or stores flammable liquids. 
(b)  Cooking and heating equipment and facilities. All cooking and heating equipment, components and accessories in every heating, cooking and waterheating device shall be maintained free from leaks and obstructions and kept functioning properly so as to be free from fire, health and accident hazards. Portable cooking equipment employing a flame is prohibited in multiple dwellings. 
(c)  Storage of flammable or combustible materials. Flammable or combustible materials of all types shall be stored safely in removable, air-tight containers and shall not be stored in the vicinity of open heaters, kitchen ranges, furnaces or boilers or in the stairways or exit ways. 
(d)  Storage of explosive material. No explosive material shall be stored or located so as to put in jeopardy either persons or property. 
(e)  Obstruction of exits. There shall be no obstruction to or of fire escapes, ladders which may be used as escapes, stairways, aisles, exits, doors, windows, passageways or halls, that are likely in the event of fire to interfere with the operations of the fire department or of the safety and ready egress of occupants. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-31. - Basic sanitary and comfort facilities. 
(a)  Sanitary facilities required. The minimum sanitary facilities set out in this article shall be provided by the owner and maintained in a sanitary, safe working condition. 
(b)  Water closet. Every dwelling shall contain within its walls at least one (1) room, separate from the habitable rooms, which affords privacy and is equipped with a toilet and a lavatory. Windows with an aggregate glazing area of not less than three (3) square feet, one-half which must be openable shall be provided. The glazed area shall not be required where artificial light and a mechanical ventilation system are provided. Ventilation must meet current locally adopted building codes. At least one (1) toilet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system in good working condition shall be supplied for each four (4) rooms within a rooming or boarding house whenever the facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Access to such water closet may not be through another dwelling unit. 
(c)  Bathtub or shower. Every dwelling shall contain a room which affords privacy to a person and which is equipped with a bathtub or shower. At least one (1) bathtub or shower shall be available for every four (4) rooms in a rooming house or boarding house when a private bathtub or shower is not provided. 
(d)  Kitchen sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart from the room with a water closet. 
(e)  Water and sewer system. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and water closet shall be properly connected to an approved and properly operating water and sewer system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be provided with hot and cold running water. 
(f)  Water-heating facilities. Every dwelling shall be equipped with water-heating facilities which are installed according to industry specifications, properly maintained and connected with hot water lines to the fixtures required by this Code to be provided with hot water. Water-heating facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry facility, or other similar unit, at a temperature of not less than one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit at any time needed. 
(g)  Heating facilities. Every dwelling shall have adequately vented heating facilities: 
(1)  The heating facility shall be capable of maintaining a minimum room temperature of sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit at a point three (3) feet above the floor and two (2) feet from exterior walls in all habitable rooms and every room containing a toilet, shower or bathtub. 
(2)  The heating facilities shall be properly installed, maintained in a safe manner, and capable of delivering heat to the dwelling as required. 
(3)  Fuel fired heating equipment shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent. 
(h)  Plumbing and electrical system installation and maintenance. In all dwellings, water lines, plumbing fixtures, vents, drains, stacks, waste and sewer lines shall be properly installed according to industry specifications and the Code of DeKalb County and maintained so as to function properly and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and defects. Electrical wiring and fixtures shall be installed, maintained and used according to industry specifications and the Code of DeKalb County and shall not be altered or allowed to deteriorate in any way that might create an unsafe condition. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-32. - Electrical systems. 
(a)  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed and connected to the source of electrical power in accordance with the adopted electrical code of the county. 
(b)  Where a determination is made, upon examination of the existing electrical service supply, that such electrical service is obsolete or is being used in such a manner as would constitute a hazard to the occupants or would otherwise constitute a hazard to life and property, the following shall be used for determining the adequacy of such service supply and main disconnect switch: 

 
(c)  The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main disconnect switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load required in accordance with the electrical code of the county. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-33. - Light and ventilation. 
(a)  Total window area. All habitable rooms shall be provided with aggregate glazing area of not less than eight (8) percent of the floor area of the room. Such openings shall be provided with ready access or shall otherwise be readily controllable by the building occupants. The minimum openable area to the outdoors shall be four (4) percent of the floor area. Glazing areas need not be provided where approved mechanical ventilation and artificial light is provided. 
(b)  Electrical lights and outlets required. Every dwelling shall be wired for electric light and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room of such dwelling shall contain at least one (1) floor or wall-type electric convenience outlet. Every kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, corridor or hallway, and porch shall contain at least one (1) supplied ceiling or wall-type electric outlet. Every such outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in good and safe working condition, and shall be connected to the source of electric power in a safe manner. 
(c)  Light in public halls and stairway. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five (5) or more units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and containing not more than four (4) dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting. 
(d)  Alternatives to windows. Year-round mechanically ventilating conditioned air systems may be substituted for windows, as required in this section, in rooms other than rooms used for sleeping purposes. Window-type air-conditioning units are not included in this exception. 
(e)  Bathroom. Windows in bathrooms shall comply with section 18-31(b) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-34. - Exterior property areas. 
(a)  Accessory structures: Accessory buildings and structures shall be structurally sound and be maintained in good repair or such buildings and structures shall be removed. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose shingles, peeling paint, crumbling stone, brick or cement or other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance. The exterior walls, roofs, windows, window frames, doors, doorframes, foundations and other portions of every building and structure shall be so maintained as to prevent deterioration from water and weather. Damaged materials must be repaired or replaced promptly. Places showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or corrosion are to be restored and protected against weathering or seepage. 
(b)  Fences and retaining walls : All fences and retaining walls on the premises shall be structurally sound and kept in good repair. The fence posts shall be firmly set in a base that does not allow the posts to shift. The fence railings or slatting shall be firmly attached to the supporting posts. Gaps or wedges in a retaining wall shall be restored to the original condition. Fences and retaining walls shall not encroach on the public right-of-way and must be maintained in a manner that will protect the fence or wall from rotting, decay, deterioration, or loss of structural integrity. 
(c)  Foundations, walls and roof : Every foundation, exterior wall, roof and chimney and all other exterior surfaces shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks and breaks. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. The foundation elements shall adequately support the building at all points. 
(d)  Exterior walls : Every exterior wall, including screened-off areas, doors and windows, shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting boards or timbers, or any conditions which might admit rain, dampness or insects to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior wall or surface material, once painted, must be kept in good repair free of peeling, cracked, blistered paint, graffiti, or paint weathered to an uneven and spotty condition. Any exterior wall or surface material must be protected against weathering. 
(e)  Exterior openings : Every exterior opening shall be fitted with a window, door or basement hatchway cover, as appropriate, which shall be tight and maintained in sound condition and good repair to exclude wind and prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water into the dwelling or structure. Every doorway which gives access from a habitable room or dwelling unit into a common passageway, hall, stairway or the exterior shall be fitted with a door, equipped with hardware capable of ensuring security and privacy to the occupants of such habitable room or dwelling unit. 
(f)  Windows and screens : Every window shall be in good condition and fit tightly within its frame so as to exclude wind and rain as completely as possible from entering the dwelling or structure. All windows shall be fully supplied with glass windowpanes or an approved substitute without cracks or holes. Windows, other than fixed windows, shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by window hardware. Any window that is open shall have a screen in place covering the open window area. Screens shall be maintained in good repair. When present, awnings are to be kept in good repair. Every other opening located within four (4) feet of the ground level shall be protected against the possible entry of insects and rodents. Dwelling units containing central air-conditioning equipment are not required to have screens on window openings. 
(g)  Doors : Every exterior door shall be maintained in good condition and when closed shall fit well within its frame so as to exclude wind and rain as completely as possible from entering the dwelling or structure. Every door hinge and door latch shall be maintained in good condition. Every door available as an exit shall be capable of being easily opened from the inside. 
(h)  Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto of every structure used for human habitation shall be capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and be maintained in sound condition and good repair. 
(i)  Secondary means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have no less than one (1) exit door. The required exit door shall provide for direct access from the habitable portion of the dwelling to the exterior without requiring travel through any other dwelling units or a private garage. The required exit door shall be a side-hinged door not less than three (3) feet in width and six (6) feet, eight (8) inches in height. 
(j)  Emergency escape routes. Basements with habitable space and every sleeping room below the fourth floor shall have at least one (1) operable emergency escape and rescue window or exterior door opening for emergency escape and rescue. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-35. - Building interiors. 
(a)  Freedom from dampness. Every building shall be maintained free from dampness to prevent conditions conducive to decay, mold, electrical hazards or deterioration of the structure. 
(b)  Structural members. The supporting structural members of every building shall be structurally sound, showing no evidence of deterioration or damage that would render them incapable of carrying the imposed loads. 
(c)  Interior walls, ceilings and floors. All interior walls, ceilings and floors shall be structurally sound, in good repair, free from defects and painted or decorated. 
(d)  Bathroom and kitchen floors. Every kitchen and wet floor areas of bathrooms shall be covered and protected by non-absorbent floor coverings. Dressing areas may transition to carpet. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-36. - Dwelling space. 
(a)  Required space in dwellings. Every dwelling shall contain at least one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area for the first occupant thereof and at least one hundred (100) additional square feet of floor area per additional occupant. 
(b)  Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling of two (2) or more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
(c)  Minimum ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room, foyer, hall or corridor shall have a ceiling height of at least seven (7) feet. The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is less than seven (7) feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of determining the maximum occupancy thereof. 
(d)  Conditions to inhabiting basement. No cellar shall be used as a habitable room. No basement shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless: 
(1)  The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and surface runoff water and are adequately protected against dampness; 
(2)  The total window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum window area required by this division; 
(3)  Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the grade of the ground adjoining such window area or is equipped with an adequate window well providing light and ventilation; and 
(4)  The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least the minimum as required under this division, except where there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation, and approved by the county. 
(5)  All sleeping rooms shall have an emergency escape window or door leading directly to the exterior. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-37. - Sanitation. 
(a)  Sanitation. Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more rooms shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the shared or common areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. The operator of every rooming or boarding house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the house. 
(b)  Cleanliness. Every occupant of a rooming house, boarding house, or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling and/or dwelling unit and any premises thereof which such person occupies and controls or which is provided for such person's particular use. 
(c)  Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of garbage and any other organic waste, which might provide food for rodents and insects, and rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage or rubbish storage containers. 
(d)  Extermination. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises. Notwithstanding the foregoing provision, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a reasonable rodent-proof and insect-proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(e)  Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(f)  Grading and drainage. All premises shall be graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any building or structure located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-38. - Weeds, junk, etc., prohibited. 
(a)  Persons shall keep their property free of those weeds and underbrush which create a health menace, fire hazard or an unsafe or unsanitary condition as well as trash, garbage, inoperable vehicles or other things thereon which constitute a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or occupant of a dwelling, rooming house, building or structure to use the premises of such property for the open storage of any inoperable vehicle, household appliance, glass, building material, building trash or similar item. It shall be the duty and the responsibility of each owner, operator or occupant to maintain the premises of such property and to remove from the premises all abandoned items as listed above, including, but not limited to, weeds, dead trees, trash and garbage, upon notice from the county. 
(c)  Owners and occupants of property shall not permit weeds or grass within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any building or structure to grow on such property to a height exceeding twelve (12) inches. 
(d)  Owners and tenants of property or structures abutting a street, sidewalk, lane or parking area on which the property or structure abuts shall maintain the property or structure clean and free of garbage and trash; however, county maintenance responsibility for public rights-of-way shall not be diminished by this section. 
(e)  Where parking in open areas is used jointly for the benefit of two (2) or more owners or tenants, the responsibility for maintaining these parking areas free of garbage and trash shall be the joint and severable responsibility of the owners and tenants of these premises. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-39—18-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 18-61. - Enforcement generally. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby authorized and directed to administer and enforce all of the provisions of this article. Authorized agents of the department may be selected and vested by the chief of police with the police power to prosecute persons charged with violating the terms of this article and to take all necessary steps to ensure compliance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection or to enforce any of the provisions of this article or whenever the chief of police has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or structure any condition which makes such building or structure unsafe, the chief of police may enter the building or structure during normal work hours with the consent of the owner or an inspection warrant to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the chief of police by this article. 
(1)  If such property is occupied, the chief of police shall first present proper credentials and request and obtain consent to enter before entering the building or structure. Reasonable effort must be made to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property when seeking permission for entry. 
(2)  If no consent has been given to enter or inspect any building or structure, no entry or inspection shall be made without the procurement of a warrant from a magistrate of DeKalb County, or a judge of the State or Superior Court of DeKalb County. 
(3)  The person seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes that property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. 
(4)  The chief of police may enter the premises without consent or an inspection warrant to make an inspection or enforce any provisions of this Code only if so authorized by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-62. - No financial interest. 
No official or employee of the police department, the development department, the public works department or the department making inspection of properties for the purpose of determining the necessity for repairs or corrections shall or may have any financial interest, directly or indirectly in any repairs or corrections which may be required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-63. - Owner's right of entry. 
Every occupant of a building, dwelling, or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or the owner's agents or employees, access to any part of such building, dwelling or dwelling unit or its premises, at all reasonable times, for the purpose of maintenance, improving or making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful rule or regulation adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-64. - Stopping work. 
Whenever the department determines defective or illegal work is performed in violation of a provision or requirement of this article, it shall order, in writing, all further work to cease until such defective or illegal work is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-65. - Prohibited manner of managing or controlling real property. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person who has management authority over or control of property within a residential zoning district, whether as a legal or equitable owner, managing agent, leasing agent, rental agent or otherwise, to recklessly permit the physical condition or facilities of the property to become or remain in any condition which endangers the health or safety of any person. Such conduct shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Recklessly allowing property to be improperly secured, resulting in the commission of a crime against a resident of the property or against any other person; 
(2)  Recklessly allowing property to collapse or partially collapse, resulting in injury to a person inside or outside of a building; 
(3)  Recklessly allowing property to remain in violation of applicable building codes, fire codes, or other applicable provisions of this Code; 
(4)  Recklessly failing to respond to reasonable requests by the county to repair property that is in violation of an applicable provision of the Code; or 
(5)  Recklessly endangering the health and safety of any person by illegally altering or modifying a structure to increase the number of dwelling units or habitable rooms within the structure, or by allowing any such alteration or modification to continue or be used. 
(b)  Any person found to have violated subsection (a) shall be subject to a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day on which such person shall continue any such violation. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any freestanding, owner-occupied single-family home or to any owner-occupied townhouse; provided, however, the requirements of this section shall apply to any single-family home, or townhouse, which is rented, or to any structure that is altered or modified in violation of this Code. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any person who is a tenant on the property or in the structure that is the subject of the violation so long as such tenant has no ownership interest in the property or structure. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-66. - Violations. 
A person who violates a provision of this article or fails to comply with this article is guilty of an offense. The owner of a building, structure or premises, where anything in violation of this article shall be placed or shall exist, or any person who may have assisted in the commission of such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense. A purchaser, transferee, lessee or mortgagee who has actual or constructive knowledge of the issuance of a citation or notice of violation pursuant to this article shall be deemed to have notice of the violation as of the date of such sale, transfer, lease or mortgage. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-67. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by the provisions of this article, as they now exist or as they may hereafter be amended, upon citation by the chief of police or his/her designee and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Without limiting the foregoing, upon the presentment of evidence, the judge may consider whether the imposition of a sentence authorized under this article would: 
(1)  Result in undue burden or hardship; 
(2)  Alter or impair the obligations created by court order or decree; or 
(3)  Otherwise not further the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of DeKalb County. 
(c)  Upon a third or subsequent conviction of a violation of section 18-38(c), the court of competent jurisdiction, in addition to other remedies provided in this article, may order the county to cut and remove any and all overgrown vegetation, weeds or grass from said property at public expense, the full cost of which shall constitute a lien upon the property thereof, when the owner refuses to cut and remove the same in accordance with this article, or when such owner cannot be located by reasonable search. The lien shall attach to the property in accordance with the provisions in section 18-70(d). 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03; Ord. No. 06-03(1), Pt. I, 4-11-06) 
DIVISION 4. - DANGEROUS, UNINHABITABLE AND UNFIT BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-68. - Uninhabitable dwellings. 
(a)  The department shall make an investigation or inspection of a dwelling, structure or premise whenever a charge is made that any dwelling, structure or premise is dangerous and unfit for human habitation. The charge must be made by a public authority or in writing by at least five (5) residents who have attained the age of majority living in separate households of DeKalb County if the dwelling, structure or premise in question is located in the unincorporated area of the county. For purposes of this subsection, a board of directors of a duly incorporated, mandatory-membership homeowners association may bring a charge that any dwelling, structure or premise is dangerous and unfit for human habitation, without regard to any limitation on the number of residents required by this subsection, if the decision to bring a charge is authorized by an official vote of the board of directors of the incorporated homeowners association in compliance with its by-laws and such decision is reflected in the minutes of the meeting where such a decision was made. 
(b)  If the department determines that the property or structures on the property are dangerous and unfit for human habitation, in addition to all other remedies available under this Code and article, the county may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. The county shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. Service of the complaint shall be in the manner as mandated by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12, as may hereinafter be amended. 
(c)  The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the county to abate or correct the alleged violation. 
(d)  The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held within the county before a court of competent jurisdiction at a date and time certain. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. 
(e)  The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-69. - Orders and appeals. 
(a)  After notice and a hearing, if the court determines that the dwelling, structure or premise in question is dangerous and unfit for human habitation, the court shall assess any joint and several fine(s) against the owner and all parties in interest of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per offense. 
(b)  In addition to any fine(s) assessed, the court may order the owner and any person known to have an interest in the property to repair, close or demolish the dangerous structure which is deemed unfit for human habitation or which imperils the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county, provided such order is coupled with a finding of fact that the dangerous structure is unfit for human habitation or imperils the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. Any dangerous structure ordered to be closed shall be boarded to minimum specifications as determined by the chief of police. 
(c)  Such finding of fact shall be coupled with a brief explanation sufficient to inform the owner and any person with a known interest in the property why the dangerous structure is deemed to be unfit for human habitation or imperils the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. The court may also order the property to be vacated and closed pending repair of the property. 
(d)  The order and findings of fact shall be sent to the owner and any person known to have an interest in the property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of such person. The order and findings of fact shall also be posted on the property and advertised in the legal organ of the county. The order to repair, close or demolish shall designate the time within which the owner shall repair, close or demolish the dangerous structure, but in no event shall such time be less than thirty (30) days from the date the order is transmitted to the owner and any person known to have an interest in the property. 
(e)  In addition to the other remedies provided in this article, the court may order the county to repair, close, or demolish such dangerous structure(s) at public expense, the full cost of which shall constitute a lien upon the property thereof, when the owner refuses to repair, close, or demolish same in accordance with this article, or when such owner cannot be located by reasonable search. The lien shall attach to the property in accordance with the provisions in section 18-70(d). 
(f)  The department may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling, building or structure closed by court order pursuant to this article, a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or business use. The use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use is prohibited and unlawful." 
(g)  Such placard shall bear the date posted, address of the building involved and be signed by the director. It shall be unlawful for such placard to be mutilated or removed or for such structure to be occupied until required corrective action is taken. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to occupy the dwelling, structure, or premises, or for an owner to allow occupancy of a dwelling, structure, or premises which has been placarded, if such dwelling, structure, or premises is, or becomes, vacant after placarding or, in all events, within sixty (60) days from the date of placarding unless the violation has been corrected. 
(i)  The posting of the placard and the recording of same in the records of the department shall be notice to the general public that it is unlawful for any owner or party in interest to allow the dwelling or structure to be occupied, as provided herein. No further notice shall be required to be given to any owner or party in interest. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful to deface, alter, destroy, cover or remove such placards. The department shall remove the placards when compliance with this article has been effected. 
(k)  Where a complaint in rem is filed pursuant to this article and the action does not commence in the Superior Court of DeKalb County, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the Superior Court of DeKalb County under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29, as amended. Notice of an appeal shall act as a supersedeas if so ordered by the trial court. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 18-70. - Correction of violation by county at expense of property owners. 
(a)  If the court orders the county to demolish the structure, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. 
(b)  The county, its employees, and officers are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the repair, closing or demolition of the structure, and the retrieval, removal and sale of any salvaged materials, including, without limitation, any defects in such salvaged materials. 
(c)  If demolition is ordered by the court, the cost of demolition, the cost of removal of salvaged materials, all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the in rem action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. The amount of the lien shall be reduced by the sales proceeds if any, as provided in section (a) above. 
(d)  The lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, demolition or cutting and removal in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of DeKalb County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (g) of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12, as amended. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the department shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically Chapter 4 of Title 48; provided however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, as amended, which requires twelve (12) months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the board of commissioners. Thirty (30) days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(e)  The board of commissioners may waive and release any lien imposed on property pursuant to this article if the owner of such property enters into a contract with the county agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property; demonstrates the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation; fully completes the rehabilitation; and fulfills all terms of the contract. 
(f)  The board of commissioners may appropriate revenue as necessary and may accept and apply for grants or donations in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03; Ord. No. 06-03(2), Pt. I, 4-11-06) 
Sec. 18-71. - Demolition of structures. 
(a)  Demolition of any structure shall not begin until all of the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  A permit for demolition has been secured from the county; 
(2)  The county health director has inspected the premises and accepted an appropriate vermin and rodent extermination plan; and 
(3)  All utilities are cut off and capped at the street. 
(b)  Within the time specified in the demolition permit: 
(1)  All debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level shall be removed from the premises. 
(2)  Any excavation or other depression must be filled to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than twenty-five (25) percent stone or masonry and all filled areas must be adequately sloped and drained. 
(Ord. No. 33-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Secs. 18-72—18-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FORECLOSURE REGISTRY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Part I. of Ord. No. 12-09, adopted May 22, 2012, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 18-100—18-104, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10-13, Pt. I, adopted July 27, 2010 and Ord. No. 11-06, Pt. I, adopted March 15, 2011. 

Sec. 18-100. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a foreclosure registry as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are foreclosed or where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure. 
(b)  Improperly maintained and unsecure foreclosed properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of foreclosed real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(c)  This foreclosure registry will require creditors to provide the county with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing foreclosed real property into compliance with applicable provisions of state and federal law, and the Code. 
(d)  If there is a conflict between the provisions and requirements in this article and state law, as it exists now or may be amended hereafter, then state law shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12) 
Sec. 18-101. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, certain phrases and words are defined below. Words or phrases not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized on behalf of a foreclosed real property owner, with respect to foreclosed real property, to: 
(1)  Accept inquiries, notices, and service of process; 
(2)  Ensure security and maintenance; 
(3)  Comply with code enforcement orders issued by the county; 
(4)  Provide a trespass authorization upon request of an enforcement officer; 
(5)  Conduct inspections; and 
(6)  Accept rental payments from tenants, if no management company is otherwise employed. 
Bona-fide, arms length sale means a transaction which has occurred in good faith by unrelated or unaffiliated parties, who are a willing buyer and a willing seller, each acting in his or her own self interest. 
Chapter means chapter 18 of the Code. 
Clerk means the Clerk of the DeKalb County Superior Court. 
County official means county employee designated by the chief executive officer. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Director means the director of the department of planning and sustainability. 
Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by or working on behalf of the county. 
Foreclosed real property means improved or unimproved real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by the county and held pursuant to a judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure of a mortgage, deed of trust, security deed, deed to secure debt, or other security instrument securing a debt or obligation owed to a creditor or a deed in lieu of foreclosure in full or partial satisfaction of a debt or obligation owed to a creditor, where said real property is within the unincorporated area of the county, but shall not include property within the boundaries of any municipal corporation, unless otherwise allowed by intergovernmental agreement between the county and said municipal corporation. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 14-04 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 18-102. - Registry of foreclosed real property. 
(a)  Any person who holds foreclosed real property shall, no sooner than sixty (60) days but no later than ninety (90) days after the effective date of the real property's foreclosure transfer to said person, register with the county official the following information for each foreclosed real property, as identified by its tax parcel number: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(b)  Any persons who holds foreclosed real property shall pay to the county official, for each registered foreclosed real property, as identified by its tax parcel number, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  A person shall be exempt from registering foreclosed real property if it is acquired by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 44-14-160 or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure, and the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains: 
(1)  The information specified in subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk within sixty (60) days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the director: 
a.  A filing date stamp or a receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  The entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 14-04 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 18-103. - Registry of transferred foreclosed real property. 
(a)  Any person who holds foreclosed real property and then transfers said foreclosed real property to a different person shall, no sooner than ninety (90) days but no later than one hundred twenty (120) days after the effective date of the transfer, register with the county official the following information for each transferred foreclosed real property, as identified by its tax parcel number: 
(1)  The real property transferee's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The transferee's agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The transferred real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the transferee; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, the recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the transferee. 
(b)  Any person who has foreclosed on real property and then transfers said foreclosed real property to a different person shall pay to the county official, for each registered transferred foreclosed real property, as identified by it tax parcel number, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  No person who holds foreclosed real property and then transfers said foreclosed real property to a different person is exempt from registering or paying fees because the information provided to the county is in a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 14-04 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 18-104. - Updating change in registry information. 
(a)  Any person registered pursuant to section 18-102 shall update any change in information required to be submitted by that section to the county official within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(b)  Any transferee registered pursuant to section 18-103 shall update any change in information required to be submitted by that section to the county official within thirty (30) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12; Ord. No. 14-04 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 18-105. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of applicable provisions of state and federal law and the Code. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Fail to register or pay the registration fee in accordance with applicable provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Fail to update a change in registry information. 
(c)  Any person who is required but fails to register, pay the registration fee or update a change in registry information as required by this article, upon citation or summons by an authorized county employee, and judgment or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the recorder's court, shall be subject to penalties not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12) 
Sec. 18-106. - Deregistration. 
(a)  An owner may apply to remove foreclosed real property from the foreclosure registry at such time as the foreclosed real property: 
(1)  Is conveyed to a third party in a bona-fide, arms-length sale; 
(2)  The owner has provided the director with a copy of the recorded deed, together with a Form PT-61 filed in connection therewith, showing conveyance of the foreclosed real property to a third party in a bona-fide, arms-length sale; and 
(3)  The foreclosed real property does not have any outstanding warnings or citations for a violation of any requirements under state or federal law or the Code. 
(b)  The director shall grant or deny an owner's application to remove foreclosed real property from the foreclosure registry within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. An application is complete when it contains all of the information required by subsection (a) of this section. The director's decision shall be in writing, dated, signed and mailed to the owner at its agent's address. If no decision is made within thirty (30) days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12) 
Sec. 18-107. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  A citation, issued pursuant to section 18-105, is not a determination as that term is set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, but a matter involving a violation of the Code subject to the original jurisdiction of the recorder's court pursuant to 1959 Ga. Laws p. 3093, section 2 codified as section 653 of appendix B to the Code. 
(b)  As required by O.C.G.A § 44-14-14(j), any determination made by the director pursuant to the remaining provisions of this article shall be in writing, dated, signed and mailed to the owner or transferee at an agent's address. 
(c)  Any determination made pursuant to this article may be appealed by an owner or transferee to the county executive assistant. The appeal must be in writing and received by the county executive assistant within fourteen (14) days of the date of determination. To be considered complete, the appeal shall include: 
(1)  A description of the determination being challenged; 
(2)  The date the determination was made; and 
(3)  All the reasons that the owner or transferee believes that the determination represents an error in a material fact or a material misapplication of the requirements of this article. 
(d)  An appeal shall be deemed received by the county executive assistant if postmarked prior to midnight on or before the day it is due. 
(e)  The county executive assistant may only reverse a determination of the director if he or she finds that the determination was based on an error in a material fact or a material misapplication of the requirements of this article. 
(f)  The county executive assistant shall, within thirty (30) days after a complete appeal is received, issue a written decision affirming, reversing or modifying the determination of the director. 
(g)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14(j), an owner or transferee may appeal the written decision of the county executive assistant to recorder's court. Said appeal shall be filed within fourteen (14) days after the date of the issuance of the written decision. 
(h)  The director may develop guidelines and forms, make recommendations and take such other steps as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 12-09, Pt. I, 5-22-12) 
Secs. 18-108—18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VACANT PROPERTY REGISTRY 

Sec. 18-116. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a vacant property registry as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are vacant. 
(b)  Improperly maintained and unsecure vacant properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of vacant real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(c)  This vacant property registry will require the owner to provide the county with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing vacant real property into compliance with applicable provisions of state and federal law, and the Code. 
(d)  If there is a conflict between the provisions and requirements in this article and state law, as it exists now or may be amended hereafter, then state law shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 13-18 , Pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 18-117. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, certain phrases and words are defined below. Words or phrases not defined in this article but defined in applicable state law or the Code shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agent means an individual with a place of business in this state at which he or she is authorized on behalf of a vacant real property owner, with respect to vacant real property, to: 
(1)  Accept inquiries, notices, and service of process; 
(2)  Ensure security and maintenance; 
(3)  Comply with code enforcement orders issued by the county; 
(4)  Provide a trespass authorization upon request of an enforcement officer; 
(5)  Conduct inspections; and 
(6)  Accept rental payments from tenants, if no management company is otherwise employed. 
Chapter means chapter 18 of the Code. 
County official means county employee designated by the chief executive officer. 
Days means consecutive calendar days. 
Director means the director of the department of planning and sustainability or designee. 
Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer, building official, fire inspector or code enforcement officer employed by or working on behalf of the county. 
Evidence of utility usage means a bill or invoice from a supplier of water, electricity or gas showing at a minimum the base charge charged by the supplier for usage at the real property. 
Lawfully inhabited means that the building or structure is occupied by the owner or tenant or pursuant to the express consent of the owner or tenant. 
Partially constructed or incomplete means real property for which a land disturbance permit has been issued by the county, but no valid building permit. 
Street address means the street or route address. Such term shall not mean or include a post office box. 
Vacant real property means real property that: 
(1)  Is intended for habitation, has not been lawfully inhabited for at least sixty (60) days and has no evidence of utility usage within the past sixty (60) days; or 
(2)  Is partially constructed or incomplete, without a valid building permit. 
The term "vacant real property" shall not include a building or structure containing multiple units with common ownership that has at least one (1) unit occupied with evidence of utility usage. 
( Ord. No. 13-18 , Pt. I, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 14-05 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 18-118. - Registry of vacant real property. 
(a)  Any person who owns vacant real property shall no later than (90) days after it becomes vacant real property, register with the county official the following information for each vacant real property, as identified by its tax parcel number: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number. 
(b)  Any person who owns vacant real property shall pay to the county official, for each registered vacant real property, as identified by its tax parcel number, a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
( Ord. No. 13-18 , Pt. I, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 14-05 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 18-119. - Updating change in registry information. 
Any person registered pursuant to section 18-118 shall update any change in information required to be submitted by that section to the county official within thirty (30) days of the change. 
( Ord. No. 13-18 , Pt. I, 11-19-13; Ord. No. 14-05 , Pt. I, 6-10-14) 
Sec. 18-120. - Enforcement, violations and penalties. 
(a)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of applicable provisions of state and federal law and the Code. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)  Fail to register or pay the registration fee in accordance with applicable provisions of this article; or 
(2)  Fail to update a change in registry information. 
(c)  Any person who is required, but fails to register, pay the registration fee or update a change in registry information as required by this article, upon citation or summons by an authorized county employee, and judgment, or conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the recorder's court, shall be subject to penalties not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
( Ord. No. 13-18 , Pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 18-121. - Deregistration. 
(a)  An owner may apply to remove vacant real property from the vacant property registry at such time as the vacant real property: 
(1)  Is lawfully inhabited; 
(2)  There is evidence of utility usage; and 
(3)  It does not have any outstanding warnings or citations for a violation of any requirements under state or federal law or the Code. 
(b)  The director shall grant or deny an owner's application to remove vacant real property from the vacant property registry within thirty (30) days of receipt of a complete application. An application is complete when it contains all of the information required by subsection (a) of this section. The director's decision shall be in writing, dated, signed and mailed to the owner at its agent's address. If no decision is made within thirty (30) days, the application shall be deemed granted. 
( Ord. No. 13-18 , Pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Sec. 18-122. - Administrative procedures. 
(a)  A citation, issued pursuant to section 18-120, is not a determination as that term is set forth in O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, but a matter involving a violation of the Code subject to the original jurisdiction of the recorder's court pursuant to 1959 Ga. Laws p. 3093, section 2 codified as section 653 of appendix B to the Code. 
(b)  As required by O.C.G.A § 44-14-14(j), any determination made by the director pursuant to the remaining provisions of this article shall be in writing, dated, signed and mailed to the owner at an agent's address. 
(c)  Any determination made pursuant to this article may be appealed by an owner or transferee to the county executive assistant. The appeal must be in writing and received by the county executive assistant within fourteen (14) days of the date of determination. To be considered complete, the appeal shall include: 
(1)  A description of the determination being challenged; 
(2)  The date the determination was made; and 
(3)  All the reasons that the owner or transferee believes that the determination represents an error in a material fact or a material misapplication of the requirements of this article. 
(d)  An appeal shall be deemed received by the county executive assistant if postmarked prior to midnight on or before the day it is due. 
(e)  The county executive assistant may only reverse a determination of the director if he or she finds that the determination was based on an error in a material fact or a material misapplication of the requirements of this article. 
(f)  The county executive assistant shall, within thirty (30) days after a complete appeal is received, issue a written decision affirming, reversing or modifying the determination of the director. 
(g)  As required by O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14(j), an owner or transferee may appeal the written decision of the county executive assistant to recorder's court. Said appeal shall be filed within fourteen (14) days after the date of the issuance of the written decision. 
(h)  The director may develop guidelines and forms, make recommendations and take such other steps as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-18 , Pt. I, 11-19-13) 
Secs. 18-123—18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HOTELS, MOTELS AND EXTENDED STAY HOTELS 

Sec. 18-131. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the continued availability of quality transient lodging within the county, proper maintenance of hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels and to protect the health, safety and welfare of hotel, motel, and extended-stay hotel inhabitants. 
(b)  Unless otherwise stated in this article, the requirements of this article apply to those who occupy, visit, patronize, frequent, operate, keep, conduct, or own a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel within the county, regardless of the date of the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel's construction. 
(c)  This article is essential to the public's interest, safety, health, and welfare, and this article shall be liberally construed to effectuate its purposes. 
( ord. No. 17-04 , pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-132. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Bona fide employee shall mean a person who works in the service of the hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel (i.e. The employer) under a contract of hire, whether express or implied, where the employer has the power or right to control or direct the details of what work is to be performed and the manner in which that work is to be performed. 
Electronic records shall mean the identifying information for all patrons and their guests contained in the electronic guest registration system as listed in section 18-136 of this article, which is recorded at the time of registration and maintained for a period of no less than one hundred eighty (180) days after the rental agreement's termination. 
Extended-stay hotel shall, for the purpose of this article, mean any structure consisting of one (1) or more buildings, with more than five (5) dwelling units with provisions for living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary residence is offered for pay (a) to persons for non-transient extended-stays and/or stays longer than thirty (30) days; or (b) for stays longer than fifteen (15) days in rooms equipped with kitchen facilities. 
Guest shall mean a person who is not a patron who is present on the premises of a hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel with the express permission of (a) a guest or patron of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel and (b) the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel. 
Hotel or motel shall, for the purpose of this article, mean any structure consisting of one (1) or more buildings, with more than five (5) dwelling units with provisions for transient living, sanitation, and sleeping, that is specifically constructed, kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public to be a place where temporary lodging is offered for pay to guests, is not intended for long-term occupancy, and does not otherwise meet the definition of an extended-stay hotel as defined in this section. This shall include boutique hotels, as described in section 27-3.22. 
Housekeeping shall mean the cleaning of guest rooms, guest bathrooms, public area, changing of linen and removal of trash from guest rooms and common areas. 
Kitchen facilities shall mean kitchen amenities, which at a minimum must include a stove, oven, and a kitchen-type sink. A bathroom sink does not qualify as a kitchen facility. Amenities limited to a microwave, mini-refrigerator, and/or an appliance designed to produce coffee or tea do not constitute "kitchen facilities" for purposes of this definition. 
Loitering is defined in chapter 16, section 16-43, of this Code. 
Manual records shall mean the identifying information for all patrons and their guests contained in the form of a paper record or reservation book as listed in section 18-136(e) of this article, which is recorded at the time of registration and maintained for a period of no less than one hundred eighty (180) days after the rental agreement's termination. 
Patron shall mean a person who pays a fee to the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel. 
Public nuisance shall mean a condition, obstruction or use of property allowed or continued by any person, legal entity or agent, that interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the neighborhood, community, or members of the public; or which can cause hurt, damage, inconvenience or affect or offend an ordinary, reasonable person. 
Vehicle is any car, truck, trailer, motorcycle, or other machinery used for transporting people or goods and is normally required to be registered with a state in order to be legally operated or towed on a public roadway. 
Visitor shall mean a person, who is not a patron or guest, who is on the premises of a hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel at the invitation of a patron or guest, but without the express permission of the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of the hotel, motel or extended-stay hotel. 
( ord. No. 17-04 , pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-133. - Provisions applicable to hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels. 
(a)  For any hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel permitted for construction after March 16, 2018, any public-facing entry points to the premises must require a magnetic or electronic keycard/locking device for access. Public facing entry point doors shall have operating automatic closures, key entry and shall remain locked at all times between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Additionally, all entry point doors shall be equipped with an alarm or other device that will alert hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel security, attendants, or other employees that the door has been opened or remains open. These requirements are not applicable to entry points that enter directly into the lobby of the hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel as long as the lobby is manned by a bona fide employee twenty-four (24) hours a day. These requirements are also not applicable to entry points that enter directly into a banquet hall, conference room, or other facility utilized for a special event or meeting hosted by a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel as long as there is a bona fide employee staffing the banquet hall, conference room, or other facility utilized for the duration of that event. 
(b)  Notwithstanding section 18-134 and section 18-135(a), an owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel may designate no more than five (5) percent or six (6) (rooms, whichever is fewer, for the purpose of allowing any number of bona-fide employees and their family to reside on the premises. Rooms designated for employee residences must be clearly marked as distinct from rooms held out for rent and, where practical, must be located adjacent to other rooms designated for employee residences. Rooms designated for employee residences may not be held out for rent to the public. 
(c)  No owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall provide lodging at an hourly rate. 
( ord. No. 17-04 , pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-134. - Provisions applicable to hotels and motels. 
No hotel or motel located within the county shall allow any person to occupy such hotel or motel for more than a one hundred eighty-day period. No guest residing for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall begin a new rental agreement with the hotel or motel without a two-day vacancy between stays. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-135. - Provisions applicable to extended-stay hotels. 
(a)  No extended-stay hotel located within the county shall allow any person to occupy such extended-stay hotel for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days unless otherwise permitted in this section. No guest residing for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days shall begin a new rental agreement with the extended stay hotel without at least a two-day vacancy between stays. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a) of section 18-134, a stay in excess of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days may occur in the following situations: 
(1)  Where there is a written contract or documented agreement between an extended-stay hotel and a business, corporation, firm or governmental agency to house employees or individuals on valid work orders; 
(2)  Where there is documentation, consistent with HIPPA privacy rules, that a hotel guest is considered family or is providing care for a patient who is admitted at local hospital; or 
(3)  When an insurance company or federal, state or local agency has provided documentation that a hotel guest has been displaced from their home by a natural disaster or fire. 
(c)  Extended-stay hotels are required to comply with all applicable provisions of this Code, including but not limited to section 27-4.2.26. 
(d)  All extended-stay hotels constructed after March 16, 2018, must provide a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet in common areas for recreational use by guests. In computing the one thousand (1,000) square feet requirement, swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers, patios, terraces, and other recreational facilities in common areas may be used in determining the square footage required by this subsection. An extended-stay hotel is considered constructed only after a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-136. - Responsibilities, access, and registration requirements. 
(a)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall, without delay, report violations of law to the DeKalb County Police Department that were either witnessed or made known to them by an employee, patron, guest, visitor or other person on the premises. 
(b)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall, at all times, maintain a manager on duty capable of assisting, communicating, and cooperating with the police or other law enforcement officials in maintaining the public health, welfare, and safety. 
(c)  All information required to be procured and kept pursuant to this article shall be kept strictly confidential in accordance with state and federal law and shall not be provided to any person except to a federal or state law enforcement officer or to any officer empowered to enforce this article. 
(d)  All information required to be procured and kept pursuant to this article shall be provided to any federal or state law enforcement officers, or local sworn enforcement officer empowered to enforce this article, upon demand of the officer and a representation by said officer that a reasonable suspicion exists that such information is relevant to a then-pending inquiry or investigation. Nothing in this requirement shall be construed as giving any such officer any greater right or license to enter a room or invade privacy than the officer shall otherwise possess as a matter of law, probable cause, constitutional law, statutory right, or warrant. 
(e)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall keep a record of all rental agreements between the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel and all patrons and their guests, and make these records available to the county within a reasonable time upon request. For the purposes of this section, the term "record" shall mean the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel's electronic guest registration system which stores guest identifying information. In the event the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel does not have an electronic guest registration system, the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall record the guest, patron and their guest's information in a paper record or reservation book. The following information, at a minimum, must be recorded at the time of registration and maintained for a period of no less than one hundred eighty (180) days after the rental agreement's termination: 
(1)  The full name, phone number, and home address of each patron and overnight guest. If the patron is a tourism company or other business, only the patron shall be required to provide this information; 
(2)  The total number of occupants (patrons and guests) registered in each room; 
(3)  The room number assigned to each patron and guest; 
(4)  The day, month, year and time of arrival of each patron and guest; 
(5)  The day, month, year each patron and each guest is scheduled to depart; 
(6)  Upon departure, record of departure day, month, and year for each patron and guest; 
(7)  The rate charged and amount collected for rental of the room; 
(8)  The method of payment for each room; and 
(9)  Documentation used to verify a stay in excess of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days as stated in section 18-135(b). 
(f)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall require each patron to provide proper identification prior to renting a room when registering in person. Proper identification is defined as a current and valid government issued photo identification card such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport. A record of the provided identification shall be kept on file for the duration of the occupancy and for one hundred eighty (180) days thereafter. 
(g)  Annually, the county shall provide every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel with a list of crimes and ordinance violations that occurred on the property in the previous year. 
(h)  No person shall procure or provide lodging in any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, or any services therefrom, through misrepresentation or production of false identification, or identification which misrepresents the identity of the person procuring or sharing in such lodging or service. 
(i)  Change of location or name. 
(1)  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on a hotel, motel, or extended-stay motel/hotel under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the occupation tax certificate. 
(2)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where a hotel, motel, or extended-stay motel/hotel is located shall require inspection and shall comply with all applicable codes and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-137. - Vehicles, parking, and registration. 
(a)  All handicap parking must be in compliance with state and local laws. 
(b)  All vehicles parked on any hotel's premises must be in good working order. 
(c)  Vehicle maintenance in hotel parking lots is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-138. - Room requirements, equipment and services. 
(a)  Every operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall keep and maintain in each and every rental unit, a telephone equipped to place a direct call to 911. 
(b)  No operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall rent or provide a room for any number of persons greater than the sleeping accommodations provided within the particular rental unit or temporary sleeping accommodations provided by the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(c)  No operator, owner, keeper, or proprietor, patron, visitor or guest of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall be allowed to congregate within any room or single rental unit a number of persons which is greater than two (2) times the number of persons for whom sleeping accommodations are provided within the single room or rental unit except when temporarily designated as a hospitality suite by the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(d)  Daily housekeeping shall be included within the standard room rate of any hotel, motel, or extended stay hotel. At a minimum, rooms must be cleaned before each new guest checks in and no less frequently than once every seven (7) days. Each hotel, motel, and extended-stay hotel must maintain a log that documents when each room is cleaned. The log must be maintained for one hundred twenty (120) days for extended-stay hotels and must be maintained for thirty (30) days for hotels and motels. Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel must make these records available to the county within a reasonable time upon request. 
(e)  The utilization of clothes-lines or other clothes-drying equipment or facilities outside of a room that are located on or are visible from the outside of a room are prohibited. Balconies and railings are not to be used for hanging towels, personal items or any other articles of clothing. 
(f)  No occupational tax certificate shall be issued for the purpose of conducting business from a guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, and no home occupation shall be conducted from such room. 
(g)  Each existing and newly constructed guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel in existence as of March 16, 2018 of this article shall, at a minimum, be brought into compliance, within three (3) years of the date of the effective date of this article, with sprinkler requirements for new construction set forth in NFPA 101, 2012 edition. The fire marshal shall provide notice to the building owner or agent of any hotel or dormitory that is not in compliance with NFPA 101, 2012 edition. Within sixty (60) days of receiving such notice of noncompliance, the building owner or agent of such owner shall file an intent to comply with this requirement with the fire marshal. Unless otherwise noted, it is intended that the provisions of this section be applied to new as well as existing facilities, equipment, structures, or installations that are approved for construction or installation prior to the effective date of this document. Existing facilities, equipment, structures, or installations will have three (3) years from March 16, 2018, to comply with the provisions of this section. The following extensions and exemptions to this requirement shall apply: 
(1)  Hotels, motels, or extended-stay hotels in existence as of March 16, 2018, may receive up to a two-year extension at the discretion of the fire chief based on submitted plans for the installation of the approved supervised sprinkler system. An affidavit shall be submitted to the fire marshal within sixty (60) days of the end of the three-year period, certifying that the premises is in compliance with the following regulation: 
a.  No kitchen facilities are installed or operated within any dwelling unit. Microwaves are allowed. 
(2)  Automatic sprinkler protection shall not be required in buildings where all guest sleeping rooms or guest suites have a door opening directly to either of the following: 
a.  Outside at the street or the finished ground level; 
b.  Exterior exit access arranged in accordance with NFPA 101:7.5.3 in buildings three (3) or fewer stories in height. 
(3)  NFPA 101: 7.5.3 Exterior Ways of Exit Access. 
a.  7.5.3.1 Exit access shall be permitted to be by means of any exterior balcony, porch, gallery, or roof that conforms to the requirements of this chapter. 
b.  7.5.3.2 The long side of the balcony, porch, gallery, or similar space shall be at least fifty (50) percent open and shall be arranged to restrict the accumulation of smoke. 
c.  7.5.3.3 Exterior exit access balconies shall be separated from the interior of the building by walls and opening protectives as required for corridors, unless the exterior exit access balcony is served by at least two remote stairs that can be accessed without any occupant traveling past an unprotected opening to reach one of the stairs, or unless dead ends on the exterior exit access do not exceed twenty (20) ft. (6100 mm). 
(h)  Each new and existing guest room of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall be equipped with a hard wired smoke detector or smoke alarms whose device housing is tamper-resistant and is powered by a non-replaceable, non-removable energy source capable of powering the alarm for a minimum of ten (10) years from the manufacture's date on the device. All smoke detectors or alarms must be installed and approved by the fire marshal within one hundred eighty (180) days after March 16, 2018. 
(i)  All new hotels, motels and extended stay hotels must have in place laundry facilities consisting of washer and dryer machines which shall be made available to patrons for a fee. This equipment shall be maintained and in good repair at all times. Laundry supplies (detergent, softener, etc.) may also be made available to patrons for a fee. Washers and dryers should be provided at a ratio of one (1) washer and dryer for every one hundred fifty (150) rooms. For existing hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels, laundry equipment must be installed and in working conditions within one hundred eighty (180) days after March 16, 2018. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-139. - Common area requirements and parking illumination. 
(a)  The open parking area and all areas surrounding any building or proposed building being a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least one (1) footcandle with a minimum allowable intensity of three-tenths of a footcandle. The covered parking area of any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of five-tenths of a footcandle. 
(b)  Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel must provide and maintain security in its parking area. This shall include one (1) or more of the following: live patrol guard, security fencing that is decorative and consistent with the zoning code, or other security measures approved in writing by the chief of police to meet the minimum security standards required by this code section. All hotels, motels, or extended-stay hotels must maintain a security plan which shall include all implemented security measures. Security plans and documentation for approved alternative security measures shall be kept on file and made available to the county within a reasonable time upon request. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-140. - Smoking. 
(a)  Smoking is prohibited in all hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel rooms with the exception of designated smoking areas. 
(b)  Smoking is prohibited except in designated smoking areas. Smoking is expressly prohibited in exterior breezeways, stairwells, or within twenty-five (25) feet of any guest room or doors used for ingress or egress. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-141. - Video surveillance systems. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "video surveillance system" (VSS) means a continuous digital surveillance system including cameras, cabling, monitors, and digital video recorders (DVR). 
(b)  Every owner, operator, keeper or proprietor of any new or existing hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel is required to install a VSS within one hundred eighty (180) days of March 16, 2018. All hotels, motels, and extended-stay hotels, which have installed a VSS prior to the effective date of this article, shall ensure said systems are in full compliance with this section and request an approval assessment from the chief of police within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this article. 
(c)  All VSS shall be maintained in proper working order at all times, be kept in continuous operation twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, and meet the minimum technological standards established in this section. The hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall retain the continuous digital images recorded by this system for no less than twenty-one (21) days. 
(d)  All VSS shall have no less than one (1) camera dedicated to each register or check-out stand, entrance/exit, interior hallway and lobby, swimming pool area, exercise facility, loading dock, and parking lots or areas designated for customer and/or employee parking use. The placement of cameras included in VSS required under this section must be approved by the chief of police. The chief of police will conduct an assessment of each site required to install a VSS prior to installation of said system, and upon approval will issue an approval notice which will be placed in plain view inside the common area of the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. This approval notice will also inform customers and employees of the presence of the VSS. Existing VSS at any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel as of the effective date of this article will be evaluated to ensure full compliance with this section. 
(e)  The VSS shall be subject to regular inspection by the chief of police, who is authorized to inspect any such system, at reasonable times to determine whether it conforms to this section. If the VSS does not conform, the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel, in question, shall take immediate steps to bring the system back into compliance. 
(f)  The DeKalb County Police Department will develop, maintain and publish on the county website VSS standards that provide the minimum standards for VSS equipment, installation, and maintenance. Any new standards or changes to existing standards will be issued in conjunction with annual business license renewal notices and become effective on May 1 of each year. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-142. - Loitering and juvenile curfew. 
(a)  All hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel operators will advise patrons and guests verbally, upon registration, and through posted signage that loitering is prohibited. 
(b)  No person(s) shall loiter in or upon any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel parking lot, public parking structure or in or around any building to include breezeways, stairwells or hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel rooms either on foot or in or upon any conveyance being driven or parked thereon, without the permission of the owner, operator, keeper or proprietor or the hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
(c)  The common areas of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel shall be considered an "establishment" as that term is defined in section 16-44 of this Code. 
(d)  Section 16-44 of this Code, related to juvenile curfew shall be enforced in the common areas of a hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Secs. 18-143—18-153. - Reserved. 
Sec. 18-154. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  The objective of enforcement is compliance. 
(b)  Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be punishable under section 1-10 of this Code. Any person or entity violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued, or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article may be abated as a nuisance. 
(d)  The violation of all provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies of law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of DeKalb County. 
(e)  If a person is convicted of a violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  First conviction in a calendar year: a minimum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
(2)  Second conviction in a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction: a minimum of five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
(3)  Third conviction in a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction: a minimum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00); and 
(4)  Fourth conviction in a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction: a minimum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-155. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
(a)  County employees, including employees or agents of the DeKalb County Police Department, Fire Department, Code Enforcement Division, and Board of Health shall have the responsibility for the enforcement of this section. Sworn officers of the DeKalb County Police Department, Fire Department, Code Enforcement Division, Board of Health, and designated civilian employees shall have the authority to inspect establishments governed under this section during the hours in which the premises are open for business. 
(b)  These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this section and state law. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-156. - Right of entry. 
(a)  When there is probable cause to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists a condition in violation of this Code, personnel identified in section 18-155 of this Code are authorized to enter the structure or premises, including individual rooms, at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties imposed by this Code. 
(b)  If such structure or premises is occupied, county personnel shall present credentials to the occupant and request entry. If entry is refused by occupant, county personnel shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law to secure entry. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, county personnel shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure or premises and request entry. If entry is refused by the owner or other person having charge or control of the structure refuses entry, county employees shall have recourse to all methods of entry allowed by law, and the owner and responsible party shall be in violation of this article and subject to punishment under section 1-10 of this Code. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 18-157. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any hotel, motel, or extended-stay hotel operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article may be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The county may, in addition, or in lieu of all other remedies, commence actions or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by state law and this Code. 
( Ord. No. 17-04 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Chapter 19 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of power to provide for parks, recreational areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1—19-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARK AND RECREATION FACILITY RULES 

Sec. 19-26. - Hours. 
Parks and recreation facilities shall open at 7:00 a.m., and shall close at sunset, except that parks containing lighting for night use shall close at 11:00 p.m. Only those areas of park and recreation facilities which are illuminated and in use at night shall be interpreted as being open. All other portions of the facilities if not illuminated are considered to be closed. Applicable closing signs shall be conspicuously posted at all park and recreation facilities and any deviation from these times must be approved in writing by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6002) 
Sec. 19-27. - Using parks for golf practice, putting greens, driving ranges. 
No person shall use any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreation purposes as a field for golf practice, putting green or driving range, except those areas specifically designated as golf clubs. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6003) 
Sec. 19-28. - Motor vehicles in parks. 
(a)  A motorized vehicle means a self-propelled, wheeled conveyance that does not run on rails. A motorized vehicle shall not include a wheelchair used by a person with disabilities as an auxiliary aid. A wheelchair means a device designed solely for use by a mobility-impaired person for locomotion that is suitable for use in an indoor pedestrian area. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motorized vehicle of any kind or nature in or on any county park, bicycle path, or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as an auxiliary aid in or on any county park, bicycle path, or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(c)  This section does not prohibit the use of motorized vehicles for maintenance purposes, golf carts operated on prescribed paths, or motorized vehicles using marked roads, driveways or parking areas. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6004; Ord. No. 10-04, Pt. I, 3-23-10) 
Cross reference— Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 17; speed limit in parks, § 17-113. 
Sec. 19-29. - Reservation of picnic shelter areas. 
(a)  Fees. The use of a county park area or picnic shelter may be reserved for a reasonable period of time for the purpose of group activities through application to the county and upon payment of a reservation fee in accordance with the schedule established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Application. All persons desiring to reserve a park area or picnic shelter shall make application to the parks and recreation department, on a form prescribed by the county. 
(c)  Limited reservations. Reservations shall be limited to one (1) reservation per month per person/group per shelter. 
(d)  Fund-raisers at picnic shelters. Any person/group wishing to hold a fund-raiser at county picnic shelter must follow procedures for reserving picnic shelters (see section 19-30) and provide verification of current registration with the secretary of state. 
(e)  Refusal or revocation permit. The department reserves the right to refuse or revoke permits. Such a determination shall be based on health, safety and welfare of the public and protection of county property. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6005; Ord. No. 90-06, § 1, 4-10-90; Res. No. 94-27, 11-8-94) 
Sec. 19-30. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Prohibited; exception. No person shall serve, consume or transport in open containers any alcoholic beverage within a county park or recreation facility, except at a group function for which a permit has been issued by the parks and recreation department. 
(b)  Application for permit. All persons desiring to obtain a permit to serve or consume alcoholic beverages on county park property shall make application to the county on a form prescribed by the parks and recreation department, and shall pay a permit fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(c)  Locations where permitted. Notwithstanding the above, permits may be issued by the parks and recreation director for the consumption of alcoholic beverages but may be issued for the following park locations only: 
Brookhaven; Chapel Hill; County Line; Exchange (shelter 1); Henderson; Lithonia; Mark Trail (shelter 3); Murphey Candler (shelters 1 through 10); Blackburn; Gregory Mosley; Glen Emerald; Shoal Creek II; Stephenson Road Property; W.D. Thomson; Wade-Walker; Old Courthouse; Dunwoody; Emmie Smith; Mason Mill; and Southeast Athletic Complex. 
(d)  Other locations. Notwithstanding the above, permits may be issued by the planning director for the consumption of alcoholic beverages at the Callanwolde Fine Arts Center and the North DeKalb Cultural Center. Applications shall be made at the planning department on forms provided by the planning department and shall be accompanied by a permit fee as set forth in paragraph (b) of this section. 
(e)  Refusal and revocation of permits. The parks and recreation director and the planning director shall have the right to refuse and revoke permits for cause. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6006; Ord. No. 89-37, § 1, 10-24-89; Res. No. 94-27, 11-8-94; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 3-21-97) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 19-31. - Animals in parks and swimming areas. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of an animal to bring said animal onto county-owned or -operated athletic fields. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, graze or walk a horse or any other type of hoofed animal within county parks or other areas owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes without obtaining written authorization from the director of the parks department or designee. This subsection shall not prohibit riding, grazing or walking horses in county property designated as horse farms or in county parks or recreational areas with county signage specifically allowing the riding, grazing or walking of horses. No person shall ride a horse on county property in a manner that endangers other persons. 
(c)  Animals are prohibited in county swimming areas, the areas inside fencing around pools, and in concession and restroom facilities at swimming pools. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from bringing guide animals into any such areas or into any county park or area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 90-05, § 1, 4-10-90; Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-32. - Special prohibitions. 
(a)  Paint. It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to possess paint, in any form, in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreation purposes. 
(b)  Glass containers. No person shall possess a glass container in or on any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreation purposes. 
(c)  Bicycles on athletic fields. No person shall ride or walk a bicycle or other nonmotorized vehicle in or on any athletic field owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as defined in section 19-28 as an auxiliary aid on such fields. 
(d)  Bicycles on park trails and paths. 
(1)  No person shall ride, carry, push or otherwise manually transport a one-, two- or three-wheeled cycle on or through any trails owned or operated by the county and designed solely for pedestrian use. 
(2)  This subsection does not prohibit the use of such cycles on trails or paths specifically designated for bicycling or multi-uses that include cycling. No person shall operate a one-, two- or three-wheeled cycle or a trailer attached to a cycle on trails specifically designated for bicycling or multi-uses that include cycling, if the width of the trailer or cycle exceeds 36 inches as measured from the outer rim of the back tires. 
(3)  This section does not prohibit persons with disabilities from using a wheelchair as defined in section 19-28 as an auxiliary aid on county-owned or county-operated trails and paths. 
(Ord. No. 93-04, § 1, 2-9-93; Ord. No. 10-04, Pt. I, 3-23-10) 
Sec. 19-33. - Reserved. 
Sec. 19-34. - Closing of ballfields. 
The department may close to the public particular ballfields for maintenance purposes. Such ballfields shall be posted, and it shall be unlawful for any person to enter a closed field. 
(Ord. No. 90-02, § 1, 3-13-90) 
Sec. 19-35. - Public address systems. 
No public address systems, loud speakers or amplifying devices shall be used in county parks unless written authorization for use is given by the department. 
(Ord. No. 90-03, § 1, 3-13-90) 
Sec. 19-36. - Weapons. 
(a)  Weapons include, but are not limited to, knives; air guns; paintball guns; archery equipment; explosives; fireworks; slingshots; fishing spears; any device designed to launch a projectile by physical strength, compressed gas/compressed air or a fuel source; and other devices designed for the purpose of offense or defense. The term "weapon," as used in this section, does not include firearms as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-11-171, and as it hereafter may be amended. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than law enforcement officers to shoot, use, carry, or employ any weapon or similar device in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than law enforcement officers to discharge any firearm in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(d)  The director of the parks department or his/her designee may issue a permit for a time-limited use of weapons other than firearms, and the permit shall set forth specific conditions for use and handling of such weapons. 
(e)  This section shall not prohibit the customary and ordinary use of the county firing range during normal operating hours. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-37. - Fires. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to build or maintain a fire in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes except in designated areas clearly marked by signs or defined by the existence of county-approved fire rings. 
(b)  Permanently mounted grills may be used and personal grills may be used in designated authorized areas. 
(c)  Camp fires may be allowed with written authorization from the director of the parks department or his/her designee for organized groups allowed in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes after closing time. The written authorization must be on site with the event organizer or his/her designee and available for inspection at the time of the camp fire. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-38. - Swimming. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the lawful direction of a lifeguard at a county-owned or -operated pool facility during the hours of operation. 
(b)  Swimming is prohibited in lakes, ponds, or creeks located inside any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(c)  Entering and using any body of water located in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes for bathing or excretory functions is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-39. - Watercraft. 
(a)  Lakes and streams located in county parks or other areas owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes may be used for boating. 
(b)  Boats, canoes, rubber rafts or other floating watercraft may not be used in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes if such equipment is powered by more than twelve-volt electric motors. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a watercraft with a petroleum-based, fuel-burning engine in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(d)  All watercraft must be carried by hand to the water's edge for launching. Water craft shall not be permitted to be towed by vehicle to the edge of any body of water in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to official use of watercraft by law enforcement, fire and rescue personnel, or by county crews for maintenance and inspection. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-40. - Vegetation—Damage or removal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig up, cut, damage or remove any tree, tree limb, shrubbery, flowers, rock, mulch or other vegetation/natural fixture located in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to personnel employed or engaged by the county to maintain county parks and recreational areas or an authorized group of volunteers involved in a county-approved project for the enhancement of a park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-41. - Artifact or treasure hunting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to search any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes for historic artifacts or for the purpose of locating lost or abandoned personal property of another, unless such person specifically is authorized by the owner of that personal property to make such search on the owner's behalf. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any historic artifacts or lost or abandoned personal property of another from any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes unless such person specifically is authorized by the owner of that personal property to recover such personal property on the owner's behalf. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dig in or otherwise disturb the ground in a park or other area owned by the county for recreational purposes, except under the circumstances permitted in subsection 19-40(b) above. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit a person from visually searching for and reclaiming his/her own lost property in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes, either by himself/herself or by someone specifically authorized by the owner of the lost personal property to act on his/her behalf. 
(e)  The prohibitions of this section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel engaged in the lawful execution of their duties or to persons employed or engaged by the county when performing their duties in any park or other area owned or operated by the county for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-42. - Commercial activity. 
Unless approved by prior written permit issued by the director of the parks department or his/her designee, it shall be unlawful for any person in any county park to: 
(a)  Sell or offer for sale any merchandise; 
(b)  operate or attempt to operate a concession; or 
(c)  Engage in any commercial or charitable activity in a county park. 
The written permit must be on site with the event organizer or his/her designee and available for inspection at the time the activity regulated in this section is occurring. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Sec. 19-43. - Native wildlife. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to remove or disturb any living or dead native creatures in county parks, including mammals, birds, fish, amphibians, and reptiles, or the parts or progeny thereof, such as nests, eggs, or antlers. 
(b)  Fishing activities in county park lakes or streams shall be allowed from the shore of a body of water or from watercraft, if the location is designated by a county sign as allowing fishing at that particular location. 
(Ord. No. 09-15, Pt. I, 10-27-09) 
Chapter 20 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Officers and employees generally, § 2-41 et seq.; departments of county government, App. A; local laws relating to personnel, App. B, § 1001 et seq. 
 Organizational act reference— General authority of chief executive over county employees, § 13. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter and in any personnel rules and regulations adopted by the chief executive, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Act or the Act or merit system act means Georgia Laws, 1956, p. 3111 [App. B, § 1052 et seq.], as amended. 
Allocation means assignment of a pay grade to a class of positions. 
Appeal means a request by an employee to have a hearing pursuant to this chapter. 
Applicant means any person who has filed an application in accordance with this chapter. 
Appointment means the employment of an applicant for county service. 
Available means an individual on a register for a class of positions willing to accept appointment to a particular position of that class. 
Base rate of pay means that salary paid an employee excluding any incentive, longevity or other compensation. 
Certification means referring a list of names of qualified applicants for appointment or promotion. 
Class means a group of positions sufficiently similar as to the duties performed, degree of supervision exercised or required, minimum requirements of training, experience and such other characteristics that the same title, the same tests of fitness, and the same schedule of compensation may be applied to each position in the group; and which has been recognized as such in the classification plan approved. 
Classified service means all positions under the merit system. Each position is assigned to a classification and carries that specific job code and an individual position number. Exempt positions are not in the classified service. 
Compensatory time means that time which may be granted an employee as off time as compensation for time worked in excess of the standard workweek applicable to that employee. 
Council means the merit system council. 
Demotion means the reduction of a permanent or working test employee to a position of a lower class. For this purpose, a lower class means any class of positions having a maximum rate of pay lower than the maximum rate of pay for the position in which the individual is employed. 
Department means the internal administrative unit established by formal action of the chief executive and board of commissioners. 
Department head means any county employee designated as the head or principal administrative officer of any department subject to the provisions of this chapter. This includes the chief executive who shall be considered the department head of department heads under the merit system. 
Director means the director of the merit system and personnel administration department. 
Disciplinary action means action taken for cause by the chief executive officer or department head that results in suspension, involuntary demotion or dismissal. 
Eligible means an individual whose name appears on a register for a particular class of positions and who is not otherwise barred from consideration for appointment. 
Emergency appointment means employment to fill an immediate need and that regular appointment methods cannot be followed. 
Employee means an incumbent of a position, as hereinafter defined. 
Examination means the designated method of evaluating the knowledge, skills and abilities of applicants for purposes of ranking and selection. Such methods could include but not be limited to written tests, oral interviews, evaluations of education and experience, etc. 
Exempt position means a position designated as being exempt from the application of this chapter. 
Merit system means the county merit system of personnel administration of employees covered under the act. 
Minimum qualifications means those training, experience and other requirements that qualify an applicant or employee to be considered for examination and appointment. 
Overtime means time wherein an employee is directed to continue work in excess of the standard workweek for that position, as hereinafter defined. 
Part-time employee means any employee working on a continuous basis at least twenty (20) hours but less than the standard workweek, as hereinafter defined. 
Permanent status employee means an employee who has successfully completed his or her probationary period and has been designated a permanent status employee by the department head and approved by the merit system director. 
Position means the duties, tasks and responsibilities which comprise and constitute the work of an employee. 
Probation means conditional employment; not regular; a trial or working test period. 
Promotion means the filling of a vacancy by appointing an employee with permanent status to a position from a position of a lower class. 
Protected classes means minorities, females, handicapped, older workers, and other classes designated by federal or state law for special employment consideration. 
Public hearings means a meeting of the merit system council open to the public, held after at least five (5) days' notice has been given thereof, at which time any interested party may appear and be heard. 
Public notice, unless otherwise expressly stated, means a written notice on a bulletin board accessible to the public during business hours, and other publicity as may be deemed necessary by the merit system council. 
Qualifying service means all periods of county employment during which an employee was eligible to accrue annual leave under this chapter. 
Reallocation means change in the pay grade assignment of a class of positions. 
Reduction in force means the termination of an employee due to lack of work, lack of funds, abolishment of position, or for other material changes in duties or organization, or appropriation of funds. 
Register means an official list of persons who have successfully competed in a merit system examination for a particular class of positions. 
Roster of employees means a listing of employees of the county government which sets forth the name of each employee, the department by which the employee is employed, the class title of the position held by the employee, and the salary range assigned to the class title of the position held by the employee. 
Salary adjustment means any change in salary, resulting from legislative or administrative action, and not constituting a salary advancement, as hereinafter defined. 
Salary advancement means an increase in salary based on merit and length of service within the salary range prescribed for a particular class of positions. 
Standard workweek means that number of hours constituting the full working time for a class of positions, as determined by a department head and as approved by the board of commissioners. 
Standby time means that time when employees are required to leave word at their homes or with departmental officials where they may be reached in case of an off-duty call-out. 
Temporary position means a position created for a designated period of time not to exceed six (6) months. 
Time-limited appointment means employment to fill a position for a period of time designated by programs authorized by Congress or the state legislature. 
Transfer means the filling of a vacancy by assigning a permanent or working test employee from another position of the same or a comparable class. 
Vacancy means an unoccupied position that has been established through a job analysis and official delegation of duties, which has been properly allocated and adopted as part of the classification and pay plans, and for which funds are available. 
Waiting time means that period of inactivity while on duty spent waiting for weather conditions to improve or contingency assignments to be made. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3002; Ord. No. 00-75, § 1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 11-08, Pt. I, 6-28-11) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-2. - Penalties for violation. 
Any employee under the merit system who willfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter may be disciplined hereunder or may be required to forfeit the employee's position, subject to the appeals guidelines as set forth in article IX of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3009) 
Sec. 20-3. - Applicability. 
All positions, other than those exempt positions under this chapter or law, shall be filled only in accordance with this chapter. All departments under the merit system, as provided herein, shall administer their personnel in accordance with this chapter. All positions, except those listed as exempt, shall be collectively known as the classified service. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to conflict with any state law or regulation that provides additional qualifications, duties or compensation levels of any employee who is also subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3003; Ord. No. 93-02, § 2, 1-26-93) 
Sec. 20-4. - Exempt positions designated. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any exempt position. The exempt positions are the following: 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Chief executive and board of commissioners and the employees of the office of the chief executive and the board of commissioners. 
b.  District attorney and employees of the office. 
c.  Probate court judge and employees of the office. 
d.  Sheriff and employees of the office. 
e.  Solicitor of the state court and employees of the office. 
f.  State court judges, clerks and employees of the offices. 
g.  Superior court clerk and employees of the office. 
h.  Superior court judges and employees of the office. 
i.  Surveyor and employees of the office. 
j.  Tax commissioner and employees of the office. 
k.  All employees of the police department, including the police chief, who hold positions or classifications above the rank of captain. All positions above the rank of captain serve at the pleasure of the chief of police. If the chief of police removes an employee above the rank of captain for a reason other than for cause, the employee shall revert to the position of captain, or to the position previously held if less than captain, with equivalent changes in salary and benefits. 
l.  All employees of the department of fire and rescue services who hold positions or classifications above the rank of captain. All positions above the rank of captain serve at the pleasure of the director of the department of fire and rescue services. If the director removes an employee above the rank of captain for a reason other than for cause, the employee shall revert to the position of captain, or to the rank previously held if less than captain, with equivalent change in salary and benefits. 
m.  The head of the following departments: airport (Peachtree-DeKalb Airport); development; economic development; police services; fire and rescue services; geographical information systems; parks and recreation; physical plant management (facilities management); public works, including the assistant directors and associate directors of roads and drainage, water and sewer, sanitation, and fleet maintenance; purchasing and contracting; and workforce development. 
(2)  Appointed official. 
a.  County attorney and employees of the office. 
b.  Elections supervisor. 
c.  Executive assistant. 
d.  Juvenile court judges. 
e.  Library director. 
f.  Magistrate court judges. 
g.  Public defender and employees of the office. 
h.  Recorder's court judges, clerk, deputy clerks, and employees of the office (except marshals of the recorder's court appointed by the chief recorder). 
i.  Tax assessor board and chief appraiser. 
j.  Medical examiner. 
k.  Members of other appointed county agencies, boards, commissions and councils and the employees of the offices. 
(3)  Employees of state or other governmental agencies. 
a.  Extension service. 
b.  Family and children services. 
c.  Board of health. 
d.  Participants in special, time-limited programs; participants or beneficiaries of programs such as the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, or similar programs authorized by Congress or the state legislature, whose employment is primarily for the purpose of training, or rehabilitation, and is time-limited in nature. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3004; Ord. No. 93-02, § 1, 1-26-93; Ord. No. 12-02, § 1, 12-11-01; Ord. No. 09-12, Pt. I, 7-14-09 ; Ord. No. 12-13, Pt. I, 9-11-12 ) 
Sec. 20-5. - Reserved. 
Sec. 20-6. - Duties of merit system and personnel administration director. 
The duties of the merit system director shall be to: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the merit system council and act as secretary to the council. 
(2)  Establish and maintain a listing of all employees of the board of commissioners, including merit and nonmerit, which will set forth the names of employees, their class titles, their pay grades, their salaries or pay statuses, their employment statuses and other appropriate data deemed pertinent by the director. 
(3)  Select a staff of assistants in accordance with this chapter and to assign and direct their work. 
(4)  Advise and consult with the department heads in the development of a variety of training programs to improve performance of employees at all levels as needed and to coordinate the planning and scheduling of such training programs for efficient administration. 
(5)  Assist the department heads in the development of a system of periodic performance appraisal of employees under the merit system to be administered by the department heads. 
(6)  Make annual reports and such special reports as deemed advisable regarding personnel administration under the merit system, and to make recommendations for improvement therein. 
(7)  Be responsible for the preparation and maintenance of the classification and compensation plans and, after consultation with department heads, to prepare and present to the board for adoption, class specifications and amendments thereto. 
(8)  Recommend amendments to this chapter and to cause all rules and regulations to be published and copies thereof to be given to the department heads and the board, and to maintain copies in the office of the merit system department. 
(9)  Prepare for review and approval by the chief executive, job classification and compensation, administrative procedures to be followed by employees, department heads and other officials in processing appeals and in carrying out other assigned responsibilities under this chapter. 
(10)  Prepare annual budgets covering all the costs of operating the merit system, for adoption by the board. 
(11)  Maintain all registers of eligible persons for appointment and to make certification from such registers. 
(12)  Act as custodian of all records and properties in the office of the merit system director. 
(13)  Make such regulations and other administrative memoranda as deemed necessary, not inconsistent with this chapter, relative to matters involved in the administration of this chapter. 
(14)  Be responsible for overseeing an equitable and uniform system of discipline, administering the internal grievance and appeal procedure and maintaining the centralized records and coordinating the activities associated with appeals. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3018) 
Sec. 20-7. - Adoption of rules, regulations. 
The chief executive shall adopt uniform rules and regulations pertaining to county recruitment activities, applications for examination, qualifications of applicants, administration of examinations, and all other matters necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3041) 
Sec. 20-8. - Minutes of merit system council. 
The date, time and place of each meeting of the merit system council, names of the councilmembers present, all official acts of the council and the votes of each member except when the acts are unanimous and, when requested, a councilmember's approval or dissent, with the reasons, shall be recorded in the minutes. The director shall cause the minutes to be prepared and presented to the council for approval or amendment. The adopted minutes, or a true copy thereof, certified by the director, shall be open to public inspection, and copies of pertinent sections thereof made available upon request to any department head or employee affected thereby. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3015) 
Sec. 20-9. - Record of appeal hearings. 
A verbatim account of an appeal hearing will not be transcribed, unless requested by one (1) of the parties, and paid for by the requesting party. Either party shall have the right to have the proceedings recorded by a court reporter at the party's own expense. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3016) 
Sec. 20-10. - Public records, confidential records. 
All merit system documents, records and information are the property of DeKalb County and shall remain confidential except when disclosure is required by the Georgia Open Records Act or other law. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3012; Ord. No. 00-75, § 2, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 20-11. - Access to records. 
The director shall have access to all departmental personnel records, documents and papers in order to discharge the director's duties. The department heads shall have access to such records as deemed pertinent by the director to their department and the discharge of their duties. Performance rating reports shall be accessible to the department head concerned, the director, the merit system council, the board of commissioners and the employee involved. Such performance reports may be reviewed by other individuals only for official purposes on a need-to-know basis at the discretion of the director. The merit system council shall have access to all records necessary to discharge its duties. Other personnel information may be made available for official purposes at the discretion of the director. Information which is obtained by employees in the course of their official duties shall not be released or made available to anyone other than employees charged with this responsibility as part of their official duties. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3013) 
Sec. 20-12. - Preservation of records. 
(a)  The following records shall be preserved in the offices of the merit system for the periods designated: 
(1)  Examination and testing records of appointees shall be kept permanently. Examination and testing records of other applicants shall be kept for one (1) year. 
(2)  Registers of certified eligibles shall be kept for one (1) year after expiration. 
(3)  A copy of each test form used and validation procedures employed shall be retained permanently. 
(4)  All other records related to examination and eligible lists, including correspondence, applications and examination papers, shall be kept for one (1) year. 
(5)  The employee's permanent personnel file shall be purged each three (3) years to remove appraisals and other documents related to performance, disciplinary actions and other materials over three (3) years of age which are no longer needed in the operation of the merit system. 
(6)  Personnel files of terminated employees shall be kept for three (3) years. 
(b)  The above retention periods may be extended if required by federal or state law. 
(c)  Records may be preserved in their original form or other duplicate form such as microfilm, at the discretion of the director. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3014) 
Sec. 20-13. - Position classification plan. 
(a)  The classification plan provides a systematic arrangement and inventory of the positions in the classified service. The plan groups the various positions into classes with an appropriate title indicative of the range of duties and responsibilities, and the types of work performed. 
(b)  The chief executive shall adopt rules and regulations for the implementation and administration of the classification plan within the budget approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-3021, 2-3022) 
Sec. 20-14. - Maintenance of registers. 
The chief executive shall adopt uniform rules and regulations pertaining to the maintenance of registers, including procedures for determining the adequacy of existing registers, the frequency of announcements of vacancies or examinations, the abolishment of registers, and the establishment of registers. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3051) 
Sec. 20-15. - Filling of vacancies. 
All vacancies under the merit system must be filled either by probationary appointment, promotion, demotion, transfer, emergency appointment, reappointment, temporary appointment or part-time appointment. No vacancy may be filled until a valid requisition is received by the director from a department head. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3061) 
Sec. 20-16. - Equal opportunity employment. 
(a)  The county is an equal opportunity employer. This effort will be an ongoing process. For affirmative action purposes, the director, in conjunction with the affirmative action officer, may institute voluntary programs that will facilitate this purpose and implement programs approved by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  There shall be no discrimination against applicants or employees on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, political affiliation or opinion, age, handicap or other nonmerit factors with regard to appointment, promotion, demotion, dismissal, discipline, training or any other aspect of personnel administration. This shall not prevent the application of a particular requirement factor that is a bona fide occupational qualification. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-3005, 2-3161) 
Sec. 20-17. - Political activities. 
(a)  No person shall seek or attempt to use any political endorsement in connection with any appointment to a position under the merit system. 
(b)  No person shall use or promise to use, directly or indirectly, any official authority or influence, whether possessed or anticipated, to secure or attempt to secure for any person an appointment or advantage in appointment to a position under the merit system, or an increase in pay or any other advantage in employment in this position for the purpose of influencing the vote or political action of any person, or for any consideration. 
(c)  No employee under the merit system shall be a candidate for nomination or election to any elective public office, or take part in the management or affairs of any political campaign, except to exercise the right as a citizen to express an opinion privately and to cast a vote. 
(d)  Employees whose principal employment is in connection with an activity which is financed in whole or in part by loans or grants made by the United States or a federal agency are subject to the provisions of the Hatch Act. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3006) 
Sec. 20-18. - Political soliciting. 
No employee under the merit system shall solicit or take part in soliciting any assessment, subscription or contribution for any political organization or purpose. Employees may make voluntary financial contributions to a political party or organization or candidate. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3007) 
Sec. 20-19. - Persons advocating overthrow of government prohibited from employment. 
No person shall be employed under the merit system who advocates or has ever advocated, or who is or who ever has been a member of any organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States by force or violence. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3008) 
Sec. 20-20. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  No employee covered by the provision of this chapter shall: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial interest or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties or which would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for a private interest when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of official county duties or would tend to impair independence of judgment or action in the performance of official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, governmental body or affairs of the county without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the employee's financial or other private interests or that of others; 
(4)  Participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which the employee has a financial interest. 
(5)  Solicit contributions from another employee for a gift or donation to an employee or elected official in a superior official position, or, if in a superior position, accept a gift presented as a contribution from an employee. 
(6)  Directly or indirectly solicit or accept any gift from a prohibited source or any gift given because of the employee's official position. 
(7)  Directly or indirectly give, offer, promise, demand, seek, receive, accept, or agree to receive anything of value to influence any official act. 
(8)  Except as provided by law for the proper discharge of official duties, directly or indirectly, give, offer promise, demand, seek, receive, accept, or agree to accept anything of value for or because of any official act performed or to be performed, or for or because of any testimony given or to be given before an individual or other entity, tribunal or proceeding authorized to hear evidence or take testimony. 
(9)  Accept gifts from the same or different sources on a basis so frequent that a reasonable person would be led to believe the employee is using his/her public office for private gain. 
(10)  Accept a gift in violation of any local, state or federal statute. 
(11)  Accept vendor promotional training contrary to applicable regulations, policies or guidance relating to the procurement of supplies and services for the county. 
(b)  No employee shall receive any compensation, salary or supplementation of his/her county salary, from any entity other than the county or as may be contributed by law out of the treasury of any state, county, or municipality, for his/her services to the county. 
(c)  No employee shall by his or her conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him or her or unduly enjoy his or her favor in the performance of official acts or actions or that he or she is affected unduly by the kinship, rank, position or association with any person. 
(d)  No employee shall by virtue of his or her position with the county, directly or indirectly attempt to influence the decision of any county employee who must act to further any county procurement, policy, regulation, inspection or transaction. 
(e)  No employee shall engage in or accept employment with or render services for any private business or professional activity when such is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties. 
(f)  Employees shall not knowingly solicit or make solicited sales to other employees who are junior in classification or position, or to the family members of such employees, within or without work hours. In the absence of coercion or intimidation, this does not prohibit the sale or lease of an employee's noncommercial personal or real property or commercial sales solicited and made in a retail establishment during non-working hours. This prohibition includes, without limitation, the solicited sale of insurance, stocks, mutual funds, real estate, cosmetics, household supplies, vitamins, and other goods or services. Both the act of soliciting and the act of selling as a result of soliciting are prohibited. In both cases, however, a solicitation is necessary for a violation to occur. While the standard prohibits a superior from making a solicited sale to a subordinate or to the subordinate's family, sales made because a subordinate approaches the superior and requests the sale to be made are not prohibited, absent coercion or intimidation by the superior. The posting of an advertisement in accordance with county policies does not constitute solicitation for purposes of this subsection. 
(g)  Where an employee knows that a particular matter involving specific parties is likely to have a direct and predictable effect on the financial interest of a member of his/her household, or knows that a person with whom he/she has a covered relationship is or represents a party to such a matter, and where the circumstances would cause a reasonable person with knowledge of the relevant facts to question his/her impartiality in the matter, the employee should not participate in the matter. 
(h)  An employee shall be disqualified for two (2) years from participating in any particular matter in which a former employer is a party or represents a party. The two-year period of disqualification begins to run on the date the employee left the employ of the former employer. 
(i)  An employee may accept unsolicited gifts from a person or entity other than a prohibited source, having an aggregate market value of forty dollars ($40.00) or less per source per occasion, provided that the aggregate market value of individual gifts received from any one source under the authority of this paragraph shall not exceed one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) in a calendar year. 
(j)  Definitions. 
(1)  Covered relationship. An employee has a covered relationship with: 
a.  A person with whom the employee has or seeks a business, contractual or other financial relationship that involves other than a routine consumer transaction; 
b.  A person who is a member of the employee's household, or who is within the third degree of relationship with of the employee; 
c.  A person for whom the employee's spouse, parent or child is serving or seeking to serve as an officer, director, trustee, general partner, agent, attorney, consultant, contractor or employee; 
d.  Any person for whom the employee has, within the last year, served as officer, director, trustee, general partner, agent, attorney, consultant, contractor or employee; or 
e.  An organization, other than a political party, in which the employee is an active participant. 
(2)  Direct and predictable effect means a particular matter will have a direct effect if there is a close causal link between any decision or action to be taken in the matter and any effect on a financial interest. An effect may be direct even though it does not occur immediately. A particular matter will not have a direct effect on a financial interest, however, if the chain of causation is contingent upon the occurrence of events that are speculative or that are independent of, and unrelated to, the matter. A particular matter will have a predictable effect if there is a real, as opposed to a speculative, possibility that the matter will affect a financial interest. It is not necessary, however, that the magnitude of the gain or loss be known, and the dollar amount of the gain or loss is immaterial. 
(3)  Former employer includes any person or entity which the employee served as an officer, director, trustee, general partner, agent, attorney, consultant, contractor or employee. 
(4)  Gift includes any gratuity, favor, discount, entertainment, trip, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other item having monetary value. It includes services as well as gifts of training, transportation, local travel, lodgings and meals, whether provided in-kind, by purchase of a ticket, payment in advance, or reimbursement after the expense has been incurred. A gift does not include: 
a.  Modest items of prepared food and refreshments, such as soft drinks, or coffee and donuts, offered other than as part of a meal; 
b.  Greeting cards and items with little intrinsic value, such as plaques, certificates, and trophies, which are intended solely for presentation; 
c.  Loans from banks and other financial institutions on terms generally available to the public; 
d.  Social invitations from persons or entities, other than prohibited sources. An employee may accept food, refreshments and entertainment, not including travel or lodgings, at a social event attended by several persons where the invitation is from a person or entity that is not a prohibited source and no fee is charged to any person in attendance. 
(5)  Imputed interests means the financial interests of the following persons will serve to disqualify an employee to the same extent as if they were the employee's own interests: 
a.  The employee's spouse/domestic partner; 
b.  The employee's child; 
c.  An organization or entity which the employee or his/her spouse serves as officer, director, trustee, general partner or employee; and 
d.  A person with whom the employee is negotiating for or has an arrangement concerning prospective employment. 
(6)  Market value means the retail cost the employee would incur to purchase the gift. An employee who cannot ascertain the market value of a gift may estimate its market value by reference to the retail cost of similar items of like quality. The market value of a gift of a ticket entitling the holder to food, refreshments, entertainment, or any other benefit shall be the face value of the ticket. 
(7)  Particular matter encompasses only matters that involve deliberation, decision, or action that is focused upon the interests of specific persons, or a discrete and identifiable class of persons. The particular matters covered by this subpart include, but are not limited to, a judicial or other proceeding, application, request for a ruling or other determination, contract, claim, controversy, charge, accusation or arrest. 
(8)  Personal and substantial means the direct and active supervision of the participation of a subordinate in the matter. To participate substantially means that the employee's involvement is of significance to the matter. Participation may be substantial even though it is not determinative of the outcome of the particular matter. However, it requires more than official responsibility, knowledge, perfunctory involvement, or involvement on administrative or peripheral issues. A finding of substantiality should be based not only on the effort devoted to a matter, but also on the importance of the effort. 
(9)  Prohibited source means any person or entity who: 
a.  Is seeking official action by the employee or the employee's department; 
b.  Does business or seeks to do business with the county or the employee's department; 
c.  Conducts activities regulated by the employee or the employee's department; 
d.  Has interests that may be substantially affected by performance or nonperformance of the employee's official duties; or 
e.  Is an organization having a majority of its members as described in paragraphs (j)(9)a. through d. of this section. 
(10)  A gift is solicited or accepted because of the employee's official position if it is from a person other than an employee and would not have been solicited, offered, or given had the employee not held the status, authority or duties associated with his/her county position. A gift which is solicited or accepted indirectly includes a gift: 
a.  Given with the employee's knowledge and acquiescence to his/her parent, sibling, spouse, child (included adopted and step-children), or dependent relative because of that person's relationship to the employee, or 
b.  Given to any other person, including any charitable organization, on the basis of designation, recommendation, or other specification by the employee. 
(11)  Third degree of relationship. The following persons are relatives within the third degree of relationship: great-grandparent, grandparent, parent, uncle, aunt, brother, sister, child, grandchild, great-grandchild, nephew or niece. 
(12)  Vendor promotional training means training provided by any person or entity for the purpose of promoting its products or services. It does not include training provided under a county contract or by a contractor to facilitate use of products or services it furnishes under a county contract. 
(h)  Any employee who violates the provision of this section shall be guilty of misconduct and subject to appropriate disciplinary action, including immediate dismissal. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3010; Ord. No. 10-02, Pt. I, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 20-20.1. - Financial disclosure reports. 
The chief executive officer, executive assistant, county attorney and assistant county attorneys, chief of staff, assistant county administrators, clerk to the board of commissioners, board of tax assessors, department heads, deputy, assistant and associate department heads/directors and economic development department personnel, shall file annually with the clerk to the board of commissioners a report disclosing the sources of any income, whatever its nature, in excess of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) derived from any one (1) source for the proceeding calendar year. Such report shall be filed on or before April 30 of each year for the prior calendar year in a format determined by the director of finance. Failure of any such person to file such disclosure statement shall be reflected in the minutes of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners following the April 30 deadline, with a copy of the list of such persons presented to the chairperson of the DeKalb County Board of Ethics for appropriate action. The reports shall be considered public documents upon filing. Each report shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The source of each of the following items received or accrued during the preceding calendar year by such person reporting or his/her spouse, including the name and address of the source: 
a.  Any income for services rendered of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; 
b.  Any interest or dividend income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more; 
c.  Reimbursement for expenses of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more in each instance; 
d.  Honoraria from a single source in the aggregate amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more, except as otherwise reported under the state statue covering financial disclosure statements; 
e.  Any gift in the aggregate amount or value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more from any single source received during the preceding year. 
(2)  The name, address and type of organization in which the person reporting or his/her spouse is an officer, director, partner, proprietor, or employee, or serves in any advisory capacity from which income of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more was derived. 
(3)  Each creditor, including the name and address, to whom the person reporting or his/her spouse was indebted for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days or more during the preceding calendar year in an amount of seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) or more, except for retail installment debt, or the purchase or sale or real property. 
(4)  Failure to file a financial disclosure report, as required by this section, may result in the referral of such violation to the DeKalb County Board of Ethics for punitive action, or may result in disciplinary action, including dismissal. 
(Ord. No. 09-02, Pt. I, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 20-21. - Disposition of special fees and rewards. 
Special fees and rewards received by any employee by reason of the performance of any act required of such employee by the county and such employee's duties, whether paid by an individual or by a public authority, shall be deemed the property of the county and no employee shall accept for private use and benefit this fee or reward. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3011) 
Sec. 20-22. - Full-time service; outside employment. 
The county shall be entitled to the full-time services of all employees whose positions are on a full-time basis. All outside employment must be approved in advance by the department head. No outside employment which interferes with the employee's scheduled county work time shall be allowed, nor shall any outside employment be allowed which may create a conflict, or apparent conflict, between private interest of the individual and official county duties and responsibilities. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3122) 
Sec. 20-23. - Physical examination. 
Before entering employment and as often as the head of the department may deem necessary for the performance of work assigned, an applicant or employee shall undergo a physical examination by a licensed physician to determine the physical fitness of the employee for the job sought or duty assigned. Such examination shall be conducted by the county physician or the county physician's designee and paid for by the county. The standard of physical fitness requirements related to job duty shall be established by each department head with due consideration given to the duties to be performed. Before becoming effective, such physical standards shall be submitted to and approved by the director and shall be furnished to the physician conducting the physical examination. No otherwise qualified handicapped individual shall be excluded from county employment solely by reason of handicap, unless such handicap prohibits such individual from performing job-related duties or places such handicapped person or county employee in unsafe conditions likely to result in bodily injuries to the handicapped person or other county employee. If a county employee does not agree to submit to a physical examination, such refusal shall be grounds for dismissal, suspension or leave without pay. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3127) 
Secs. 20-24—20-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMPENSATION PLAN 

Sec. 20-41. - Salary increases. 
A salary increase shall not be considered as an automatic and routine right due an employee. All salary increases shall be based upon quality and quantity of work as reflected by performance appraisal and other recorded ratings, giving due consideration to length of service. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3031) 
Sec. 20-42. - Holiday pay. 
All full-time employees shall be paid for a normal workday for each legal holiday established by the board of commissioners. Part-time employees shall be paid the pro rata part of a normal workday based on hours per day normally worked. Temporary employees, whether part-time or full-time, are not eligible for holiday pay. Employees required to work on a holiday shall be paid the regular day's pay. In addition, they may be given comparable time off at a subsequent date not later than twelve (12) months following the holiday or, upon approval of the chief executive or the chief executive's designee, may be paid for the holiday at a straight-time rate. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3032) 
Sec. 20-43. - Quality pay increase. 
A quality pay increase is a pay increase equivalent to a step increase available to permanent full-time employees whose performance is of such superior quality above that ordinarily found in the type of position concerned that special pay recognition is warranted. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3033) 
Sec. 20-44. - Longevity pay. 
Longevity pay is a benefit to employees for continued service to the county. Permanent employees shall receive additional compensation based upon satisfactory completion of successive years of service to begin after completion of eight (8) years of service. The method of compensation, as set forth in the administrative procedures to the personnel code, shall be determined by the chief executive with approval of funding by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3034) 
Sec. 20-45. - Separation pay. 
(a)  Annual leave payout. Upon separation from employment with the county, an employee who has completed at least six (6) months but less than ten (10) years of qualifying service may receive pay for accumulated unused annual leave up to a maximum of thirty (30) days at the employee's regular rate of pay. An employee who has completed at least ten (10) years of qualifying service may, upon separation from employment with the county, receive pay for accumulated unused annual leave up to a maximum of forty-five (45) days at the employee's regular rate of pay. No payment shall be made upon separation from employment for any amount of accumulated unused sick leave. (Note: Upon retirement after May 30, 1996, accumulated unused sick leave at the time of retirement shall be credited at the rate of twenty-one and one-half (21½) days for one-twelfth ( 1/12 ) year of service to determine total length of service for retirement benefit computation). Employees with annual leave reserve accounts created at the beginning of 2012 shall be subject to all terms and conditions of this section, except as specifically modified by subsection 20-165(g) of this chapter. 
(b)  Annual leave payout; death of employee. Upon the death of a permanent employee, the beneficiary of such employee shall be paid for accumulated unused annual leave and any other final pay and allowances in the manner of other separations as indicated above. 
(c)  Temporary and emergency employees. The appointment of any person as a temporary or emergency employee shall be automatically terminated upon the expiration of the maximum period of time that the person can be so employed. No further payment for services shall continue beyond the termination date. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3035; Ord. No. 11-08, Pt. I, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 12-02, Pt. I, 2-28-12) 
Sec. 20-46. - Hazardous duty pay. 
Extra pay, as authorized in the county's compensation plan, shall be granted: to any employee qualified as a helicopter pilot, having appropriate and current Federal Aviation Administration licensing and medical certificates for the type of helicopters operated by the police department, and designated and serving in a position permitting active piloting duty on county-owned or county-leased aircraft; to any employee qualified as a bomb technician, having the appropriate certification from the Redstone Arsenal Missile and Munitions School and designated and serving in a position requiring active bomb disposal duty for the county; and to any employee qualified as a member of the special weapons and tactical unit, having advanced and extensive training and required certifications in the use of chemical munitions, explosive devices, automatic and specialized weapons, and related equipment. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3036; Ord. No. 04-08, Pt. I, 8-10-04) 
Sec. 20-47. - Employee suggestion program. 
The employee suggestion program is established as a benefit program to compensate employees for suggestions that improve county operations, reduce costs, improve productivity and working conditions and/or improve employee morale. Employees can earn monetary payment for suggestions that are adopted and result in tangible savings (measurable, quantifiable cost savings or increase in county revenue) or intangible savings (have an overall benefit but cannot be measured in dollars). The method of compensation, as set forth in the administrative procedures to the personnel code, shall be determined by the chief executive officer with approval of funding by the board of commissioners. 
Sec. 20-48. - Acting status pay. 
Subject to approval by the chief executive officer in accordance with procedures established by the chief executive officer, an employee appointed to serve in an acting status in a position with a higher pay classification shall receive compensation at the next pay step that would afford the employee at least a five (5) percent pay increase for any time served in such acting status beyond sixty (60) days consecutively. Acting pay shall not be paid for more than nine (9) months without approval of the board of commissioners. For purposes of this section, an employee shall be deemed to be appointed to serve in an acting status when such appointment is made in writing by the department head, is submitted through the merit system director to the chief executive officer, and is approved by the chief executive officer. An acting appointment may only be made to a duly established position which is vacant. 
(Ord. No. 97-12, § 1, 7-22-97) 
Sec. 20-49. - Employee benefits. 
(a)  The county governing authority is authorized to contract for group life, group health and/or dental insurance plans for the benefit of county officers and employees, in such groups or classifications as the governing authority deems proper, and is authorized to contribute to the cost of such insurance. No employee shall be compelled to take such insurance, but if the employee voluntarily elects to do so, the director of finance shall be authorized to deduct the employee's contribution from the salary or wages of the employee so insured. 
(b)  Officers and employees shall cease to be eligible to participate in the group life, group health and dental benefits plans upon separation or termination from the county except as provided by federal law. Retirees may continue to be covered under group life, group health and dental plans, provided that the county adopts such plans. Surviving spouses and dependent children may continue to be covered under group life, group health and dental plans, provided that the county adopts such plans. 
(c)  Participants in the group health and dental plans may change or terminate their participation during the annual enrollment period and as permitted by the terms of the insurance plans and federal law. 
(d)  Any intentional false statement, deception or fraud in the enrollment application for the group life, group health and/or dental coverage will result in the loss of eligibility to participate in the plans. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Sec. 20-50. - Continuance of life, health and dental insurance while on leave of absence. 
County officers and employees may continue their group life, group health and dental benefits insurance, if they so desire, while on leave of absence from the employ of the county, provided that such leave of absence is granted for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  Military leave of absence. 
(2)  Maternity leave of absence. 
(3)  Sick leave of absence. 
(4)  Court leave of absence. 
(5)  Family and medical leave of absence. 
(6)  Approved leave of absence. 
(7)  As required by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Sec. 20-51. - Family and domestic partnership benefits. 
As part of a county officer's or employee's compensation, the county may provide for group life, group health and dental insurance benefits for an employee's legal spouse, and children, as provided for in the insurance plan documents. As part of a county officer's or employee's compensation, the county may provide for group life, group health and dental benefits for a person declared as the officer's or employee's domestic partner under Article X of this chapter. Any employee who receives insurance coverage for a domestic partner shall notify the employee benefits division within ten (10) days of any change in or termination of the domestic partnership. Any employee who fraudulently obtains coverage for a person who is not a spouse, child, or a domestic partner, as defined under Chapter 20, Article X, shall reimburse the county for all costs involved in providing such coverage and be subjected to penalties as provided by the laws of the State of Georgia and the County of DeKalb. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Sec. 20-52. - Limitation of liability for benefits. 
Nothing in this chapter shall create any broader, greater, different or other benefits than that provided in the contract of insurance or group plan, and the county shall not be liable for any life, health or dental benefits beyond that provided by the insurance contract or group plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-07, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Secs. 20-53—20-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CERTIFICATIONS AND APPOINTMENTS 

Sec. 20-66. - Generally. 
When the department head chooses to fill a vacancy, the department head may elect to fill the position through any of the methods of making appointments established under this chapter or administrative regulations. The chief executive shall adopt rules for the certification of eligible on the register and the appointment to fill vacancies, temporary and emergency appointments to permanent positions, emergency positions and reappointment. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3071) 
Sec. 20-67. - Time-limited appointments. 
Time-limited appointments may be made to positions established for special programs or projects normally anticipated as being longer than six (6) months but not permanent in nature. Programs or projects requiring this type of appointment will normally be mandated by a federal or state program implemented for a specific purpose such as training, retraining or rehabilitation. Appointments may be made through competitive or noncompetitive procedures according to the program requirements. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3072) 
Sec. 20-68. - Review of discrimination charge. 
Any applicant who believes unjust discrimination has been exercised in any phase of the pre-employment process because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, political affiliation, or opinion, age, sexual orientation, or handicap may appeal to the chief executive. Such charge must be filed in writing within one hundred eighty (180) days after the occurrence of the alleged discriminatory action, and must include the date, time, place, name(s) and specific charge of discrimination. The chief executive or the chief executive's designee shall investigate the alleged discriminatory action, and the chief executive's decision shall be binding. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3073; Ord. No. 91-03, § 1, 2-26-91) 
Sec. 20-69. - Employment of relatives. 
(a)  The employment of relatives within the same department (as defined in this Code section 20-69) wherein there is a direct or indirect supervisory/subordinate relationship is prohibited. For purposes of this Code section, direct or indirect supervisory/subordinate relationship shall mean regular assignment in the line of supervision or chain of command, and shall exclude temporary assignment of less than five (5) consecutive business days. 
(b)  "Department" solely for purposes of this Code section 20-69 shall mean the departments of the county, except that the following bureaus and divisions shall be considered separate "departments" for purposes of this Code section: 
(1)  Police bureau; 
(2)  Fire bureau; 
(3)  Emergency medical services; 
(4)  Animal control division; 
(5)  Development division; 
(6)  Fleet maintenance division; 
(7)  Roads and drainage division; 
(8)  Water and sewer division; 
(9)  Sanitation division; 
(10)  Any bureau or division designated by the chief executive officer as a separate "department" for purposes of this Code section. 
(c)  The term "relatives" shall mean: 
(1)  Father, mother, daughter, step-daughter, son, step-son, brother and sister of the whole blood or of the half-blood, grandparent, grandchild, first cousin, aunt, uncle, nephew and niece. 
(2)  Husband, wife, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, son-in-law, and daughter-in-law. 
These relationships shall include those arising from adoption. 
(d)  The limitation on employment or promotion of relatives specified in this Code section shall apply to the continued employment of persons where the referenced relationships commence subsequent to their employment. This section shall apply only to filling of vacancies by promotion, hiring, transfer from separate departments (as defined in this Code section) and reappointments made on or after the effective date of this section. If an appropriate transfer cannot be arranged, the less senior employee shall resign or will be terminated from employment unless the more senior employee chooses to transfer or resign. 
(e)  Seniority for purposes of this Code section shall mean total length of employment in positions covered by the DeKalb County Merit System. 
(f)  Nothing in this Code section shall be interpreted to prohibit employment of relatives in different departments, as defined in this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 96-07, § 1, 4-9-96) 
Secs. 20-70—20-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VETERAN'S PREFERENCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-12, Pt. I, adopted June 27, 2006 repealed in their entirety §§ 20-81—20-86. Further, said ordinance set out provisions for §§ 20-81—20-88 to read as herein set out. Formerly said article pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1976, §§ 2-3081—2-3086. 

Sec. 20-81. - Generally. 
All candidates and competitors for positions under the merit system (including veterans and their spouses) must meet the minimum requirements for the position sought, and successfully pass the total examination prescribed, if any. Veteran's preference points, if any, shall not be used to raise an otherwise unqualified candidate to a qualified level, nor do veteran's preference points exempt those entitled to them from examination. 
Sec. 20-82. - Addition of points to rating—Able-bodied veterans. 
(a)  Any veteran who has served on active duty as a member of the Armed Forces of the United States for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days (not counting service under an initial period of active duty for training under the six (6) months' reserve or National Guard programs), any portion of which service occurred during a period of armed conflict in which any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise, and who was honorably discharged shall be entitled to and shall have five (5) points added to his or her passing score on any examination for employment in any position under the merit system. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the one hundred eighty-day minimum active duty requirement of subsection (a) of this section, the five-point preference granted to veterans under said subsection shall apply to any member of the National Guard or armed forces reserve who served on active duty for: 
(1)  Any length of time during any portion of the time the Armed Forces of the United States were engaged in Operation Desert Shield or Operation Desert Storm if such service occurred in an area of imminent danger as defined by the United States Department of Defense as follows: 
a.  The Persian Gulf; 
b.  The Red Sea; 
c.  The Gulf of Oman; 
d.  The portion of the Arabian Sea that lies north of ten (10) degrees north latitude and west of sixty-eight (68) degrees east longitude; 
e.  The Gulf of Aden; and 
f.  The total land area of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq, Yemen, Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates; or 
(2)  Any length of time during a period of war or armed conflict in which any branch of the Armed Forces of the United States was engaged after Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm, whether under United States Command or otherwise. 
Sec. 20-83. - Same—Disabled veterans. 
Any veteran who qualifies for a preference as provided in section 20-82 in this article and has at least ten (10) percent service-connected disability as rated and certified by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs shall be entitled to and shall have ten (10) points added to his or her passing score on any examination for employment in any position under the merit system. This ten-point preference shall be in lieu of, not in addition to, any other similar preference accorded by this article or federal or state law. 
Sec. 20-84. - Spouse of disabled or deceased veteran. 
(a)  The spouse of a veteran who qualifies for a preference as provided in section 20-82 in this article shall be entitled to and shall have five (5) points added to his or her passing score on any examination for employment in any position under the merit system if the spouse of the veteran is qualified for the merit system position sought, and if the veteran has a one hundred (100) percent disability that disqualifies him or her from employment. 
(b)  The spouse of a veteran, who if living would qualify for a preference as provided in section 20-82 of this article, shall be entitled to and shall have five (5) points added to his or her passing score on any examination for employment in any position under the merit system if the spouse of the veteran is qualified for the position sought and the veteran is deceased. 
Sec. 20-85. - Appropriate consideration. 
(a)  In the event that a scored examination is not required to qualify for a particular merit system position, "appropriate consideration" may be given to all candidates and competitors for that merit system position who qualify for a veteran's preference under this article. 
(b)  "Appropriate consideration" means that: 
(1)  A candidate who qualifies for a veteran's preference in this article and meets the minimum requirements for the merit system position sought is entitled to have his or her qualifications presented to the relevant department head or appointing authority for consideration; 
(2)  A candidate who qualifies for a veteran's preference in this article may be given preference in appointment to a position under the merit system if his or her qualifications for the position sought are equivalent to those of the best qualified non-veteran applicant for the position. 
Sec. 20-86. - Extent of preference. 
The veteran's preferences established by this article are confined to entrance to the county's service, and do not apply in the case of examinations for or consideration for promotions. 
Sec. 20-87. - Preferential appointment not mandatory. 
The appointment of a candidate who qualifies for a veteran's preference is not mandatory, even if his or her qualifications are equivalent to those of the best qualified non-veteran applicant for the position. 
Sec. 20-88. - Appointment discretionary. 
The appointment of a candidate who qualifies for a veteran's preference is within the discretion of the department head. The department head may select another qualified candidate (who is not entitled to the veteran's preference) whose name has been certified. If this occurs, the director shall return the name of the candidate who qualifies for a veteran's preference to the register for further consideration. 
Secs. 20-89—20-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROBATIONARY STATUS 

Sec. 20-101. - Purpose. 
The probationary period shall be considered an integral part of the selection process. All employees appointed or promoted to a position in the county's classified service shall be required to satisfactorily complete the probation period prior to achieving permanent status. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3091) 
Sec. 20-102. - Duration. 
The first six (6) months of on-the-job service in a position to which an employee has been appointed or promoted under the provisions of article III covering appointments shall constitute the probation period. The director may fix a different length for the probation period as it applies to positions of one (1) or more classes. The period shall not be fixed at less than three (3) months nor more than twelve (12) months. The length of the probation period shall be the same for all positions in a class. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3092) 
Sec. 20-103. - Time counted. 
Only time in pay and active work status shall be counted toward completion of the probation period. Employees in probation status who are absent on leave-without-pay, or who are absent for reasons under workers' compensation or disability leave, shall be required to complete the amount of time on the job specified for the class to which they are appointed. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3093) 
Sec. 20-104. - Conditions prerequisite to permanent status. 
Supervisors of probationary employees should evaluate those employees periodically during the probation period. Whether formal or informal procedures are used, it is the responsibility of the supervisor to point out areas of deficiency and inform the employee in the correct and expected manner to perform the job. It shall be the responsibility of the department head to obtain a statement in writing from the proper supervisor to the effect that the services of each employee appointed for an initial appointment probation period have or have not been satisfactory and that the employee is or is not recommended to be retained. The statement shall contain an appraisal of the value of the employee's service upon the employee performance evaluation form. The department head shall obtain this statement prior to the completion of the probation period, and make a recommendation to the director. No probation employee shall be considered to have attained permanent status as an employee under the merit system until certified by the director. If the employee is not certified as a permanent status employee, the department head shall notify the employee in writing in advance of the date on which the employee's services are to be terminated, and transmit a copy to the director. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3094) 
Sec. 20-105. - Probation in promotional position. 
The department head shall have the same responsibility to assure evaluation of employees in promotional probation status as the department head has in initial appointment probation status. If it is determined that the employee is unsuitable for the position, the department head shall return the employee to the position previously occupied if it is vacant. If not vacant the department head shall confer with the director relative to placement of the employee in a comparable class of positions for which the employee meets the requirements. If such placement is not feasible, the employee's name shall be placed on the reemployment register. The employee shall receive written notification, prior to the action, stating the reasons for the action. A copy shall be given to the director. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3095) 
Secs. 20-106—20-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROMOTION, TRANSFER AND DEMOTION 

Sec. 20-121. - Procedures generally. 
The chief executive shall adopt administrative procedures for the filling of a vacancy by selection on a competitive basis of a permanent employee, and for transfers and demotions. Selection shall be made by the department head and reported to the director who will notify the applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3101) 
Sec. 20-122. - Promotion. 
No employee shall be promoted unless such employee has permanent status and the employee's last recorded performance appraisal is average or above. Although not eligible to qualify for a promotional position which is to be filled from present county employees only, a probation employee is eligible to apply for any county position which is being filled by open competitive examination. A probation period is required for an employee who is promoted. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3102) 
Sec. 20-123. - Transfer—Generally. 
A vacancy may be filled by the transfer of a permanent or probation employee from another position of the same class or a comparable class subject to the limitations of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3103) 
Sec. 20-124. - Same—From position of same class. 
A permanent or probation employee in a position may be transferred to any vacancy of the same class. Where the employee has been placed in a position through a procedure involving selective certification, the employee shall not be transferred to any other position for which selective certification on the same basis is not justified until the employee has completed the probation period or the employee's name on the register has been reached through regular certification. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3104) 
Sec. 20-125. - Same—From comparable class. 
A permanent or probation employee may be transferred to a comparable class if the director has certified that the minimum qualifications or training/education and experience specified for the class of the vacancy are met. If a performance test is required for regular appointment to the vacant position, and the employee to be transferred has not passed the required performance test for the class, then the employee must be certified on a test similar to and as extensive as the regular performance test. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3105) 
Sec. 20-126. - Demotion—Generally. 
An employee who is demoted shall retain the same employment status, except that the employee's rate of pay shall be reduced to the step in the pay range assigned to the lower position that is at least the equivalent of one (1) step in the pay plan. If the demotion is nondisciplinary, and if the employee's present salary does not exceed the maximum of the new range, the director may, upon recommendation of the department head, approve a pay step equal to the employee's former salary. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3106) 
Sec. 20-127. - Same—Procedure; reasons. 
A permanent or probation employee may be demoted to a lower class for which the employee meets the requirements for reasons relative to job performance. When an initial appointment probation employee is demoted, the employee shall continue the probation period as if the original appointment had been to the position of the lower class. A permanent or probation employee may request appointment to a lower class, and the department head may make the demotion subject to the limitations applicable to transfers. A department head may demote a permanent or probation employee when a shortage of work or funds, the abolition of a position, or other material change in duties or organization necessitates the action. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3107) 
Secs. 20-128—20-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL 

Sec. 20-141. - Administration of appraisal system. 
Each department head, in consultation with the director, shall develop and administer a system of performance appraisal to give a fair and objective assessment of each employee's job performance. All appraisal (evaluation) forms and procedures shall be approved by the director prior to official use. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3111) 
Sec. 20-142. - Performance appraisal of supervisors. 
A supervisor's performance appraisal shall include an evaluation of the use of performance appraisals with employees to improve their performance. Supervisors shall be evaluated as to their effectiveness in the equal opportunity and affirmative action policies of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3112) 
Secs. 20-143—20-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ATTENDANCE AND LEAVE 

Sec. 20-161. - Hours of work. 
(a)  The standard workweek for full-time employees shall generally be forty (40) hours; however, due to the requirements of certain positions, this standard may vary. Specific hours of work shall be set by each department head with the concurrence of the director and the approval of the chief executive. In any event, specific hours of work and compensation for overtime shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act. Time worked in excess of the standard workweek, which is approved by the department head in advance or in cases of emergency as determined by the department head, shall be credited as overtime. In computing hours worked for overtime purposes, annual and sick leave and holidays shall be excluded. Overtime shall be accrued or compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1½) times the regular rate. Compensatory time at the rate of one and one-half (1½) hours for every hour worked in excess of the applicable standard workweek may be given to employees eligible for overtime compensation in lieu of cash compensation. 
(b)  Eligible law enforcement, emergency medical, fire and seasonal employees may accrue up to four hundred eighty (480) hours of compensatory time before overtime compensation must be paid in cash. All other employees eligible for overtime compensation may accrue up to two hundred forty (240) hours. Compensatory time may be utilized by the employee with prior approval of the department head under the same procedures as apply to annual leave as set forth in section 20-165, subsection (e). For employees eligible for overtime compensation, accrued balances must be paid to the employee at termination at a rate not less than the average regular rate of pay over the last three (3) years of employment or the final rate of pay, whichever is higher. 
(c)  Employees exempt from overtime compensation may be granted compensatory time at an hour-for-hour rate at the discretion of the department head. If granted, such compensatory time must be used within one (1) calendar year of the date granted in accordance with procedures as apply to annual leave as set forth in section 20-165, subsection (e). Overtime exempt employees are not eligible to receive cash compensation for unused balances. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3121) 
Sec. 20-162. - Transfer of leave benefits. 
When a permanent or working test employee is transferred to another department, the department receiving the employee shall assume responsibility for this employee's unused accumulated sick and annual leave. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3130) 
Sec. 20-163. - Sick leave. 
(a)  County employees, except temporary and emergency employees, are eligible for sick leave benefits as earned from the date of employment. Sick leave shall accrue for full-time employees at the rate of one (1) day per month or its proportional equivalent (see section 20-165 for annual leave accrual rate) and an additional one-half day's sick leave or proportional equivalent thereof (see section 20-165 for annual accrual rate) will accrue on June 30 and December 31 of each year. Part-time employees shall accrue sick leave at the rate of one-half day a month and an additional one-quarter day's leave will accrue on June 30 and December 31 of each year. An employee who starts work before the sixteenth of a month shall earn sick leave for that month, but if the employee starts work on or later than the sixteenth of the month, sick leave accrual will be determined by the hours worked by the end of the month. No sick leave shall accrue for an employee under conditions as set forth in section 20-165, subsection (b). No accrual shall be permitted for an employee on leave without pay, workers' compensation or disability leave. When an employee shall have accumulated thirty (30) days of sick leave by the end of the last pay period in November, such employee may be paid in cash each year by December 25 for one-fourth of that year's unused sick leave accumulated beyond the thirty (30) days, and the other three-fourths beyond the thirty (30) days shall be added to the sick leave accumulation of such employee. Accrued but unused sick leave shall be cumulative for succeeding years. 
(b)  Both probationary and permanent status employees who are eligible for sick leave with pay shall be granted this leave for the following reasons: 
(1)  Personal illness or physical incapacity and doctor or dentist appointments of the employee, employee's spouse, children living in the same household, or serious illness of spouse, children or parents as defined in the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. 
(2)  Enforced quarantine of the employee in accordance with community health regulations. 
(c)  An employee on sick leave shall inform the employee's immediate supervisor of the fact and the reason therefor within the time established by the department head, and failure to do so may be cause for denial of sick leave with pay for the period of the absence. 
(d)  A medical certificate signed by a licensed physician may be required by the department head to substantiate a request for sick leave for any of the following: 
(1)  Any period of absence consisting of three (3) or more consecutive days. 
(2)  Sick leave of any duration if absence from duty recurs frequently or habitually, provided the employee has been notified in writing that a certificate will be required. 
(3)  To support the use of family and medical leave and unscheduled annual leave when sick leave has been exhausted. 
(Code 1976, §§ 2-3123—2-3126; Ord. No. 94-26, § 1, 10-11-94) 
Sec. 20-164. - Holidays. 
(a)  The county will observe ten (10) paid holidays per year. These are: 
January 1, New Year's Day. 
Third Monday in January, Martin Luther King's birthday. 
Third Monday in February, George Washington's birthday. 
Last Monday in May, Memorial Day. 
July 4, Independence Day. 
First Monday in September, Labor Day. 
November 11, Veteran's Day. 
Fourth Thursday in November, Thanksgiving Day. 
Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day. 
December 25, Christmas Day. 
(b)  Whenever a legal holiday occurs on Saturday, the previous Friday will be observed. Whenever a legal holiday occurs on Sunday, the following Monday will be observed. 
(c)  Any employee who is required to work the holiday may be allowed to take a day off at a subsequent date no later than twelve (12) months following the holiday or, upon the approval of the chief executive or the chief executive's designee, may be paid for the holiday at a straight-time rate. 
(d)  In 2009, the county will not observe the Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day as a paid holiday. 
(e)  In 2010, the county will not observe Memorial Day, Independence Day, and Labor Day as paid holidays. 
(f)  In 2011, the county will not observe Labor Day, Veteran's Day, and the Friday immediately following Thanksgiving Day as paid holidays. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3128; Ord. No. 91-10, § 1, 5-14-91; Ord. No. 91-15, § 1, 7-23-91; Ord. No. 09-14, Pt. I, 9-1-09; Ord. No. 10-03A, Pt. I, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 10-18, Pt. I, 9-14-10; Ord. No. 11-10, Pt. I, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 11-15, Pt. I, 9-13-11) 
Sec. 20-165. - Vacation (annual) leave. 
(a)  [Vacation accrual.] Vacation (annual) leave with pay for employees whose normal work schedule consists of a forty-hour workweek shall accrue as per the following: 

 
Those employees whose regularly scheduled average workweek exceeds forty (40) hours shall accrue vacation (annual) leave hours at a rate proportionate to the designated hours of work according to the following formula: 

 
(b)  [Exceptions.] Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a): 
(1)  Temporary and emergency employees shall not accrue annual leave. 
(2)  Part-time employees shall accrue annual leave at one-half the rate shown. 
(3)  No annual leave shall accrue while an employee is on leave without pay, workers' compensation or disability leave. 
(4)  No annual leave shall accrue when, due to an unexcused absence, an employee works less than seventy-five (75) percent of the scheduled hours in a pay period. 
(c)  [Use of accrued leave.] An employee shall not be entitled to use any part of accumulated annual leave until the employee has worked six (6) months. Accrued but unused annual leave at the end of any year (starting with 2011) shall be accumulated for succeeding years up to a maximum per the following (based on a forty-hour workweek): 

 
Employees whose regularly scheduled average workweek exceeds forty (40) hours shall carry over vacation (annual) leave hours at a rate proportionate to the designated hours of work in accordance with the formula in subsection (a). Annual leave accumulated over the maximum amount that may be carried over to the next year shall be converted to sick leave and added to the employee's accumulated sick leave balance for the next year. 
(d)  [Scheduling leave.] Annual leave shall be scheduled in advance and requires the approval of the department head; vacation schedules shall be arranged to provide the least possible disruption of department work programs. Annual leave can be used for emergency situations when approved by the department head. Annual leave, to the extent the purpose for such leave qualifies for leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (FMLA), will be counted against the employee's FMLA leave entitlement. 
(e)  [Unused sick leave.] At the beginning of each year, an employee shall be credited with one (1) day of annual leave for each fifty (50) days of unused accrued sick leave the employee had on December 31 of the previous year. 
(f)  Transition to new annual maximum carryover. To move employees from the 2011 carryover limits to the new 2012 carryover limits, the rollover process will be handled in two (2) steps as follows. First, any amount of accumulated annual leave that exceeds the prior sixty-day maximum at the end of 2011 shall be converted to sick leave, per previous procedures. Second, any remaining annual leave exceeding the new 2012 carryover limit shall be converted to sick leave unless the employee elected to place it into an annual leave reserve account. That election must be made in writing by the employee and received by the director no later than January 2, 2012. If an employee does not make a timely election, all of the employee's accumulated annual leave not carried over into 2012 shall be converted to sick leave. All accumulated annual leave that is converted into sick leave pursuant to this subparagraph shall be converted on an hour-for-hour basis and added to the employee's accumulated sick leave balance for 2012. Accumulated annual leave that is placed into an annual leave reserve account may be used as annual leave if the employee's accumulated annual leave is otherwise exhausted and the employee's department head authorizes such use. 
(g)  Annual leave payout for employees who have reserve account annual leave at separation. 
(1)  Payment for reserve account annual leave. An employee who has accumulated annual leave left in his/her annual leave reserve account at separation shall receive pay for such leave at the employee's last 2011 pay rate. 
(2)  Payment for accumulated unused annual leave outside the employee's reserve account; limitations on such payment. In addition to payment for any remaining reserve account annual leave, an employee may receive pay for accumulated unused annual leave outside his/her reserve account at separation, subject to the limitations in subsection 20-45(a) of this chapter and subject to the additional limitation that no employee may receive pay for more than sixty (60) days combined total of accumulated unused annual leave under subsections (1) and (2) of this subsection (g). 
(Code 1976, § 2-3129; Ord. No. 94-26, § 1, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 11-08, Pt. I, 6-28-11; Ord. No. 12-02, Pt. I, 2-28-12) 
Sec. 20-166. - Leave of absence without pay. 
Leave of absence without pay for a period not to exceed six (6) consecutive months may be granted to any employee with the approval of the department head. Any leave of absence for a period in excess of six (6) consecutive months shall be at the discretion of the chief executive officer. Valid reasons for leave without pay shall include, but not be confined to, the following: those reasons required under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, educational or training enrichment, and military leave. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3131; Ord. No. 94-26, § 1, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 23-03, Pt. I, 8-26-03) 
Sec. 20-167. - Military leave. 
(a)  An employee who is a member of the National Guard or an organized military reserve of the United States will be allowed leave of absence with pay to participate in ordered military duty or training for a period consistent with state law. 
(b)  An employee, other than emergency or temporary, who leaves employment with the county for military service with the United States shall have reemployment rights upon successful completion of such service, consistent with federal law. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3132) 
Sec. 20-168. - Court leave. 
An employee serving on a permanent, probationary or temporary basis shall be entitled to leave of absence from duties, without loss of pay or time and without effect on service rating, on all days during which the employee is subpoenaed by any court, federal, state or political subdivision thereof, to serve as a juror or witness. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3133) 
Sec. 20-169. - Maternity leave. 
Maternity leave shall be granted to merit system employees in compliance with applicable administrative procedures and the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. Time for beginning and ending of maternity leave shall be certified by the employee's doctor. Maternity leave shall consist of the following: use of any accumulated sick leave, annual leave and/or leave of absence without pay as prescribed in sections 20-163, 20-165, 20-166 and 20-170. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3134; Ord. No. 94-26, § 1, 10-11-94) 
Sec. 20-170. - Family and medical leave. 
Family and medical leave shall be granted to those employees eligible and pursuant to the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 and the administrative procedures. 
(Ord. No. 94-26, § 1, 10-11-94) 
Sec. 20-171. - Donation of leave time. 
Any permanent employee who has been employed with DeKalb County for a minimum of twelve (12) months and who meets the eligibility criteria set forth in the administrative procedures promulgated by the chief executive officer may donate his/her accrued annual or sick leave to other county employees who have exhausted all accrued paid leave due to serious health conditions as defined by the chief executive officer in the administrative procedures. 
(Ord. No. 97-01, § 1, 1-14-97) 
Secs. 20-172—20-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - DISCIPLINARY ACTION AND APPEALS 

Sec. 20-186. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Delinquency means violation of duty to the job requirements or county regulations. 
Excessive absenteeism means the habitual or patterned use of sick leave, or leave without pay, not supported by competent medical evidence or other proof of necessity. On a national average, employees experience two (2) to three (3) incidents of sick leave absence a year. Unsubstantiated absences, in excess of the following rule of thumb, may be an indication of excessive absenteeism: 
(1)  Two (2) incidents in three (3) months. 
(2)  Four (4) incidents in six (6) months. 
(3)  Six (6) incidents in one (1) year. 
(An incident is a single day or consecutive series of absences.) 
Flat fee reimbursement means a flat fee to reimburse a permanent status employee for a portion of the attorneys' fees such employee actually paid to an attorney to represent the employee in a merit system appeal, where at the end of all available appeals (including any appeals by the employee or county in court), the employee's termination or demotion is reversed. The amount of such reimbursement shall be determined by a reimbursement schedule issued in writing by the county attorney annually and approved by official action of the governing authority. Under this schedule, the flat fee amount that an employee may be reimbursed for shall be less for an appeal of a demotion than an appeal for termination. 
Incompetence means the lack of qualities or the incapability of doing the job. Skills, knowledge and abilities are inadequate, unsuitable or obsolete to perform at minimally acceptable standards of performance. 
Inefficiency means nonproduction, wasteful use of time, energy or material, or repeated errors and mistakes. 
Insubordination means the unwillingness or refusal to perform assigned work, or deliberate failure to comply with written or verbal instructions from a proper supervisory authority. 
Misconduct means mismanagement of job responsibilities and county property, intentional improper behavior on the job, or deliberate violation of county regulations. 
Negligence means careless disregard for or lack of attention to job-related matters. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3146; Ord. No. 16-02 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-187. - Departmental rules. 
The department head of any department may establish rules which are related to the work of that department. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3141) 
Sec. 20-188. - Disciplinary action. 
Where the department head does not deem termination warranted, as hereinafter provided, the following disciplinary actions may be taken after due consideration has been given to the nature of the cause therefor: 
(1)  Suspension. An employee may be suspended for a period of one (1) or more full days, not to exceed thirty (30) days in a twelve-month period. An employee may be suspended for an indefinite period of time pending the outcome of an investigation of a crime involving moral turpitude during which the employee may have the option of using accrued annual leave credits until they are exhausted. A suspension may be appealed as prescribed in section 20-193. 
(2)  Demotion. An employee may be demoted to a lower class in which the employee meets the minimum qualifications. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3142; Ord. No. 90-28, 8-14-90; Ord. No. 06-22, Pt. I, 10-10-06) 
Sec. 20-189. - Dismissal. 
A permanent status employee may be dismissed by a notice in writing giving the cause of the dismissal with sufficient particularity so that the employee may be on notice of the reason for discharge in order that the employee may fully explain the conduct if so desired. Cause for dismissal shall be as outlined in section 20-191 or for other reasons relative to job performance. Dismissal for disciplinary reasons may be instituted without prior notice. Unless a written notice of dismissal is handed to the employee personally by a supervisor or other authorized person, it shall be mailed to the employee at the last known address of such employee as shown by the employee personnel file maintained in the merit system department. It shall be the duty of each employee, and no other, to keep the merit system department informed of the employee's residence address. A permanent classified employee may appeal a dismissal, including dismissal due to reduction in force, to a hearing officer by filing a written notice of the desire to appeal with the director within ten (10) days from the effective date of dismissal. If the notice of dismissal is not handed to the employee personally, it shall be deemed to have been delivered to the employee three (3) days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. Copies of all dismissal notices shall be furnished to the director. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3143; Ord. No. 00-75, § 3, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 20-190. - Authority for disciplinary action and discharge. 
The chief executive, as the chief administrative officer of the county, shall have the authority to impose disciplinary actions and to dismiss employees as provided in this article. In addition, disciplinary action may be taken against an employee or an employee may be dismissed by the head of the department to which the employee is assigned. An employee's supervisor may propose disciplinary action or dismissal, but before the same shall become final, it must be reviewed and approved by the department head. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3144) 
Sec. 20-191. - Causes for dismissal or disciplinary action. 
Cause for dismissal and disciplinary action shall include but not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Violation of any material provision of this chapter, or other personnel rules and regulations, and any violation of section 20-20 (conflicts of interest) and section 20-20.1 (financial disclosure forms) of this chapter. 
(2)  Substandard work quality. 
(3)  Improper use of county equipment or property. 
(4)  Selling or soliciting on county property without prior authorization. 
(5)  Unauthorized use of telephone or other county communication equipment. 
(6)  Conduct unbecoming an employee of the county while on duty. 
(7)  Leaving the work area without permission from the supervisor. 
(8)  Failure to call in when sick or absent from work otherwise without prior approval. 
(9)  Neglect, carelessness or disregard of common safety practices. 
(10)  Violation of departmental rules. 
(11)  Malicious mischief, horseplay, wrestling, or other undesirable conduct. 
(12)  Falsifying any official record or document. 
(13)  Giving a false answer or false information on application. 
(14)  Habitual unexcused tardiness. 
(15)  Loafing, neglect of duties or otherwise wasting of working time. 
(16)  Sleeping during working hours except where conditions of work authorize and warrant it. 
(17)  Possession of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances at place of work, or in official county vehicles. 
(18)  Possession of or bringing a firearm or other deadly weapon on county property or an official county vehicle, unless duly authorized by the department head. 
(19)  Reporting to work under the influence of intoxicating beverages, or drugs not prescribed by a physician. 
(20)  Fighting, threatening, intimidating, coercing or otherwise interfering with the rights of other employees. 
(21)  Gambling on county property. 
(22)  Insubordination or willful failure to carry out an official supervisory directive or job assignment. 
(23)  Acceptance of a fee, gift or service of any item of value in return for a favor. 
(24)  Loss or damage of county property through carelessness or negligence. 
(25)  Violation of a safety rule which results in personal injury or property damage; refusal to use proper safety equipment when provided. 
(26)  Failure of supervisor to enforce established safety regulations, or requiring employee to perform unsafe act. 
(27)  Excessive absenteeism. 
(28)  Exhaustion of annual leave without prior approval. 
(29)  Abuse of sick leave. 
(30)  Misappropriation of county funds or illegal sale or disposal of county property for personal gain, or deliberate falsification of official reports, employment application or misrepresentation of personnel information in order to qualify for appointment or promotion. 
(31)  Conviction of a felony crime, or a misdemeanor involving serious moral turpitude. 
(32)  Engaging in a strike, work stoppage, slowdown or act of sabotage. 
(33)  Substantial incompetence or inefficiency in carrying out work assignments. 
(34)  Failure to report for work without prior approval, except when sick leave is authorized. 
(35)  Stealing or similar conduct, including destroying, damaging or concealment of any property of the county. 
(36)  Willful damage of or attempt to damage county property. 
(37)  Threatening physical violence or striking a supervisor or subordinate. 
(38)  Operation of any county-owned or county-leased vehicle or equipment without proper state license or while under the influence of any medication or drug which has been prescribed by a doctor and which carries the warning not to drive or operate machinery while using same. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3145; Ord. No. 10-02, Pt. II, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 20-192. - Intradepartmental transfer not a disciplinary act. 
An employee may be transferred to another division or facility at the discretion of the department head. The department head shall be the final arbitrator of all intradepartmental transfers and the sole judge of the need, necessity, convenience or reason for such transfer. An intradepartmental transfer shall not be construed to be a demotion unless it results in a reduction of the employee's pay. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3147) 
Sec. 20-193. - Review of disciplinary action (appeals). 
A permanent status employee aggrieved by any suspension, demotion, or termination may appeal such aggrieved action to a hearing officer as outlined below: 
(1)  All requests for review of disciplinary actions shall be filed in writing with the director within (10) days from the effective date of the disciplinary action. 
(2)  A hearing officer shall be assigned, pursuant to the administrative procedures, to hear said appeal within forty-five (45) days after it is filed, during which time said hearing will convene to afford the aggrieved employee a hearing before said hearing officer, which may be continued from time to time, to fully explain his or her conduct for which he or she was disciplined. 
(3)  The hearing officer may reverse a disciplinary action only upon a finding that it was based upon an error in fact or was motivated by a non-job-related factor. 
(4)  The hearing officer shall issue a written decision within twenty (20) days of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing, dated and signed. The written decision shall contain the findings of fact, the conclusions and, clearly set forth the basis or grounds for the decision. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3148; Ord. No. 00-75, § 4, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 20-194. - Review of action considered discriminatory against employee. 
Any employee who believes unjust discrimination has been exercised with respect to any disciplinary action because of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, political affiliation, or opinion, age, sexual orientation, or disability may appeal to a hearing officer within ten (10) days from the effective date of the action. Such appeal shall be filed with the director and set forth in detail the reasons why the employee contends the disciplinary action was based upon discrimination, including specifying the dates, times, places, and specific types of each instance of discrimination alleged. In such cases, the hearing officer may reverse the decision of the department head only on a finding that it was based on error of fact or was motivated by intentional discrimination against the employee because of membership in a protected class listed in this section. The same provisions relative to the hearing officer as outlined in section 20-193 shall also apply in the case of an employee discrimination appeal under this section. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3149; Ord. No. 91-04, § 1, 2-26-91; Ord. No. 00-75, § 5, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 20-195. - Review of dismissal due to reduction in force. 
An employee dismissed due to reduction in force may appeal to a hearing officer within ten (10) days from the effective date of the action. This appeal request must be filed in writing with the merit system director. Such appeal shall be filed and heard in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter; however, the right of review by the hearing officer shall be limited to whether the dismissal was in fact due to lack of work, lack of funds, lack of appropriation of funds, abolishment of the position or for other material changes in the duties of the position or the organization of the department. 
(Ord. No. 00-75, § 7, 7-25-00) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-75, § 6, adopted July 25, 2000, repealed former § 20-195, which pertained to decisions and orders of the personnel review panel and derived from the 1976 Code, § 2-3150. Section 7 of Ord. No. 00-75 added new provisions as § 20-195. 
Sec. 20-196. - Flat fee reimbursement for certain attorneys' fees incurred by employees who successfully appeal a termination or demotion. 
(a)  Conditions of a flat fee reimbursement. Flat fee reimbursement shall be provided only when a permanent status employee appeals the employee's termination or demotion through the merit system appeal process and, at the end of any available appeals (including any appeals filed in court by the employee or the county), the employee's termination or demotion is reversed. In no event shall reimbursement exceed the flat fee amount provided for in the county attorney's flat fee reimbursement schedule for the year that the appeal process reaches its conclusion. Flat fee reimbursement shall be available only for successful appeals of termination and demotion actions effective on or after March 1, 2016. 
(b)  Timing of requests for and payment of flat fee reimbursement. An employee who seeks to be paid a flat fee reimbursement under this provision must submit to the county's finance director documentation establishing: that the termination or demotion is reversed after all available appeals have been concluded; the amount the attorney billed the employee for services representing the employee in that merit system appeal process; and the amount the employee actually paid to the attorney for those services. This documentation must be submitted to the finance director within forty-five (45) days after the employee becomes eligible to apply for the flat fee reimbursement. If the employee timely submits sufficient documentation to the finance director, the finance director shall pay the applicable flat fee reimbursement to the employee within thirty (30) business days after such submission. If the employee fails to submit sufficient documentation to the finance director, then the finance director shall not pay the applicable flat fee reimbursement. 
( Ord. No. 16-02 , Pt. I, 3-8-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-75, § 7, adopted July 25, 2000, repealed former § 20-195, which pertained to review of dismissal due to reduction in force and derived from the 1976 Code, § 2-3151.    Subsequently, Ord. No. 16-02 , Pt. I, adopted March 8, 2016 enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. 
Secs. 20-197—20-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS 

Sec. 20-200. - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
Declaration of domestic partnership means a form provided by the county finance department in which two (2) people of the same gender agree to be jointly responsible for the necessities of life incurred during the domestic partnership and that all qualifications for domestic partnership are met when the declaration is signed. The form will require both partners to provide reasonable proof of their primary, regular and permanent residence address. The form must be signed under penalty of perjury and must be witnessed and notarized. 
Domestic partnership means two (2) people of the same gender who live together in a single home and have signed a declaration of domestic partnership in which they attest that: 
(1)  They share the same primary, regular and permanent residence and have lived together for the previous twelve (12) months (documentation must be submitted verifying joint residency); 
(2)  They have a committed personal relationship with each other that is intended to be lifelong; 
(3)  The employee's partner is a dependent of the employee under Georgia law; 
(4)  They are not married as recognized by Georgia law to anyone or legally separated from anyone; 
(5)  They have only one current domestic partner; 
(6)  They are eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(7)  They are competent to enter into a contract; 
(8)  They are not related by blood closer than would bar marriage in the state; 
(9)  They are each other's sole domestic partner; 
(10)  They agree to file a termination of domestic partnership within ten (10) days if any of the facts set out in this definition change; 
(11)  Any prior domestic partnership declared under this section, in which their domestic partner participated with a third party, was terminated not less than twelve (12) months prior to the date of such affidavit and, that notice of termination was provided to the county in writing to the finance department; 
(12)  They agree that the county employee shall have the sole and exclusive right to make all benefit elections on behalf of the domestic partner; 
(13)  They agree that the county employee shall be responsible for any and all tax liability associated with any benefits provided to the domestic partner, including imputed taxable income and be subject to tax withholding or other tax treatment; 
(14)  They agree under penalty of perjury under the laws of Georgia that all information in the declaration of domestic partnership is true and correct. 
Live(d) together means that the two (2) people claiming domestic partnership status share the same primary, regular and permanent residence. It is not necessary that the legal right to possess the residence be in both names. Domestic partners do not cease to live together if one leaves the shared residence for a period not to exceed six (6) months, but intends to return. Whether the relationship between these two (2) people is or is not sexual is in no way relevant for the purposes of determining eligibility under this article. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Sec. 20-201. - Effect of declaration of domestic partnership. 
(a)  Rights and duties created. Neither this article nor the filing of a declaration of domestic partnership shall create any legal rights or duties from one of the parties to the other, except those that specifically refer to domestic partnership. Nothing in this article shall be construed to explicitly or implicitly create a marital relationship. This article does not attempt to alter or affect the laws in the state that regulate any private or civil relationships. This article shall not be construed to conflict with, alter or affect the laws of this state or the United States. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article shall create any rights in either domestic partner that are not covered, included or created in the underlying insurance or benefits plan documents of the county. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Sec. 20-202. - Establishing existence of domestic partnership. 
(a)  Generally. Domestic partners, one of whom is an employee of the county, may establish the existence of their domestic partnership by presenting an original declaration of domestic partnership to the finance department of the county. The finance department will file the declaration. The standard declaration form will be available in the finance department during normal business hours. 
(b)  Limitations. The finance department shall only accept for filing declarations of domestic partnership submitted by domestic partners at least one of whom is an employee of the county. 
(c)  Amendments to the declaration. A partner may amend a declaration of domestic partnership filed with the finance department at any time to show a change in such partner's primary residence address. 
(d)  New declarations of domestic partnership. No person who has created a domestic partnership may create another until twelve (12) months after a notice of termination has been signed and filed with the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Sec. 20-203. - Records, copies, filing fees. 
Records of the county's finance department. The finance director shall keep a record of all declarations of domestic partnerships, amendments to declarations of domestic partnership, and all notices of termination. The records shall be maintained so that amendments and notices of termination shall be filed with the declaration of domestic partnership to which they pertain. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
Sec. 20-204. - Ending domestic partnerships. 
(a)  Termination. A domestic partnership ends when: 
(1)  One partner sends the other partner written notice that such partner has ended the domestic partnership; 
(2)  One of the partners dies; or 
(3)  The partners no longer meet one (1) or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. 
(b)  Notice of termination. When a domestic partnership ends, the partners must execute a notice of termination naming the partner and stating that the partnership has ended. The notice of termination must be dated and signed under penalty of perjury by at least one (1) of the partners. The notice of termination must be filed with the finance department. 
Notwithstanding any of the above, the county shall revoke a declaration of a domestic partnership if the county finds that the partners no longer meet one (1) or more of the qualifications or conditions for domestic partnership. The effective date of such termination will be retroactive to the date that such qualifications or conditions were no longer met. The county may revoke the declaration of the domestic partnership upon recommendation of the finance director and approval of the chief executive officer without notice or hearing to the employee or domestic partner. Nothing in this Code shall create any right to a notice or hearing concerning the termination of the domestic partnership. In all circumstances, the provisions of the county's insurance plans shall control regarding coverage, eligibility and benefits provided to domestic partners. 
(Ord. No. 01-03, Pt. I, 4-26-01) 
ARTICLE XI. - EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATIONS 

Sec. 20-205. - Statement of policy. 
It shall be the policy of DeKalb County to communicate with employee organizations in an orderly and professional manner, listening to input from such organizations where appropriate. This policy in no way obligates DeKalb County to bargain or contract with employee organizations. Further, this policy does not authorize employee organizations or any county employees to engage in strikes, slowdowns, or other organized absences from work or their assigned work stations. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-206. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not defined herein, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings given to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
An eligible employee is a DeKalb County merit-status employee who is not: 
(1)  A department head or other employee with actual authority to hire, fire, or discipline; or 
(2)  A confidential employee who works directly with and reports directly to an elected official, department head, or department director. 
Employee organization means any lawful organization that eligible employees have joined for the purpose of discussing issues of common interest regarding terms and conditions of employment with DeKalb County. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-207. - Applicability of article. 
This article shall apply to employee organizations of which eligible employees are members. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-208. - Prohibited discrimination and retaliation. 
(a)  There shall be no discrimination or retaliation against any eligible employee because of the fact that such employee is a member of an employee organization or has authorized a representative of an employee organization to communicate on his/her behalf in an appropriate manner regarding terms and conditions of DeKalb County employment. However, this section does not eliminate or limit the right to discipline employees for activities made unlawful by Georgia law or other applicable law (including, but not limited to, strikes or work slowdowns), or for conduct that violates DeKalb County policy. 
(b)  No employee shall be required, as a condition of employment with DeKalb County, to become a member of any employee organization. There shall be no discrimination or retaliation against an eligible employee because of the fact that the employee chooses not to be a member of an employee organization or otherwise chooses not to become involved in employee organization activities. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-209. - Representative of the county. 
The executive assistant shall designate a person in the human resources and merit system department to serve as the county's designated representative to meet with employee organizations when appropriate. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-210. - Meet and confer. 
When an employee organization requests a meeting with the county, the designated county representative will meet with a representative or representatives of that organization upon reasonable terms for the purpose of listening to input from the organization regarding employment terms and conditions of eligible employees the organization represents (but not for the purpose of collective bargaining or negotiating a contract). The designated county representative shall not be required to meet with a particular employee organization more often than once per month. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-211. - Representation of eligible employees in merit system hearings. 
Subject to the terms and conditions of the merit system and personnel administration department's written administrative procedures governing the conduct of merit system hearings, a representative of an employee organization shall be permitted to represent and assist an eligible employee who is an appellant in a merit system hearing under sections 20-193, 20-194, or 20-195 of this chapter: (1) if that representative is an attorney, or (2) if those written administrative procedures expressly authorize an appellant to designate a non-attorney to represent him/her in a merit system hearing and specify the procedure for an appellant to designate a non-attorney representative for such a hearing. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Sec. 20-212. - Employee organization activities during scheduled work hours. 
No eligible employee may spend scheduled working time (excluding approved break time) away from his/her work assignment and/or work station to participate in employee organization activities, unless the employee obtains his/her supervisor's advance permission to spend that time away from his/her work assignment and/or work station. An eligible employee may spend up to one (1) hour per calendar month of paid scheduled working time in employee organization meetings or in meetings between employee organization representatives and the designated county representative or county elected officials, if the eligible employee has advance permission from his/her supervisor to spend that time away from his/her work assignment and/or work station. With the exception of that one (1) hour per calendar month, normal county and department rules regarding requests to take time off from work (using accrued paid leave or unpaid leave) apply to eligible employees' requests to take time away from their normal work assignments and/or work stations to participate in employee organization activities. The one-hour per calendar month of paid scheduled working time that an eligible employee may spend on certain employee organization activities as described above shall not accumulate if unused during a calendar month, and no payment shall be made for any such time that is not used. 
( Ord. No. 13-15 , Pt. I, 10-8-13) 
Secs. 20-213—20-220. - Reserved. 
Chapter 21 - SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, adopted June 10, 2003, repealed former Ch. 21 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as Ch. 21 as herein set out. Former Ch. 21, §§ 21-1—21-8.1, 21-9—21-29, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 18-02, Pt. I, adopted March 26, 2002. 
Cross reference— Advertising of alcoholic beverages, § 4-103; signs at DeKalb-Peachtree Airport, § 6-50; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 7; removal of signs from public right-of-way, § 17-41; signs on public right-of-way, § 23-6; zoning, Ch. 27; signs for neighborhood shopping in office-institutional uses in R-CD district, § 27-248(h)(4). 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II; constitutional grant of zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV; signs on or near public rights-of-ways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Purpose and findings. 
The board of commissioners further finds that signs provide an important medium through which persons may convey a variety of noncommercial and commercial messages. However, left completely unregulated, the number, size, design characteristics, and locations of signs in the county can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and a detriment to property values and to the county's general public welfare, as well as create an aesthetic nuisance. The county, further, finds that signs have become excessive, and that many signs are distracting and dangerous to motorists and pedestrians, are confusing to the public and substantially detract from the beauty and appearance of the county. The county finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. The purpose and intent of the governing authority of DeKalb County in enacting this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of DeKalb County, and to implement the policies and objectives of a comprehensive development plan of the county through the enactment of a comprehensive set of regulations governing signs in DeKalb County; 
(2)  To regulate the erection and placement of signs within DeKalb County in order to provide safe operating conditions for pedestrian and vehicular traffic without unnecessary and unsafe distractions to drivers or pedestrians; 
(3)  To preserve the value of property on which signs are located and from which signs may be viewed; 
(4)  To maintain an aesthetically attractive county in which signs are compatible with the use patterns of established zoning districts; 
(5)  To maintain for the county's residents, workers and visitors a safe and aesthetically attractive environment and to advance the aesthetic interest of the county; 
(6)  To establish comprehensive sign regulations that effectively balance legitimate business and development needs with a safe and aesthetically attractive environment for residents, workers, and visitors to the county; 
(7)  To provide fair and reasonable opportunities for the identification of business which are located within DeKalb County, and to provide for the identification of the availability of products, goods or services so as to promote the economic vitality of businesses that are located within the county; 
(8)  To ensure the protection of free speech rights under the State and United States Constitutions with DeKalb County; 
(9)  To establish a permit system to allow specific types of signs in zoning districts consistent with the uses, intent and aesthetic characteristics of those districts; 
(10)  To allow certain signs that are small, safe, unobtrusive and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter but without a requirement for permits; 
(11)  To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances; 
(12)  To place reasonable controls on nonconforming signs that are by definition contrary to the public health, safety and welfare while protecting the constitutional rights of the owners of said nonconforming signs; and 
(13)  To prohibit all signs not expressly authorized by this chapter, to provide for the maintenance of signs, and to provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, the word "person" includes a firm, organization, partnership, trust and corporation, and the word "county" shall mean DeKalb County, Georgia. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them: 
Aggregate sign area shall mean the sum total of the sign area of any and all signs for a given lot. Subdivision signs, flags and banners are excluded from any determination of aggregate sign area in residentially zoned districts. Street numbers assigned by the United States Postal Service shall not be considered in calculating the aggregate sign area. 
Animated sign shall mean a sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or uses movement or a change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. This includes signs that rotate or revolve to display a message in more than one (1) direction. 
Area of a sign/sign area shall mean the total area upon which a message is displayed on any sign consisting of the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. For double-faced signs, the side of the sign with the largest sign area shall be used in computing the sign area. 
Banner shall mean a piece of fabric or similar material which is permanently attached to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or mounted to allow movement caused by the atmosphere. 
Business day shall mean any day during which county government offices are open for public business. For purposes of this chapter, a "business day" shall not any include any day during which county government offices are closed after a partial business day due to a holiday, emergency, inclement weather, or the like. 
Candela means a unit of luminous intensity equal to one-sixtieth ( 1/60 th) of the luminous intensity per square centimeter of a blackbody radiating at the temperature of solidification of platinum (2.046K). 
Canopy sign shall mean a sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any roof or roof-like structure which is extended over a sidewalk, walkway, or vehicle access area. 
Commercial message means sign copy which identifies, advertises, or directs attention to a business, or is intended to induce the purchase of goods, property, or service, including without limitation, any sign copy naming a brand of goods or service or otherwise proposing a commercial transaction. 
County shall mean DeKalb County, Georgia. 
Directional sign shall mean any sign placed within five (5) feet of an authorized curb cut. 
Director shall mean the director of the development department, or his/her designee. 
Double-faced sign shall mean a sign which has two (2) display areas placed back to back against each other and the interior angle formed by the display areas is less than fifty-nine (59) degrees, where one (1) sign face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
Electronic sign shall mean a sign whose message may be changed at intervals by electronic process or by remote control, including the device known as a commercial electronic variable message sign. 
Entrance sign shall mean any ground sign placed at the intersection of a public street and a private entrance into an apartment, office, condominium, church or industrial complex or some other building with multiple residential or commercial units. 
Facade shall mean the exterior wall of a building which facing any street which provides direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
Flag shall mean a piece of fabric or other flexible material attached to or designed to be flown from a flagpole. 
Flagpole shall mean a freestanding structure or a structure attached to a building or to the roof of a building on a parcel of record and used for the sole purpose of displaying flags. 
Ground sign shall mean any sign supported by uprights or braces or resting upon a foundation in the ground that is not supported or suspended from any building, or any sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
Historic sign means a sign deemed worthy of preservation by reason of its value to DeKalb County for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(a)  It is an outstanding example of a sign representative of its era; 
(b)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past sign design or style; 
(c)  It is a sign associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to DeKalb County; or 
(d)  It is a sign of esthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of DeKalb County. 
Illegal sign shall mean any sign that was erected in violation of the laws, as they existed at the time the sign permit was issued or signs that were not built in conformance with the issued permit. 
Illuminated sign shall mean a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
Lot shall mean a designed parcel, tract, or area of land legally established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
Lot, substandard shall mean a designated parcel, tract, or area of land created after the time of enactment of this chapter or amendment of this chapter which does not meet the lot area; lot width, or public street frontage and access requirements of this chapter. Such a lot is illegal except where created by governmental action in which case such lot shall have the status of a nonconforming lot of record as defined in the county zoning ordinance. 
Luminance means a measure of the brightness of a luminous surface, measured in candelas per unit area. 
Nits means a unit of measurement of luminance, or the intensity of visible light, where one nit is equal to one candela per square meter. 
Nonconforming sign shall mean any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Planned commercial center means any commercial, office, industrial or mixed-use development that contains any combination of offices, residences, retail or industrial uses with a common entry from a public street and are managed as a whole and in accordance with all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
Portable sign shall mean any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an "A" or "T" frame sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 
Primary facade shall be the facade of the building which is most nearly parallel to widest street to which the building faces. 
Projecting sign shall mean any sign which is attached perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than twelve (12) inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
Pump-island sign shall mean a sign located under a canopy over pump islands of a service station or convenience store with gas pumps. 
Road, accessible shall mean any road or street that provides a means of ingress and egress to the lot. 
Street frontage shall mean the lot line that is coincident with any road or street that provides a means of direct ingress and egress to the lot. 
Roof sign shall mean a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building that extends above the immediately adjacent roof line of the building or a sign that is wholly or partially above the roof line of a building. 
Rotating sign. See animated sign). 
Secondary facade shall mean any facade that is not the primary facade. 
Sign shall mean a device, structure or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" shall include the structure upon which a sign face is located. Flags and banners shall be included within this definition only as provided elsewhere herein. Seasonal holiday decorations shall not be included within the definition of "sign" and regulated as such. 
Store front shall mean the exterior wall of a single, undivided unit located within a planned commercial center or business park. 
Subdivision sign shall mean any ground sign placed at the intersection of two (2) roads, at least one (1) of which is a public road, with the other road being the main thoroughfare into and out of a commercial or residential subdivision. 
Suspended sign shall mean a sign securely suspended above a pedestrian passageway from beneath a canopy or awning and oriented perpendicular to the adjacent building facade. 
Tri-faced sign shall mean a sign structure with more than two (2) sign faces situated so that each sign face is facing a different direction. 
Wall sign shall mean a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
Window sign shall mean any sign displayed to an outside observer on or through a window or covering a window. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 09-08, Pt. I, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 10-07, Pt. I, 4-13-10) 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 21-3. - Permits. 
(a)  Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the unincorporated county without first having obtained a sign permit or any other permit required by this chapter or other ordinances of the county. 
(b)  Existing signs which conform to the provisions of this chapter that would be required to obtain a permit under the regulations of this chapter must register with the director within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter if such signs do not have a valid permit pursuant to a previous ordinance and pay a permit fee. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 21-4. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs which have a current valid permit under any previous ordinance regulating signs. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-4. - Application information. 
(a) Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed by the sign owner or the owner's agent with the director or his/her designee. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which sign is to be located and a plat map of the property which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign; 
(2)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located; 
(3)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign; 
(4)  Name, address, phone number and occupational tax certificate number of the sign contractor; 
(5)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, how the sign is to be illuminated (if at all) and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected; 
(6)  The size of the lot on which the sign is to be placed; 
(7)  The payment in full of the applicable application fee; and 
(8)  Application for ground signs shall include a site plan drawn to scale, including a closed boundary survey of the property gross acreage, the proposed location of subject sign, location of all ground signs on the property, entrance driveways from public streets, street rights-of-way, public or private easements, building locations, gross area of buildings and floor area occupied by subject owner or tenants. 
(b)  The director shall develop such forms as may be necessary to facilitate the permit application process. 
(c)  The applicant shall apply for all other permits or licenses required by county ordinances and state laws and regulations. No sign permit shall be valid unless other required permits or licenses have been issued by the authority responsible therefor. 
(d)  Each application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and save the county harmless of all damages, demands or expenses of every character which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. Each applicant shall present to the department, on a request, a certificate of liability insurance prior to the issuance of a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-5. - Time for consideration and issuance. 
The director shall process all sign permit applications within forty-five (45) business days of the director's actual receipt of a completed application and a sign permit fee. The director shall give notice to the applicant of his/her decision by hand delivery or by mailing a notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the forty-fifth business day after the director's receipt of the completed application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the director fails to act within the forty-five-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. A sticker or other device bearing the sign permit number shall be affixed to the sign structure. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-6. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The director shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter and any other applicable state laws or county ordinances will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the county for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the director shall revoke the permit. Should the director deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and hand delivered or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the forty-fifth business day after the director's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined. "Due cause" is the violation of the provisions of this chapter, other applicable ordinances, state or federal law, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal. A person whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the director to the zoning board of appeals as provided in Chapter 27 (Zoning). 
(c)  Certiorari. In the event a person whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the zoning board of appeals, he/she/it may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court of the county as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-7. - Permit expiration. 
A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and fully installed within six (6) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If an individual later desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-8. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The director or his/her designee may issue a citation for violation of this chapter by any person, including if applicable, the owner, manager or tenant of the lot upon which a sign is located, for a sign erected, altered, maintained, converted, or used in violation of this chapter or in violation of any other applicable ordinance, including, but not limited to the building and electrical codes. 
(b)  The director and/or his/her designee shall have the same duties, authority, and obligations regarding access to private property, inspections, including the procurement of inspection warrants provided in Article VI of Chapter 27 of the Code with regard to the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction, shall be subject to the general penalty provided in section 1-10 of the County Code. Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation, and each day of a continued violation for each sign shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalties authorized in section 1-10. 
(d)  The county may seek affirmative equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the removal or repair of any sign in violation of this chapter or other county ordinances. 
(e)  The director or his or her designee, any county employee who operates an assigned county-owned vehicle, or any person contracting with the county for such purpose may, without notice, remove and dispose of any prohibited sign, signal, device or other structure erected, placed or maintained on the dedicated right of way of any public road. Such removal and disposal of a prohibited sign, signal, device or other structure shall not preclude the prosecution of any person for erecting, placing or maintaining such item in the dedicated public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 25-03, Pt. I, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 11-07, Pt. I, 5-10-11) 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 21-9. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his/her duties, including but not limited to: public notices, safety signs, danger signs, official traffic control devices, memorial plaques, and historical markers shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The following signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 21-3 above; provided, however, that such signs shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  Window signs; 
(2)  Signs located on lots used solely for residential purposes; 
(3)  One (1) suspended sign per tenant of a multi-tenant building when the area of the sign is less than six (6) square feet per side; 
(4)  Signs for the sole purpose of displaying street numbers as may be required by other ordinances and other signs required by law; 
(5)  Flags and banners as provided in sections 21-28 and 21-29; and 
(6)  Nongovernmental traffic control devices in or adjacent to parking areas and driveways and signs located at railroad crossings. 
(7)  Historic signs where: 
a.  The property, building or structure where the historic sign is to be located is designated as a historic property by DeKalb County's governing authority; and 
b.  The owner of the property where the historic sign is to be located has obtained a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the sign from DeKalb County's historic preservation commission; and 
c.  A previous sign must have been located on the property. The historic sign's former existence, original design, original size, original color(s), original composition and other original aesthetic qualities of the historic sign shall be shown to the director's satisfaction by photograph(s) or other documentation. The new historic sign shall be an exact replica of the original sign located on the property. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 09-08, Pt. I, 4-28-09) 
Sec. 21-10. - Fees. 
The cost of a sign permit shall be established by the board of commissioners and collected by the director. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-11. - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the unincorporated county: 
(1)  Signs on the dedicated right-of-way of any public road other than publicly owned or maintained signs and signs pertaining to railroad crossings. 
(2)  Window signs which exceed thirty (30) percent of the window area; 
(3)  Signs that contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, as amended; 
(4)  Signs that simulate an official traffic control device, warning sign, or regulatory sign or which hide from view any traffic control device, signal or public service sign, except as allowed by section 21-9(b)(5) above; 
(5)  Signs that emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing abilities; 
(6)  Signs that interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic or which otherwise pose a hazard to traffic due to structural deficiencies in the structure of such signs; 
(7)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, curb, utility pole, natural feature, or other structure except as may be set forth herein; 
(8)  Animated signs, including rotating or revolving signs (except for time and weather informational signs, official warning and regulatory signs); 
(9)  Signs that obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation or shall prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, as well as signs attached to any fire escape; 
(10)  Signs that do not conform to county building and electrical codes; 
(11)  Signs for which a permit is required that do not display the sign permit number and the name and address of the person responsible for erecting and maintaining the sign; 
(12)  Roof signs; 
(13)  Tri-faced signs; 
(14)  Signs that are in violation of the rules and regulations of any zoning overlay district presently existing or as may later be enacted; 
(15)  Any sign constructed of non-durable material including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard or flexible plastic that has been displayed for more than sixty (60) days. Nothing herein shall prohibit such a sign from being replaced. This provision does not apply to flags or banners which are governed by sections 21-28 and 21-29; 
(16)  Portable signs; 
(17)  Signs located on any substandard lot created after the enactment of this chapter, unless the substandard lot is created as the result of governmental action; 
(18)  Abandoned commercial signs. Commercial signs (including sign structures) shall be deemed abandoned if the business, service or commercial transaction to which it relates has been discontinued for six (6) months; 
(19)  Any sign that is structurally unsound, or is a hazard to traffic or pedestrians; 
(20)  Dilapidated or neglected signs. A sign (including sign structure) will be dilapidated or neglected if it does not present a neat and orderly appearance, which may be manifested by the following; rust or holes on or in the sign or sign structure, or broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illuminating or mechanical devices or missing letters in sign copy; and 
(21)  Illegal signs. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 11-07, Pt. I, 5-10-1) 
Sec. 21-12. - Owner's consent required. 
No sign may be permitted or posted on property without the consent of the property's owner or authorized agent. Should it be determined that a sign was erected on a lot pursuant to an alleged agent's incorrect representation that the record owner of the lot in fact gave permission for the erection of a sign, the permit for such sign shall be revoked as provided in section 21-6 herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-13. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
The following regulations shall pertain to lots located in single family residential zoning districts and R-DT, TND, RA5, RA8, RCH, MHP, NCD and RM zoning districts: 
(1)  Lots used for residential purposes other than for apartments, condominium, mobile home, or townhouse developments shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than twenty-four (24) square feet per lot. Flags and banners shall not be included in the calculation of aggregate sign area. Subdivision and entrance signs shall not be included in the calculation of aggregate sign area; 
(2)  Lots used for apartments, condominiums, mobile homes, or townhouse developments shall not have an aggregate sign area exceeding six (6) square feet per unit, not to exceed an aggregate of one hundred (100) square feet for the development; 
(3)  There shall be a maximum of two (2) subdivision/entrance signs per entrance into any residential subdivision or real estate development in a residential district; 
(4)  Ground signs having a height of greater than four (4) feet above the grade level of the adjacent street to which the lot on which the sign is located as measured from the top of the sign, pole or support included, or three (3) feet above ground level, as measured from the top of the sign, pole, or support structure to ground level, whichever is greater, are prohibited, with the exception of subdivision signs and entrance signs; 
(5)  No sign in any residentially zoned district may be illuminated, except for subdivision and entrance signs, subject to the provisions of section 21-24 hereof. No subdivision or entrance sign may be internally illuminated; 
(6)  No single sign in a residential zoning district governed by this section, except for flags, banners, subdivision signs and entrance signs, may exceed six (6) square feet in size; 
(7)  Subdivision and entrance signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of sign area, excluding the base, and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height; 
(8)  Any commercial message on a sign located on any lot in any residential district must be related to the physical premises on that lot. Such a message may be deemed related to the lot physical premises if it indicates the provider of services to or regarding the premises. The board of commissioners having previously considered extensive findings, studies and evidence in connection with the April 13, 1999 zoning ordinance, as amended, to the extent that section 27-751 of the zoning ordinance conflicts with this chapter, section 27-751 of the zoning ordinance shall control; and 
(9)  Should any new zoning district be created that incorporates any residential use, this section shall apply to such new district unless otherwise stated in the ordinance creating the new zoning district. 
(10)  No electronic signs are allowed in any residential zoning district if that district is designated by DeKalb County as a historic district. No electronic signs shall be allowed in any other residential zoning district except an electronic sign identifying a place of worship, or a public or private elementary, middle, or high school. Any electronic sign allowed pursuant to this subsection must meet all of the applicable requirements of this Code, including, but not limited to, the requirements in section 21-22(b). 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 10-07, Pt. I, 4-13-10) 
Sec. 21-14. - Height and setback requirements. 
(a)  All signs shall be set back as follows: 
(1)  Ten (10) feet from the curb line of each street adjacent to the lot upon which the sign is situated where an authorized curb cut exists; (applicable to all zoning districts); 
(2)  If the right-of-way is more than ten (10) feet from the curb line as described in (1) above, the sign, including its footing or foundations, shall be setback at least one (1) foot from the right-of-way (applicable to all zoning districts); 
(3)  In a residential zoning district, if the distance between the right of way to the front of the principal structure is less than fifteen (15) feet, signs shall be setback two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the distance between the curbline and the front of the principal structure on the lot on which the sign is located; 
(4)  Along all lot lines which are not adjacent to a road with an authorized curb cut, any and all signs shall be within the buildable area of the lot. All signs shall be so located and shall provide such vertical clearance as to provide for safe, convenient and unobstructed passage for pedestrians and vehicles. 
(b)  No sign or sign structure above a height of three (3) feet shall be maintained within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines extended of two (2) streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. However, a sign support structure not more than ten (10) inches in diameter may be located within the required comer visibility area if all other requirements of this chapter are met and the lowest elevation of the sign surface is at least twelve (12) feet above the ground level. 
(c)  Window signs are only allowed on the ground floor of a building. 
(d)  Also see regulations in section 21-18 below. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-15. - Convenience stores and service stations with pump islands. 
In addition to the signs otherwise allowed in this chapter, convenience stores and service stations with pump islands may have signage subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Within the limits of the canopy covering the pump islands, one (1) sign per canopy face per public street frontage with a maximum of six (6) square feet. 
(2)  Within the limits of the canopy covering the pump islands, pump-island signs shall be limited to no more than two (2) signs per island, not to exceed four (4) square feet per sign. However, total square footage of all pump island signs shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet. 
(3)  Accessory car wash, if a separate drive-through car wash building is on site, one (1) additional wall sign per face of car wash, not to exceed five (5) square feet, may be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-16. - Non-commercial messages. 
Any sign provided for in any zoning district may contain non-commercial messages. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-17. - Wall or projecting signs. 
(a)  Wall or projecting signs shall be securely fastened to the building surface. 
(b)  No wall sign greater than one hundred eighty (180) square feet shall be placed below the twelfth story of a building. 
(c)  Projecting signs may project from the building up to two (2) feet; provided that no projecting sign shall be maintained less than ten (10) feet above the ground level when erected over pedestrian walkways or driveways and no less than fourteen (14) feet above vehicle access. 
(d)  No wall or projecting sign shall extend above the parapet wall. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-18. - Ground signs. 
(a)  The height of all ground signs at their highest point above the level of the ground shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in non-residentially zoned districts; however, when the ground level is lower than the level of the adjoining street pavement, then a sign may be raised so as to be no more than twenty (20) feet above the level of the pavement. Residentially zoned districts shall be governed by section 21-13 above. The level of the ground shall not be altered in such a way to provide additional sign height. The height of monopole sign structures shall be measured from the base of the pole at ground level to the top of the pole or top of the highest sign face, whichever is higher. The height of any multi-pole sign structure shall be measured the same as a monopole structure, except that the measurement shall be made using the shortest pole. Ground signs shall be measured from the ground level base of the sign structure (deemed to include any skirting) to the highest point of the sign. 
(b)  The height of any directional sign shall not be more than three (3) feet above the ground. 
(c)  All ground signs allowed for primary facades shall place between the primary facade and the street the primary facade faces. 
(d)  All ground signs allowed for secondary facades shall place between the secondary facade and the street the secondary facade faces. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-19. - Canopy signs. 
Canopy signs shall be no less than eight (8) feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways and fourteen (14) feet above areas of vehicle service access at the lowest extremity of the sign. No canopy sign shall extend above the parapet wall. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-20. - Non-residential zoning district regulations. 
(a)  In addition to all other applicable regulations in this chapter, all lots that are located in non-residential districts not developed as a planned commercial center are limited to the following signs: 

 
(b)  In lieu of the sign regulations of Table (a) above, a lot located in a non-residential district and developed as a planned commercial center shall be allowed the following: 

 
(c)  No property zoned for non-residential use may have more than one (1) ground sign that is oriented towards travelers along the same street. 
(d)  In addition to those regulations set forth in subsection (a) and (b) above, no person may maintain a lot zoned for commercial use where the aggregate signable area exceeds four hundred fifty (450) square feet, or two (2) square feet of signage for each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area, which ever is greater, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-21. - Special event signs. 
A site containing an authorized use and located in a non-residential zoning district is allowed special event signs for a special use or event, such as, but not limited to, grand openings, seasonal sales, liquidations, going-out-of business sales, fire sales, display of a noncommercial message, and giveaway or free promotions, only under the following conditions and subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Prior to the special event or use, and the erection and placement of the sign or device, an application for permit shall be filed with the director; 
(2)  The signs and devices shall be constructed of, or shall be described as, poster board, banners, metal, wood, pennants, flags, balloons, twirlers, streamers, portable displays and air- or gas-filled figures; 
(3)  The maximum size allowance for all the devices and signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet; 
(4)  The signs may be attached to the exterior wall or walls of a building, no higher than the top of the parapet or roof and shall not be placed, located or connected nearer than fifty (50) feet from the center of the street or roadway, or twenty (20) feet from the curb or edge of the pavement, whichever is further from the center of the street or roadway; and 
(5)  The maximum number of special event sign permits to be issued to a single site or location shall be two (2) per year for a period of time not to exceed sixteen (16) days for each issuance. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-22. - Electronic signs. 
(a)  Electronic signs shall be allowed only in C-1, C-2, M, and M-2 zoning districts, but only if the electronic sign complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  No message may be displayed for less than one (1) second; 
(2)  No message may be repeated at intervals less than two (2) seconds; 
(3)  No segmented message may last longer than ten (10) seconds; and 
(4)  No traveling message may travel at a rate slower than sixteen (16) light columns per second or faster than thirty-two (32) light columns per second. 
(b)  Electronic signs shall be allowed in places of worship or in public or private elementary, middle, or high schools, if such establishments are located on property zoned R-200, R-150, R-30,000, R-20,000, R-100, R-85, R-75, R-60, R-A5, R-50, R-A8, R-CH, R-CD, R-DT, RM-150, RM-100, RM-85, RM-75, RM-HD, R-NCD, PC-1, PC-2 or PC-3, O-I, so long as the electronic sign complies with all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Electronic ground signs shall be limited to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet, and sign copy area shall be limited to one hundred (100) square feet; 
(2)  Electronic signs may only be located along a major or minor thoroughfare; 
(3)  Electronic signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of six thousand three hundred (6,300) nits during the daylight hours and a maximum illumination of five hundred (500) nits between dusk to dawn, as measured from the sign's face at maximum brightness; 
(4)  Any external illumination devices on an electronic sign shall be effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of a major or minor thoroughfare, or any residential use; and 
(5)  Electronic signs shall contain a default design that freezes the sign in one (1) position with no more than a maximum illumination of five hundred (500) nits if a sign malfunction occurs. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 10-07, Pt. I, 4-3-10; Ord. No. 10-09, Pt. I, 5-25-10) 
Sec. 21-23. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  The county finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic characteristics of the county and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact of said signs on motorist and the structural characteristics of said signs. 
(b)  Any nonconforming sign that is not used or leased for a continuous period of one (1) year shall not be reused for sign purposes unless and until it fully conforms with the terms and requirement of this chapter. 
(c)  Illegal signs must be removed within thirty (30) days of notice from the county. 
(d)  No structural repairs, or changes in shape, size or design, to any nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this chapter. Routine maintenance and changing of copy shall be permitted as long as such maintenance or changing of copy does not result in or change the shape, size, or design. Signs which are structurally unsound or present a hazard to persons or property must be removed within two (2) days upon notification by the county. 
(e)  A nonconforming sign structure may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign structure, except that a non-conforming sign may be rebuilt where the original sign structure has been damaged or destroyed by nature or an act of god. No such replacement structure may have a sign area or height greater than the original structure. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-24. - Illumination. 
No sign shall give off light that glares, blinds or has any other such adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. No illuminated sign shall be constructed or maintained within seventy-five (75) feet of any single-family lot property line. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-25. - Building code. 
To the extent that it is not inconsistent with this chapter, the present edition of the Standard Building Code and other building and construction codes as adopted and modified by the county and the Georgia Department of Community Affairs are incorporated as a part of this chapter as if fully restated herein for the same purposes stated in section 21-1 hereof and for the same purposes for which the Standard Building Code was promulgated and enacted, which purposes are expressly incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-26. - Zoning ordinance. 
Except as provided elsewhere in this section, to the extent that it is not inconsistent with this chapter, the county zoning ordinance, as amended including, but not limited to definitions of terms contained therein is incorporated as a part of this chapter as if fully restated herein for the same purposes stated in section 21-1 hereof and for the same purposes for which the zoning ordinance and any amendments thereto, were adopted, which purposes are expressly incorporated herein. However, to the extent that any regulations governing any zoning overlay district now existing or later enacted conflict with this article, the rules of the zoning overlay district shall control. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-27. - Variances. 
(a)  Where a literal application of this article, due to special circumstances, would result in an unusual hardship in an individual case, a variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals after receiving evidence that the applicant meets all of the following criteria: 
(1)  Exceptional conditions pertaining to the property where the sign is to be located as a result of its size, shape, or topography, which are not applicable to other lands or structures in the area; 
(2)  Granting the variance would not confer on the applicant any significant privileges which are denied to others similarly situated; 
(3)  The exceptional circumstances are not the result of action by the applicant; 
(4)  The requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the rights commonly enjoyed by others similarly situated; 
(5)  Granting of the variance would not violate more than one (1) standard of this article; and 
(6)  Granting the variance would not result in allowing a sign that interferes with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(b)  No variance shall be granted to the height of a sign or the aggregate area of signs permitted on a lot. 
(c)  No variance shall be granted which increases the size of a sign more than twenty (20) percent of that allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-28. - Flags. 
(a)  All flags shall be displayed on flagpoles, which may be vertical or mast arm flagpoles. In non-residential districts, flagpoles shall not exceed the height allowed in the applicable zoning district, or sixty (60) feet, whichever is less. Flagpoles in residential districts shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height or the height of the primary structure on the lot, whichever is less. 
(b)  The maximum dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height. The hoist side of the flag shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the vertical height of the flagpole. In addition, flags are subject to the following limitations: 

 
(c)  Each lot shall be allowed a maximum of three (3) flagpoles. 
(d)  A maximum of two (2) flags shall be allowed per flagpole. 
(e)  A vertical flagpole must be set back from all property boundaries a distance which is at least equal to the height of the flagpole. 
(f)  Flags and flagpoles shall be maintained in good repair, and to the extent applicable shall be in compliance with the building code. Flagpoles with broken halyards shall not be used and flags which are torn or frayed shall not be displayed. 
(g)  On officially designated county, state, or federal holidays, there shall be no maximum flag size or number or other limitations on display. 
(h)  This section shall not be construed to restrict the right to display eligible flags as banners or non-commercial signage as provided elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-29. - Banners. 
(a)  Banners shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  Each banner shall not exceed fifteen (15) square feet; 
(2)  Each banner must be individually attached to poles, mast arms, or other structures; 
(3)  No more than two (2) banners shall be displayed on any lot at one (1) time; and 
(4)  All banners must be maintained in good condition as provided for flags in section 21-28 above. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 21-30. - Severability. 
In the event any section, subsection, sentence, or word of this chapter is declared and adjudged to be invalidated or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged unconstitutional were not originally part of this chapter, even if the surviving parts of the chapter result in greater restrictions after any unconstitutional provisions are stricken. The board of commissioners declares that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this chapter if it had known that such portion thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. The board of commissioners declares its intent that should this chapter be declared in part or in whole, signs are to be subject to regulations applicable to "structures" contained in other ordinances, including the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 13-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Chapter 22 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Health regulations for refuse, § 13-96 et seq.; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 25; local laws relating to solid waste, App. B, § 1201 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of power to provide for garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(2); Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined. Where words have not been defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved receptacle for residential solid waste means a galvanized metal container or durable plastic container or durable plastic bag with the capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons and no more than thirty-two (32) gallons, with the containers having two (2) durable handles on the sides thereof and a removable tight-fitting top. All containers shall be waterproof. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not be acceptable. 
Approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings means a biodegradable paper bag, empty card board box, clean galvanized metal container or durable plastic container with a capacity of not less than twenty (20) gallons and no more than forty (40) gallons. Containers shall have two (2) durable handles on the sides thereof or a bail by which it may be lifted. Oil or grease drums, paint cans and similar salvaged containers shall not constitute an approved receptacle for yard debris trimmings. 
Collector means a person who, under agreements, verbal or written, with or without compensation, does the work of collecting and/or transporting solid waste from industries, offices, retail outlets, businesses, institutions and/or similar locations or from residential dwellings; provided, however, that this definition shall not include an individual collecting and/or transporting waste from the individual's own single-family dwelling unit. 
Commercial container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. The following general standards are prescribed for commercial containers: 
(1)  All containers must be steel, continuous welded and properly reinforced. 
(2)  All lids will be flanged and reinforced for strength. 
(3)  Pickup side of container shall be reinforced inside or outside at point of torque tub contact. 
(4)  Inside reinforcement shall be pressed steel angel. 
(5)  Bottoms shall be reinforced with one-and-one-half-inch drain plug installed flush to bottom. 
(6)  All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel and epoxy paint. 
(7)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths will be seventy (70) inches. Minimum gauges of steel shall be as follows: 

 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment house, rooming house, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a single dwelling unit/residential unit and condominiums. 
Commercial front loader container means a manufactured container suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the director. 
Commercial/industrial solid waste means solid waste from commercial establishments that includes but is not limited to material from industrial processes, manufacturing canneries, slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry processing plants or similar industries, and food waste. 
Compactor container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with a self-contained compacting mechanism or an external compactor which is designed to be used in conjunction with the individual home appliance. 
Compactor front loader container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with an external mechanical compacting system that detaches in order to be serviced by driving forward to the container using a commercial front loader vehicle. 
Compactor roll-off container means a manufactured commercial container of any size with an internal or external mechanical compacting system that either detaches or is fully self-contained and is serviced by backing up to the container and hoisting it onto a commercial roll-off container vehicle. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure with a front and back entrance to each unit on the ground level. 
Construction and demolition solid waste means solid waste from construction and demolition projects that include but is not limited to remodeling, repair operations on houses, commercial buildings, multiple dwellings and other structures such as concrete, bricks, plaster, stone, earth, lumber, roofing materials, gutters, shavings and sawdust. 
Conveyance means any automobile, plane, train, bus, bicycle, motorcycle or other method of transporting persons from one place to another. 
Department means the public works department or its successor for purposes of this chapter. 
Director means the director of the public works department or designee. 
Discard means to throw, abandon, place, deposit, discharge, dump, bury, burn or dispose of a substance. 
Disposal facility means any facility or location where any treatment, utilization, processing or deposition of solid waste occurs. 
Finance director means the director of the department of finance as established by Ga. L. 1981, p. 4304. 
Garbage means waste including but not limited to food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used or intended for use as food, or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetables. 
Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste that does not meet the toxic characteristic leachate procedure requirements and includes but is not limited to highly flammable or explosive wastes; toxic wastes; industrial sludge; and other waste material that the director determines to be a likely hazard to the public health, safety or environment, except radioactive waste materials. 
Incinerator means the high temperature waste combustion unit designed to dispose of pathological matter. 
Landfill means a method of disposing of solid wastes, other than putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, on land by placing an earth cover thereon. 
Litter means, but is not limited to, any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, yard debris, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description but the term litter does not include "waste" as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6), as amended. 
Multiple dwelling means a building designed for and containing two (2) or more dwelling units. 
Municipal solid waste means, but is not limited to, any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard debris not separated for recycling and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural, or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Noncombustible trash means, but is not limited to, materials which are unburnable in the incinerator or at incinerator temperature of eight hundred (800) to one thousand eight hundred (1,800) degrees Fahrenheit such as mineral water, metal furniture, large metal scraps and wires, auto bodies or parts, and other similar materials. 
Owner means any person or entity that generates solid waste on real property in the county and who is designated by the records of the office of tax commissioner as the owner of such real property within the county. 
Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of at least one and one-half (1.5) mils and not exceeding a thirty-two-gallon capacity. 
Public or private property means the right of way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and land used for business, residential, commercial, industrial, or farm purposes. 
Putrescible waste means wastes that are capable of being decomposed by microorganisms. Examples of putrescible wastes include but are not necessarily limited to kitchen wastes, animal manure, offal, hatchery and poultry processing plant wastes, and garbage. 
Recycle means any process by which materials that would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Refuse means garbage, rubbish or commercial refuse. 
Residential unit means any freestanding structure or shelter or any part thereof used or constructed for use as a residence for one (1) family. 
Sanitary landfill means a method of disposing of putrescible waste on land for final disposition and/or management. 
Sanitation or sanitary district means designated service areas established by this Code or by a contract with a municipality. 
Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded materials including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject under 33 U.S.C. § 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33), as amended. 
Special industrial waste container means any container such as a metal box, bucket, an open bed container or special container used for transporting chemicals, paint, metals, glass, oil products, plastics or any type of material that requires special handling and cannot be incinerated. 
Stationary compactor means an object of refuse container system which compacts refuse at the site of generation into a pull-on detachable container. 
Tax commissioner means the constitutional officer charged with collecting both state, county and special taxes as established by Ga. L. 1927, p. 558, § 2. 
Yard debris means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural, and silvicultural operations. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3003; Ord. No. 94-29, 12-27-94; Ord. No. 96-13, § 1, 8-13-96; Ord. No. 01-20, Pt. I, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-2. - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to the preparation and storage, collection, transportation and disposal of all refuse in the unincorporated area of the county, including all public and private property, and any property within a municipality that contracts with the county for collection and disposal services. This chapter prescribes rules and regulations therefore, regulates the collection of garbage and refuse, provides for the licensing and regulation of private garbage and refuse collection, prescribes rules and regulations for hauling garbage, refuse and other waste material within or through the county, and prohibits the unlawful deposit of litter within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3002; Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-3. - Private transportation of refuse. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person including county refuse collectors and sanitary contractors to haul, convey or cause to be conveyed any refuse, including discarded building material or discarded furniture, upon or along the public streets and roadways except when the material transported is adequately secured in such a manner as to prevent it from falling, leaking or being blown from transporting vehicles. The operator or owner of the offending vehicle shall be personally responsible for any violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not licensed by the county to collect and haul any refuse other than that arising from such person's own accumulation within any areas of the county in which refuse collection service is maintained by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3009) 
Sec. 22-4. - Disposal of refuse and garbage generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or to cause to be dumped any garbage, refuse, litter, junk, appliances, equipment, cans, bottles, paper, lumber, trees, tree limbs, brush or parts thereof anywhere in the unincorporated area of the county except as may be permitted by county regulations at the incinerator or sanitary landfills operated by the county without the expressed approval by action of the board of commissioners under such terms and conditions as may be invoked from time to time by the board. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section do not apply to the dumping on private property with the owner's permission of sand, dirt, broken dirt, blocks, broken pavement or other suitable material for use as a fill to raise the elevation of the land, provided it is not maintained in an unsightly condition and provided the owner or owners of the property on which such material is dumped agrees to level such dumped material with appropriate grading equipment and assess the cost thereof against the real property on which such material was dumped. 
(c)  If any of the matter or material dumped in violation of the provisions of subsection (a) of this section can be identified as having last belonged to, been in the possession of, sent to or received by, or to have been the property of any person prior to its being dumped as prohibited therein, this identification shall be presumed to be prima facie evidence that the owner dumped or caused to be dumped such matter and material in violation of this chapter. 
(d)  For information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person violating the provisions of this chapter or the provisions of any state law prohibiting the dumping of garbage, refuse or litter on any public or private property within the county, the board shall pay a reward in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, to the person furnishing such information leading to such arrest and conviction and such monies as may be a necessary cost of the operation and administration of the county government. 
(e)  All compactors containing combustible materials emptied at a county disposal facility will pay the price per ton established in section 22-33 of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3011) 
Sec. 22-5. - Operation of private landfills. 
(a)  No sanitary landfill or dump shall be operated within the county without written approval of the county and the state. 
(b)  Sanitary landfill and landfill hours of operation shall be limited to eighteen (18) hours each day, from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m., unless daily cover is applied and utilized in the manner described in the sanitary landfill's or landfill's design and operating plan approved by the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3012; Ord. No. 99-15, § 1, 6-22-99) 
Secs. 22-6—22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL SERVICE 

Sec. 22-26. - Notice to owner, occupant of unacceptable container or area. 
The county, upon determining that a can, container or area is becoming or has become unserviceable or unsanitary or likely to cause an unsanitary condition, shall issue a notice to the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the can, container or condition exists to inform such person of the condition existing. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3004(b)) 
Sec. 22-27. - Pickup routes and districts established. 
The county shall divide the unincorporated areas of the county into pickup routes, which routes shall be plainly outlined on a map of the county and numbered numerically. The county shall prepare a list of the names of all the streets, roads, alleys, drives, highways and other public thoroughfares within each route; shall keep the map and lists for public inspection; and shall furnish a copy of the map showing any particular route along with a list of the names of the public thoroughfares therein to any person who requests them upon the payment of the actual cost for the reproduction of the map and list by either a county or commercial facility, whichever is available. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3005) 
Sec. 22-28. - Preparation and storage of residential refuse for collection; placement; unacceptable refuse. 
It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to keep all refuse pending collection and disposal as follows: 
(1)  All garbage shall be free from liquid and initially placed in watertight plastic bags with the tops of such bags securely closed. The owner shall then place the closed plastic bags in an approved receptacle for residential solid waste to be collected and removed by the appropriate county employee. 
(2)  Other household refuse will be containerized in disposable containers (box, watertight or plastic bag) except that tree branches and heavy brush which will not fit into containers shall be cut in lengths not exceeding four (4) feet in length and stacked in a compact pile on the parkway in front of the residence adjoining the curb, but these piles shall not extend into the street. Sticks, hedge clippings and small brush shall be gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed four (4) feet in length nor weigh more than fifty (50) pounds. The county will not collect logs and limbs over four (4) inches in diameter or over four (4) feet long. 
(3)  Noncombustible trash and liquids will not be collected by the county and shall be disposed of by other means. 
(4)  All refuse receptacles, except single-use paper or plastic bags, single-use paper or cardboard boxes, shall be kept clean and free of accumulated waste and shall be treated with an effective insecticide if necessary to prevent nuisance. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the occupant of any single residential unit, condominium or multiple residential unit not serviced by a commercial container to place refuse receptacles, watertight paper or plastic bags securely tied, rubbish and bundles, on assigned collection days, at a front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct passage; except that the residential superintendent may require it to be placed on any side of a property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. It shall also be the duty of the occupant to place the refuse at an appropriate curbside location at or before 8:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck; this placement shall not be made before 5:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection day. Any refuse placed on the curb after the departure of the pickup crew shall be at the peril of the owner and the owner shall be subject to prosecution for violation of this chapter should the street become littered from the refuse. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the occupant to remove containers from the curbside location to the storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting the premises; the removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents are emptied and collected. 
(7)  Each owner shall prevent the continued, excessive and unsightly accumulation of refuse upon the property such person occupies or the public thoroughfares adjoining the property. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquid or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(9)  Inoperative, privately used or worn out household appliances (refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, discarded furniture) will be collected at the curb on an on-call basis to the department. 
(10)  Commercial waste generated from the conduct of business or commercial enterprise carried on from residential units will not be collected except on a special fee basis. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3006; Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-29. - Preparation and storage of commercial and multiple dwelling refuse for collection. 
(a)  Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of a commercial establishment, condominium or multiple dwelling, arrangements for the storage of refuse and location of containers must be approved by the county. 
(b)  Commercial containers at existing commercial establishments and multiple dwellings shall be placed at locations approved by the county for collection by the county. The county will not collect refuse from commercial establishments or multiple dwellings unless it is placed in commercial containers, properly located. Cardboard boxes shall be flattened and placed in containers. 
(c)  Where the occupants of two (2) or more commercial establishments share the use of a refuse can or commercial container, it shall be the joint responsibility of the users to maintain the area surrounding such cans or containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(d)  The occupant, or occupants, of commercial establishments and the management of multiple dwellings serviced by commercial containers shall be responsible for maintaining the area surrounding such commercial containers clean and free of accumulations of refuse. 
(e)  All garbage and rubbish shall be free of liquid and placed in watertight paper or plastic bags with the tops secured prior to placing in commercial containers. 
(f)  Commercial containers containing any of the following items will not be emptied: 
(1)  Large household or industrial appliances. 
(2)  Furniture. 
(3)  Tires. 
(4)  Wooden crates. 
(5)  Logs or limbs over four (4) feet in length or four (4) inches in diameter. 
(6)  Bed springs. 
(7)  Rock, dirt, concrete blocks, etc. 
(8)  Uncontainerized garbage, yard debris and household trash. 
(g)  Normal household appliances will be collected on a special fee basis at multiple dwellings served by commercial containers, when placed adjacent to the commercial container and reported to the department. 
(h)  It is unlawful to place or cause to be placed in any refuse can or container for collection any acid, explosive material, inflammable liquids or dangerous or corrosive material of any kind. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3007) 
Sec. 22-30. - Collection of refuse generally; conditions for collection by county. 
(a)  Refuse may be collected for disposal by the county, by municipalities or by persons or commercial sanitation firms licensed by the county. 
(b)  The county and its licensed scavengers will collect refuse under the following conditions: 
(1)  Refuse will be collected twice each week from residential units except for exceptionally large piles of limbs which may require an excessive period of time to load. 
(2)  Refuse will be collected as often as six (6) times a week from commercial establishments. 
(3)  Dead animals (other than dogs and house pets) will not be collected, and dead dogs and house pets will be collected only from animal hospitals, curbsides and public rights-of-way. Dead house pets shall be in a plastic bag and placed at the curb. They will be collected on a special fee basis and on an on-call basis by the county. Large dead animals shall be disposed of by burying on the individual's property to whom the animal belongs as the county has no responsibility to supply service for the removal and disposal of large dead animals. 
(4)  Collection service shall be discontinued where garbage or trash cans or commercial containers are inadequate or have been condemned as unfit by an inspector and notice has been given to the owner or occupant of the premises who has refused to correct the situation then existing. 
(c)  The county shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling discarded building material, dirt, rock or discarded furniture and appliances from private property, nor shall it be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers or building contractors except on a special fee basis. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3008) 
Sec. 22-31. - Garbage collection for disabled persons. 
(a)  Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit who is disabled to the extent of being incapable of moving refuse and shall obtain a physician's certificate as to this disability shall not be required to place the refuse at curbside. This section does not apply unless all of the persons in a residential unit are disabled and obtain a physician's certificate. These certificates will be mailed to the director for appropriate notification of pickup crews. This subsection also applies to temporary disability not to exceed ninety (90) days (extensions are required). 
(b)  Residential cans shall not be placed more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the curb or road edge, nor will refuse cans be picked up if any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Gates are locked. 
(2)  Gates are wired or tied shut. 
(3)  Dogs are loose in yard. 
(4)  Cans are in carports or garages. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3013) 
Sec. 22-32. - Billing for sanitary services, sanitary docket. 
(a)  Commercial establishments. 
(1)  It shall be the duty of the finance director or authorized designee to prepare and mail to each owner or lessee of a commercial establishment in the sanitary districts of the county a monthly billing for sanitary services. These monthly payments shall be paid in advance by the owner or lessee of the commercial establishment property. It shall be the duty of the finance director to enforce the collection of commercial establishment fees and assessments imposed by this chapter. Failure by the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment to pay any amount due for the collection and disposal of refuse and/or fee imposed pursuant to section 22-33 shall be unlawful and an offense in violation of this Code. Failure by any owner or lessee or a commercial establishment to pay any amount due for the collection and disposal of refuse and/or fee imposed pursuant to section 22-33 may be treated by the county as a debt for which an action at law may be brought in the same manner as any other charge, assessment or debt, including a late payment penalty and interest thereon as provided by section 2-112. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the finance director or authorized designee thereof to prepare, maintain and keep for public inspection a complete record of the name of each commercial establishment owner, the address or by tax map reference if no street address is available, the amount due for the calendar year, the amount of each monthly payment and an entry showing when each payment was made. This record shall be called the commercial establishment sanitary docket and shall be prepared monthly in advance. Each monthly docket shall be cumulative of all unpaid monthly installments. 
(3)  Upon the request of any person interested in examining the title of any parcel of real estate in the sanitary districts of the county, the person in charge of the maintenance of the commercial establishment sanitary docket under the supervision of the finance director or authorized designee thereof shall furnish to such person a form statement showing the information required in this section, which form statement shall be signed by the person maintaining the docket and the finance director or an authorized designee as to the correctness of the information contained therein. 
(4)  On premises being served by the department where there is a delinquent sanitary installment, after the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due installment in a current statement or on a separate bill or other notice and the owner or lessee of a commercial establishment refuses to promptly pay it, the county may refuse sanitary pickup at those premises and sanitary service shall not be restored until these delinquent and current installments are paid in full. 
(b)  Residential units. 
(1)  All fees for sanitary services assessed against residential units shall be assessed upon the tax commissioner's books for each year and shall be collected by the tax commissioner. After collection, the tax commissioner shall transfer the sanitary fees to the county treasury according to the same schedule as county taxes. In collection of these sanitary fees, the tax commissioner shall be allowed to resort to any remedy or right allowed by law for the collection and payment of county taxes. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the tax commissioner to prepare and mail to each owner of a residential unit in the sanitary districts of the county an annual billing for sanitary services. This sanitary billing will appear as a separate line item assessment on the owner's annual property tax bill and shall become due and payable at the same time that county taxes are due and payable. If such sanitary billing remains unpaid, the tax commissioner or authorized designee, shall have the authority to issue a fi. fa. or execution against the property served, which fi. fa. or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as fi. fa.'s or executions issued for county taxes. Each annual installment shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for county taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such billing for sanitary services is paid. Any sanitary billing amount that remains unpaid shall accrue penalty, interest and fi. fa. charges in the same manner and at the same rate as delinquent county taxes. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3014; Ord. No. 94-29, 12-27-94; Ord. No. 01-20, Pt. I, 7-24-01) 
Sec. 22-33. - Fee. 
The fees for the collection and disposal of refuse and providing such services and to construct and maintain facilities therefor shall be as established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3015; Ord. No. 94-29, 12-27-94) 
Sec. 22-34. - Burning combustible materials in containers owned or used by county. 
No person shall burn or attempt to burn or cause to be burned in any container belonging to or used by the county for refuse collection purposes any combustible material of any nature. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4001) 
Sec. 22-35. - Yard trimmings disposal restrictions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, all yard trimmings shall be subject to the provisions of this subsection; 
(b)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in or mixed with municipal solid waste; 
(c)  Yard trimmings shall not be disposed at municipal solid waste disposal facilities having liners and leachate collection systems or requiring vertical expansion; 
(d)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored for collection in such a manner as to facilitate collection, composting, or other handling; 
(e)  Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled or chipped, composted, used as mulch, or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible; 
(f)  It shall be the duty of the occupant or owner of any premises to separate yard trimmings from all other municipal solid waste; 
(g)  Yard trimmings shall not be placed in a plastic bag but shall be placed in an "approved receptacle for yard trimmings" as defined in this chapter. All other requirements of this chapter regarding containing yard trimmings and refuse shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 96-13, § 1, 8-13-96) 
Secs. 22-36—22-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE SERVICES 

Sec. 22-51. - Definition. 
In this article, "commercial sanitation firm" includes any person engaged in the business of operating a sanitary compactor. 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-52. - License. 
(a)  No person shall engage in the business of operating a commercial sanitation firm without a license issued by the county. A license application in compliance with this section shall be submitted to the department for approval or other disposition. 
(b)  Applications are available and may be submitted at the sanitation building, Camp Road, during working hours (8:00 a.m.—4:30 p.m.) Monday through Friday. 
(c)  Each application shall have attached a list showing the type, size and location of stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers and/or industrial waste materials to be serviced by the applicant. A commercial sanitation firm applying for a permit to operate stationary compactors, stationary compactor containers or industrial waste containers shall certify at the time of application that the applicant or any corporate officer of the firm is not engaged in any illegal servicing of any commercial containers or refuse collection of any type in the sanitation district. 
(d)  Approved licenses shall become effective on the first day of the calendar year. The fee to be paid to the county for each approved application shall be as established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The fee shall be prorated for the remainder of the calendar year from the day this license is approved. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(a)—(d), (m)) 
Sec. 22-53. - Performance bond. 
Each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall post a performance bond with the county in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(e)) 
Sec. 22-54. - Monthly charge for each container in use. 
In addition, each authorized commercial sanitation firm shall pay a monthly charge in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, for each stationary compactor container or industrial waste container in use on the last day of each month. This fee shall be paid on or before the fifteenth day of each succeeding month for which the service was rendered. A schedule of the location of each stationary compactor shall accompany the payment of the fees. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(f)) 
Sec. 22-55. - Decals on trucks. 
Each truck used by a commercial sanitation firm to collect and transport combustible solid waste shall bear a decal issued by the department. The issuance and placement of the decal must be accomplished at the county sanitation office building, Camp Road, by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(g)) 
Sec. 22-56. - Decals, identification on compactors, containers. 
Each stationary compactor and industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot a decal issued by the county which shows it has been properly permitted to operate in the county. In addition each stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container shall carry in a conspicuous spot the name, telephone number and address of the firm permitted to service the stationary compactor, stationary compactor container or industrial waste container. Any arrangement between firms to service another's units must receive written approval from the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(h)) 
Sec. 22-57. - Installation of stationary compactor unit; prior approval of plans. 
Plans and specifications for installing a stationary compactor unit shall be approved by the county prior to the installation. All stationary compactor shredders and stationary compactor containers shall be installed on class A, three thousand (3,000) psi concrete pads of not less than six (6) inches thickness. All installations shall comply with the requirements of the county mechanical code, fire code and health regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(i)) 
Sec. 22-58. - Special permit for handling special industrial waste. 
Special permits shall be granted to firms holding stationary compactor permits for the installation of special industrial waste containers to handle refuse requiring special handling or special equipment. No special industrial waste container shall be emptied at the incinerator. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(j)) 
Sec. 22-59. - Establishment contracting services exempt from county sanitary assessment. 
A commercial establishment which contracts with a firm licensed to operate a stationary compactor service shall not be required to pay a county sanitary assessment while it uses the stationary compactor service, provided additional service is not supplied by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(k)) 
Sec. 22-60. - Disposal of collected refuse. 
Licensees under this article may dispose of their stationary compactor refuse and all acceptable industrial waste container refuse at the county disposal facilities at a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-3010(l)) 
ARTICLE IV. - SCRAP TIRE ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22-61. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "DeKalb County Scrap Tire Enforcement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-62. - Intent and purpose. 
The DeKalb County Board of Commissioners finds that protection of the environment is vital to the health, safety, welfare and economic progress of DeKalb County and its citizens. Therefore, it is the intent of this article to develop regulations and procedures that govern scrap tires from the point of generation to the point of disposal. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-63. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined in therein. 
Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn, or dispose of a substance. 
End user means the last person who uses the scrap tires, chips, crumb rubber, or similar materials to make a product with economic value, or in the case of energy recovery, the person who utilizes the heat content or other forms of energy from the incineration or pyrolysis of waste tires, chips or similar materials. 
Environmental code enforcement officer means an officer of the county authorized by section 2-41 of this Code to write official warnings and citations to insure compliance with the DeKalb County scrap tire management ordinance and solid waste code. This definition shall include anyone designated by the county as a sanitation inspector. 
Manifest means a document used to identify the quantity and composition and the origin, routing, and destination of scrap tires during transportation from the point of generation, through any intermediate points, to an end user, processor or disposer approved by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, hereinafter referred to as EPD. 
Mixed tires means a heterogeneous group of tires consisting of used, retreadable casings and scrap tires. 
Recycle means any process by which materials which would otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated, or processed and reused or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products. 
Retreadable casing means a tire suitable for retreading. 
Reused tire means a tire used for purposes, approved by the EPD, other than intended, such as playground equipment, offshore reefs, and erosion control. 
Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its originally intended purpose because of wear, damage, or defect. 
Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires, not otherwise exempted, for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end use, or disposal facility. 
Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. Generators may include, but are not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages and service stations. 
Scrap tire processing means any method, system, or other treatment designed to change the physical form, size, or chemical content of scrap tires and includes all aspects of its management (administration, personnel, land, equipment, building, and other elements) and includes processing by: shredding, chopping, chipping, baling, splitting, recycling or sorting of scrap tires. 
Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the EPD to receive tires from scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers or the general public for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generators, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casing from scrap tires. 
Solid waste means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operation materials; solid or dissolved matters in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended and as defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-8-22(33) as may hereafter be amended. 
Tire means a continuous, solid or pneumatic covering designed for encircling the wheel of a vehicle that is not permanently attached to the vehicle or a part of the vehicle as original equipment. 
Tire handling business means any person that derives fifteen (15) percent or more of its gross income from the sale, processing, transporting or disposal of tires. 
Tire retailer means any person engaged in the business of selling new replacement tires. 
Tire retreader means any person actively engaged in the business of retreading scrap tires by scarifying the surface to remove the old surface tread and attaching a new tread to make a usable tire. 
Ultimate consumer means the last person who receives and uses a new replacement tire. Ultimate consumers may be, but are not limited to: individual, leasing and private companies purchasing tires from retail dealers for their vehicle fleets and government agencies. 
Used tire means a tire which has a minimum of two-thirty-seconds ( 2/32 ) foot of road tread and which is still suitable for its original purpose. It must be inventoried and marketed in substantially the same fashion as a new tire, and the dealer must be able to provide satisfactory evidence to the county that a market exists, and that the used tires are in fact being marketed. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-64. - General. 
It shall be unlawful to dump scrap tires or cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place in DeKalb County including the following: 
(1)  Any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right of way thereof, or on any other public lands except in containers or areas lawfully provided for such dumping; and 
(2)  Any river, canal, stream, creek, or fresh water lake; and 
(3)  Any public property or private property not owned or maintained by the alleged violator. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-65. - Scrap tire storage, handling, and disposal. 
(a)  O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., as amended, are hereby incorporated in this section as if fully set forth herein. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of properly to store all scrap tires in a manner that will not adversely affect the public health and safety. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner or occupant of properly to store all scrap tires in a manner that is consistent with federal, state and local law. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-66. - Accumulation. 
(a)  No person may store more than one hundred (100) scrap tires anywhere in the county. Any person storing in excess of one hundred (100) scrap tires shall be deemed to be in violation of this part. The following exceptions shall apply: 
(1)  A solid waste disposal site permitted by the division if the permitted by the EPD if the permit authorizes the storage of scrap tires prior to their disposal; 
(2)  A tire retailer with not more than three thousand (3,000) scrap tires in storage; 
(3)  A tire retreader with not more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) scrap tires in storage so long as the scrap tires are of the type that the retreader is actively retreading. 
(4)  An auto salvage yard with not more than five hundred (500) scrap tires in storage; and 
(5)  A scrap tire processor approved by the division so long as the number of scrap tires in storage do no exceed the quantity approved by the EPD. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store scrap tires except in a container, located outside of an authorized business, enclosed on all four (4) sides by a solid screen and having a secure top cover to prevent the accumulation of water in the container. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-67. - Compliance. 
(a)  Scrap tire generator. Any person who generates scrap tires shall obtain a scrap tire generator identification number issued by EPD and shall maintain copies of manifests for any scrap tires that have been shipped or removed from the business location within the past thirty-six (36) months. Separate identification numbers are required for each generator having multiple generation locations. 
(1)  The manifests shall include the following information: 
a.  Name and identification number of the generator; 
b.  Number and total tonnage (accurate to within ten (10) percent of actual number) of scrap tires to be transported; 
c.  Name and permit number of the scrap tire carrier; 
d.  Date of transport; 
e.  Destination of scrap tires; and 
f.  Signatures of the scrap tire generator, scrap tire carrier and scrap tire processor. 
(2)  The completed manifest(s) and the scrap tire generator identification number shall be made available to the environmental code enforcement officer upon request. 
(3)  Scrap tire generator identification numbers are not transferable; and each generator shall insure that the scrap tire section of the EPD approves the carrier being used to transport scrap tires. 
(b)  Scrap tire carrier. It shall be the responsibility of the carrier to return a completed copy of the manifest to the scrap tire generator within thirty (30) days from the date on which the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires. The date the scrap tire carrier takes possession of the scrap tires shall be indicated on the manifest. 
(c)  Tire handling businesses. All tire handling businesses shall maintain an accurate inventory of all new and used tires received at the place of business, sold to a consumer, sent to another tire handling businesses, or shipped to an approved processor. Inventory and quarterly transport reports shall be kept on site and made available for inspection by environmental code enforcement officers. Quarterly reports shall be sent to the DeKalb County director of public works and shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name of company that transported tires; 
(2)  Name of owner of company and driver of transport vehicle; 
(3)  Telephone number of transport company; 
(4)  Valid environmental protection division scrap tire program transportation identification number; 
(7)  Type of vehicle used to transport tires; and 
(8)  Quarterly tire transport report shall be mailed to the address below: 
DeKalb County Director of Public Works  1300 Commerce Drive  Decatur, Georgia 30030 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-68. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the DeKalb County Director Of Public Works or his or her designee. 
(b)  The environmental code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce this article on behalf of DeKalb County, and shall be empowered to enter private property, with the owner's consent, at reasonable times in order to inspect the property for violation of this article. If the owner does not consent to such entry on private property for inspection, such officer shall obtain a warrant to enter upon the property. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 22-69. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person violating any portion of this article shall be guilty of an ordinance violation and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as set forth in section 1-10 of this Code, and as follows: 
(1)  First offense: A fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than one thousand dollars one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or up to thirty (30) days imprisonment, or both. 
(2)  Upon conviction, the court may also order the convicted person to remove any scrap tires that have been accumulated in violation of this article from the property. 
(Ord. No. 14-03, Pt. I, 6-10-03) 
ARTICLE V. - LITTER CONTROL 

Sec. 22-70. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the "DeKalb County Litter Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-71. - Purpose and objectives. 
The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this article are: 
(a)  To provide for uniform prohibition of littering on public or private property throughout unincorporated DeKalb County; and, 
(b)  To prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter; and, 
(c)  To preserve the value of the many unique natural resources in DeKalb County and enhance the beauty and quality of life enjoyed by the citizens of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-72. - Applicability. 
This article shall apply to all public and private property within unincorporated DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-73. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence and shall control. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-74. - Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a conveyance or any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or in any waters within DeKalb County unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the State of Georgia or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to leave or deposit litter on such property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed into an approved receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a conveyance to allow any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing litter out of any conveyance onto any public or private property or in any waters within DeKalb County unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the State of Georgia or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to leave or deposit litter on such property; or 
(2)  The litter is placed into an approved receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-75. - Litter control responsibilities. 
Owners must place all of their residential solid waste within durable plastic bags and securely tie the plastic bag prior to placing it in an approved receptacle for residential solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-76. - Vehicle loads causing litter; commercial front loader containers. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(b)  All commercial front loader containers must meet all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Containers must be steel, continuously welded and properly reinforced according to manufacturer's specifications; 
(2)  Lids must be constructed of durable plastic and reinforced for strength; 
(3)  The pickup side of the container shall be reinforced inside or outside at the point of torque tub contact; 
(4)  The inside reinforcement of the container shall be pressed steel angle; 
(5)  The bottoms of the containers shall be reinforced with a one-and-one-half-inch (1½") drain plug installed flush to the bottom; 
(6)  All containers shall be primed and finished with enamel and epoxy paint; 
(7)  Body dimensions as to length and height of container can vary with the size of container; however, all container widths shall be seventy (70) inches; and 
(8)  Minimum gauges of steel for such containers shall be as follows: 

 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-78. - Evidence. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Sec. 22-79. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by this article, upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon conviction of any violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon conviction, the court may order the convicted person to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter the convicted person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of the sentence. 
(d)  Upon conviction, the court may order the convicted person to pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of the sentence. 
(e)  Upon conviction, the court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this article in the legal organ of the county. 
(f)  All county law enforcement agencies and officers are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. Primary enforcement responsibilities for litter control are shared by the officers of the code enforcement division of the DeKalb County police department and officers/employees of the sanitation division of the public works department. The officers/employees of the sanitation division are responsible for enforcement on public property and along public right of ways and easements while the officers/employees of the code enforcement division are responsible for enforcement of this article on private property. 
(Ord. No. 04-11, Pt. I, 9-28-04) 
Chapter 22.5 - STORM SEWER SYSTEM 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22.5-1. - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the Stormwater Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Quality Management Code of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 1, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-2. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System to the maximum extent practicable as required by state and federal law. This chapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this chapter are to: 
(a)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by providing for regulation and management of the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, including public and private stormwater conveyances in DeKalb County's service area. 
(b)  Comply with Georgia EPD and Federal EPA stormwater regulations, as defined herein, developed pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. 
(c)  Control the contribution of pollutants to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and industrial activity. 
(d)  Prohibit illegal connections to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(e)  Control illicit discharges to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater. 
(f)  Control, through intergovernmental agreements, the contribution of pollutants from one municipality or county system to another. 
(g)  Provide for intergovernmental cooperation in management, monitoring and enforcement of the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program among DeKalb County and the municipal governments located within DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 1, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-3. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this chapter include the following: 
(1)  Protect, maintain, and enhance the short-term and long-term public health, safety, and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by providing for regulation and management of the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, including public and private stormwater conveyances in DeKalb County's service area. 
(2)  Comply with Georgia EPD and Federal EPA stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Federal Clean Water Act and the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. These requirements include: 
a.  Control of the contribution of pollutants to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and industrial activity; 
b.  Prohibition of illicit connections to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; 
c.  Control of discharge to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater; and 
d.  Control, through intergovernmental agreements, of the contribution of pollutants from one (1) municipal or county system to another. 
(3)  Provide for intergovernmental cooperation in management, monitoring and enforcement of the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program among DeKalb County and the municipal governments located within DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 1, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, unless specifically defined below, words or phrases shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most effective application. Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and words used in the plural shall include the singular. Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
(b)  Unless otherwise specified, or it is apparent from the context, definitions herein will be the same as those in other chapters of the DeKalb County Code. 
(c)  For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivatives, shall have the meaning given herein: 
(1)  Accidental discharge shall mean a discharge prohibited by this chapter into the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System which occurs by chance and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
(2)  Authorized representative shall mean: 
a.  If the discharger is a business, an owner, partner, corporate officer or highest ranking employee of the business employed at the facility from which the discharge or connection was made; 
b.  If the discharger is a federal, state or local government facility, a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or that person's designee. 
(3)  Best management practices or BMPs shall mean a wide range of stormwater management regulations, procedures, engineering designs, activities, prohibitions or practices which control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater. 
(4)  Board of commissioners shall mean the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners. 
(5)  Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. ), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(6)  Construction activity shall mean activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES General Construction Permits, including but not limited to construction projects resulting in land disturbance, cleaning and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
(7)  Cooling water shall mean water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus. 
(8)  DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System shall mean a storm water conveyance or system of stormwater conveyances that are all of the following; owned or maintained by the county; designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; is not a combined sewer; not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW); and not located within the boundaries of a city located within the county or owned or operated by any other government entity. 
(9)  DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program shall mean that program of activities and procedures for stormwater management as set forth in the application for the permit, as approved by the Georgia EPD, and any amendment or modification thereto. 
(10)  Department unless otherwise specified shall mean the public works department and its divisions which are responsible for stormwater management activities and implementation of the provisions of this chapter or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce this chapter or any portion thereof, or any authorized representative of such department. 
(11)  Director shall mean the director of public works or designee or, when a department other than the public works department is designated to enforce provisions of this chapter or any portion thereof, the director of such department or designee. 
(12)  Discharge shall mean the spill, draining, dumping, deposit, seeping, disposal, placement, release or loss of any material or substance to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(13)  Discharger shall mean any person that permits pollutants to enter the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer System. 
(14)  Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
(15)  Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, presently codified at 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(16)  Federal EPA or EPA shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(17)  Georgia EPD or EPD shall mean the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(18)  Georgia Water Quality Control Act or Water Quality Control Act shall mean the Georgia Quality Control Act, as amended, presently codified at O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(19)  Governing body shall mean the chief executive officer and board of commissioners of DeKalb County. 
(20)  Ground water shall mean water beneath the earth's surface between saturated soil and rock. 
(21)  Illegal connection shall mean either of the following: 
a.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a federal, state or local law enforcement agency; or 
b.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized local, state or federal enforcement agency. 
(22)  Illicit discharge shall mean any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, except as exempted in Article III of this chapter. 
(23)  Industrial activity shall mean activities subject to NPDES Industrial Permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. § 122.6(b)(14), as amended. 
(24)  Maintenance shall mean any action necessary to preserve stormwater conveyances in proper working condition, in order to serve the intended purposes set forth in this chapter or to prevent structural failure of such conveyances. 
(25)  National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water Discharge Permit shall mean a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under the authority delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342 (b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general area. 
(26)  Non-stormwater discharge shall mean any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
(27)  Permit shall mean the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit for Discharges from the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System issued by the Georgia EPD on or about June 15, 1994, or such subsequent permit or authorization for discharges from the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System to waters of the state. 
(28)  Person shall mean any and all persons, natural or artificial, and includes any individual, firm, corporation, government agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
(29)  Pollutant shall mean anything that causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, such that the same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and concrete and cement. 
(30)  Pollution or polluted shall mean the contamination or other alteration of any of water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including, but not limited to, change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters; or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render any waters contained therein or discharged into waters of the state harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or general welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
(31)  Premises shall mean any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
(32)  Private shall mean property or stormwater conveyances owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by city, county, state or federal governments. 
(33)  Procedure shall mean a procedure adopted by the department to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this chapter, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this chapter or other chapters of the DeKalb County Code, or other ordinances or resolutions of DeKalb County or other agencies. 
(34)  Regulation shall mean any regulation, rule, development standard, or other requirement prepared by the department and adopted by the governing body pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. 
(35)  Sanitary sewer system shall mean the complete sanitary sewer system of DeKalb County which discharges sanitary sewerage directly or indirectly into the sewage treatment plant, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
(36)  Site shall mean any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land. 
(37)  State waters shall mean any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the State of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
(38)  Stormwater shall mean any type of stormwater runoff, snow melt runoff, surface or subsurface runoff or drainage. 
(39)  Stormwater conveyance shall mean natural or constructed stormwater conduits, features, facilities or best management practices designed or used for the collection, conveyance or treatment of stormwater through open or closed drainage systems, including, but not limited to, pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, county streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, retention ponds, infiltration devices, oil/water separators, sediment basins, modular pavement or other such devices. 
(40)  Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity shall mean the discharge from any stormwater conveyance which is directly related to manufacturing, processing or raw materials storage areas at an industrial facility. The term includes, but is not limited to, stormwater discharges from industrial facility yards; immediate access roads and rails lines used or traveled by carriers of raw materials, manufactured products, waste materials or by-products used or created by the facility; material handling sites; refuse sites; sites used for the storage and maintenance of material handling equipment; sites used for application or disposal of process wastewater; sites used for residual treatment, storage, or disposal; shipping and receiving areas; manufacturing buildings; storage areas (including tank farms for raw materials, and intermediate and finished products) and areas where industrial activity has taken place in the past and significant materials remain and are exposed to stormwater. 
(41)  Stormwater management shall mean the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater in a manner to meet the objectives of this chapter and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
(42)  Stormwater runoff shall mean the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff or drainage or other concentrated flow that enters a stormwater conveyance during and following precipitation. 
(43)  Structural stormwater control shall mean a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
(44)  Unpolluted shall mean the absence of pollution. 
(45)  Water quality shall mean those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of water. 
(46)  Water quantity shall mean those characteristics of stormwater that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater, both surface and subsurface. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 1, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Secs. 22.5-5—22.5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS 

Sec. 22.5-11. - Scope of regulation. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply throughout unincorporated DeKalb County. In addition, DeKalb County may exercise such powers or authorities within the incorporated portion of DeKalb County as are set forth in the interjurisdictional agreements with the governing bodies of such cities. 
(b)  The director, acting through the department, shall be responsible for the coordination and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  The director, acting through the department, shall be responsible for the conservation, management, maintenance (where applicable), extension and improvement of the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, including activities necessary to control stormwater discharges, and activities necessary to carry out stormwater management programs included in the permit. 
(d)  The provisions of this chapter shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers or authority granted by federal, state or local law or ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 2, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-12. - Powers of the department. 
(a)  The department shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this chapter, including the right to maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this chapter, or to seek recovery of damages, fees or costs. 
(b)  The department can: 
(1)  Administer, coordinate and oversee conservation, acquisition, extension, improvement, design, construction, management, operation and maintenance of the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; 
(2)  Establish or oversee establishment of regulations for control, management, and enhancement of the quality or quantity of stormwater, subject to approval by the governing body, and establish procedures and guidelines to implement such regulations; 
(3)  Determine the manner in which stormwater conveyances should be operated; 
(4)  Inspect and enforce private stormwater conveyances which discharge to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; 
(5)  Advise the governing body and other DeKalb County departments or agencies on issues related to stormwater; 
(6)  Protect the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System and stormwater conveyances and properties owned or maintained by DeKalb County and prescribe how they are used by others; 
(7)  Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater discharges to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System to comply with the terms of this chapter, including regulations and procedures adopted pursuant thereto, with respect to the installation of stormwater conveyances or best management practices; 
(8)  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; 
(9)  Develop, adopt and implement the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program; and 
(10)  Comply with federal and state regulations and permits concerning the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 2, 6-27-95) 
Secs. 22.5-13—22.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATED STORMWATER DISCHARGES 

Sec. 22.5-21. - Discharges to be permitted. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge to any component of the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-22. - Regulation of quantity of stormwater discharges. 
Regulation of the quantity of stormwater discharges to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System is required as set forth in sections 14-38 and 14-40 of the DeKalb County Land Development Code, and other applicable county ordinances and code provisions. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-23. - Prohibited and illicit discharges. 
It is unlawful for any person to discharge to any component of the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System or to cause, permit or suffer to be discharged into such system any matter of any nature that is not composed entirely of stormwater, or such unpolluted water as exempted in accordance with the provisions of section 22.5-26, and such discharge shall be deemed an illicit discharge and constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-24. - Prohibited and illegal connections. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to connect a stormwater conveyance of any type that discharges any matter of any nature that is not composed entirely of stormwater or such unpolluted water as exempted in accordance with the provisions of section 22.5-26 of this chapter. Such connection shall be deemed an illegal connection and constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Illegal connections must be disconnected and redirected immediately, as necessary and appropriate, to the sanitary sewer system upon approval by the director. Any such redirection to the sanitary sewer system must be in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Code, state and federal law and regulations. 
(c)  The prohibition against illegal connections expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(d)  Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in the county's development department plans or maps, and which is illegally connected to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, shall be relocated immediately by the owner or occupant of that property upon receipt of written notice of violation from the director requiring that such relocation be completed. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-25. - Stormwater discharges associated with industrial or construction activity. 
(a)  Discharges of stormwater associated with industrial or construction activities, as identified in applicable federal regulations, must comply with the permit requirements of the NPDES program for stormwater discharges. Specific dischargers of stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity are responsible for submitting a permit application to the Georgia EPD. 
(b)  A copy of the permit application shall be submitted to the director. 
(c)  Discharges of stormwater associated with industrial or construction activity must comply with all provisions of this chapter for any discharges which are made to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-26. - Exemptions from prohibition on illicit discharges and illegal connections. 
(a)  The following categories of discharges and connections are exempt from the prohibitions set forth in sections 22.5-23 and 22.5-24, unless the director determines that the following discharge or connection is a significant source of pollution: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed or approved by the director and other unpolluted discharges from potable water sources; 
(2)  Unpolluted landscape irrigation and lawn watering; 
(3)  Unpolluted irrigation water; 
(4)  Unpolluted diverted stream flows; 
(5)  Unpolluted rising or pumped ground water; 
(6)  Unpolluted infiltration to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System; 
(7)  Unpolluted water from foundation and footing drains, crawl space pumps, and air conditioning condensation; 
(8)  Unpolluted springs; 
(9)  Individual residential car washing where biodegradable soap is used; 
(10)  Unpolluted flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
(11)  Unpolluted dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 
(12)  Flows from fire fighting; or 
(13)  Other unpolluted water. 
(b)  In the event that the director determines a discharge or connection to constitute a significant source of pollution, then the director shall notify the discharger that the discharge or connection is prohibited by the terms of this chapter, and the discharger shall be required to immediately cease the illicit discharge or disconnect the illegal connection. 
(c)  The discharger, after notice, shall immediately cease the illicit discharge or disconnect the illegal connection and bring any discharge or connection to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System into compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the State and the EPA, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations. Discharger must supply director with a copy of the NPDES permit or order. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-27. - Appeal of denial of exemption. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the determination of the director that a discharge or connection, otherwise exempted under the provisions of section 22.5-26, is a significant source of pollution may file a notice of appeal of such determination to the technical board of appeals. The notice of appeal must be in writing and received within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the notice of the determination from the director that such discharge or connection constitutes a source of pollution. The notice of appeal must set forth the reasons that the person believes that the determination of the director should be rescinded. 
(b)  If the director's decision results in a revocation or denial of an exemption authorized by this chapter, the discharger may request, and shall be allowed, to meet with the director within fifteen (15) business days after the initial issuance of such order or decision. At such meeting the discharger shall be allowed to present any evidence or testimony to the director that the discharger deems appropriate. If such a meeting is not requested or the director does not alter the decision to revoke or deny the exemption, then the director's decision becomes final. During the pendency of any subsequent appeal to the board of technical appeals, the notice of appeal shall not stay enforcement of the director's decision and the discharger may not take any action, perform any act or occupy any structure that contradicts the director's revocation or denial decision in this regard. 
(c)  An appeal shall be sustained only upon the express written finding by the technical board of appeals that the director's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that the director acted in an arbitrary manner. In exercising its powers, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and to that end shall have all the powers of the director from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of an exemption provided all requirements imposed by all applicable laws are met. The board may also remand any appeal for the receipt of additional information. 
(d)  The fact that a person has appealed the determination of the director shall not delay or otherwise hinder any notice of violation, citation or other enforcement action or proceeding brought by the director to enforce the provisions of this chapter after notice of the determination. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-28. - Reporting, remediation and corrective action requirement. 
(a)  In the event of an illicit discharge or illegal connection to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, the discharger shall inform the director, within twenty-four (24) hours, of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the illicit discharge or illegal connection. The initial report may be oral but the discharger shall provide a subsequent written report to the director, describing the exact location, nature and events of the illicit discharge or illegal connection, as well as describing any detailed corrective procedures which have been taken or scheduled to prevent recurrence of the illicit discharge or illegal connection. This written report shall be submitted to the director within three (3) business days after the initial report. The failure to report an illicit discharge or illegal connection as required by this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The discharger shall take immediate action to remediate, correct, contain, treat, and minimize the effects of the illicit discharge or illegal connection to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System and state waters and to ensure no recurrence of the illicit discharge or illegal connection, including corrective and preventive procedures, and implementation of best management practices, where necessary to prevent recurrence. The failure to remediate the effects of an illicit discharge or illegal connection as required by this section shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 3, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Secs. 22.5-29—22.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MAINTENANCE 

Sec. 22.5-41. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All stormwater conveyances shall be privately owned and maintained, unless accepted for public ownership and maintenance by the county. 
(b)  The county may require dedication of privately owned stormwater conveyances which discharge to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(c)  Owners of stormwater conveyances that discharge to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System shall maintain a perpetual non-exclusive casement that allows for monitoring, inspection and emergency maintenance by DeKalb County. 
(d)  Where stormwater conveyances are accepted by the county for maintenance, public access easements shall be provided by the property owner to the county and recorded in the real property records of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 4, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Secs. 22.5-42—22.5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION 

Sec. 22.5-51. - Investigation. 
The department shall have authority to investigate any apparent violation of any provision of this chapter and to take any action authorized by this chapter which it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 5, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-52. - Inspection and right of entry. 
(a)  The department may inspect any stormwater conveyance within or outside of an existing drainage easement. 
(b)  The department, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at reasonable times to inspect or investigate conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter, the investigation of any apparent violation of any provision of this chapter, compliance with the terms of the permit, observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program or compliance with the permit, and periodic investigations in accordance with provisions of this chapter. The department shall notify the owner of said property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(c)  The department, bearing proper credentials and identification, and in accordance with state and federal law, shall be permitted to enter private or public property at reasonable times for repairs, maintenance and other similar purposes related to any portion of the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. The department shall notify the owner of said property or the representative on-site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(d)  The department, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this chapter, compliance with the terms of the permit, or observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program or the permit, and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the recorder's court when the issuing judge is satisfied that the department has established by oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. 
(2)  An inspection warrant will be validly issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
a.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or occupant of the property or discharger can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the code provisions sought to be enforced. 
e.  Measurements, samples, tests and analyses performed by DeKalb County or required of any discharger to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System shall be in accordance with 40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 136, unless another method is approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 5, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-53. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  If, after inspection, the condition of a stormwater conveyance presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, DeKalb County shall have the right to take action as may be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and make the stormwater conveyance safe. 
(b)  The department may conduct emergency maintenance or remediation operations on private property and on private stormwater conveyances. Emergency maintenance or remediation operations shall constitute actions to remedy conditions that in the opinion of the director create a condition potentially injurious to life, property or the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(c)  Emergency maintenance conducted on any stormwater conveyance shall not be construed as constituting a continuing maintenance obligation on the part of DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 5, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-54. - Authority to require person to cooperate with department. 
Whenever required to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to obtaining information regarding permit compliance, implementing the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program, or determining whether any person is in violation of any provision of this chapter, the director may in writing require a discharger to the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System to: 
(1)  Establish and maintain records; 
(2)  Make reports; 
(3)  Install, use, and maintain monitoring equipment or methods, including where appropriate, biological monitoring methods; 
(4)  Sample such discharges, in accordance with such methods, at such locations, at such intervals, and in such manner as the director shall prescribe; and 
(5)  Provide such other information as he or she may reasonably require. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 5, 6-27-95) 
Secs. 22.5-55—22.5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22.5-61. - Notice of violation and summons. 
(a)  Whenever the department determines that a violation of this chapter or regulations and procedures adopted thereto has occurred, the department shall serve upon the discharger a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this chapter which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the department, a summons shall be issued for the discharger to appear in recorder's court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the department may issue a summons to appear in recorder's court without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the director, the illicit discharge or illicit connection was not an accidental discharge or if the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(c)  If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the department shall issue a summons' to the discharger to appear in recorder's court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this chapter which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the discharger is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(d)  Nothing in this Code section shall limit the authority of the department to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 6, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-62. - Submission of a corrective plan. 
(a)  Within ten (10) business days of conviction by recorder's court or resolution of any appeal, the discharger shall submit to the director a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation, including corrective and preventive procedures, and implementation of best management practices, where necessary to prevent recurrence. 
(b)  Submission of this plan in no way relieves the discharger of liability for any violations occurring after conviction of the violation. The failure to submit this plan as required by this Code section shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 6, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-63. - Cease and desist order. 
When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter or that the discharger's past violations are likely to recur; the director may issue an order to the discharger directing the discharger to cease and desist all such violations and to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with the provisions of this chapter; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation and to prevent recurrence of the violation. 
(3)  Each day of violation of a cease and desist order, after notice thereof, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 6, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-64. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any discharger who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and, upon conviction in recorder's court, shall be subject to a fine or imprisonment in the county jail or both. Violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or one hundred twenty (120) days imprisonment in the county jail or both per violation for each day of violation. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent DeKalb County from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 6, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Sec. 22.5-65. - Injunctive proceedings. 
(a)  The director may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this chapter or to correct violations of this chapter. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief which restrains the violation or compels the requirements imposed by this chapter on activities of the discharger. The director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a discharger. 
(b)  The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, environmental impacts assessments, geotechnical work, and the costs of any actual damages incurred by the county, including, but not limited to, costs of containment and cleanup. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 6, 6-27-95) 
Sec. 22.5-66. - Civil damages and violations. 
(a)  If a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, the county may file a civil damage action against the discharger, through the county attorney, seeking such damages, fees and costs as are permitted by law. 
(b)  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided herein, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to public health, safety, welfare, and environment and is declared and deemed a nuisance, the violation may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief as provided by law. 
(c)  The remedies listed in this chapter are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and DeKalb County may pursue cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 6, 6-27-95; Ord. No. 04-12, Pt. I, 11-9-04) 
Secs. 22.5-67—22.5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COOPERATION WITH OTHER GOVERNMENTS 

Sec. 22.5-71. - Cooperation with other governments. 
DeKalb County may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purposes of this chapter, comply with the provisions of the permit, and to implement the DeKalb County Stormwater Management Program. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, agreements regarding enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes cooperative stormwater management programs and cooperative monitoring, maintenance, enforcement and management of municipal separate storm sewer systems, or other action may be needed to control the contribution of pollutants and between any municipal system and the DeKalb County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System. 
(Ord. No. 95-09, § 7, 6-27-95) 
Chapter 23 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Historic presevation, Ch. 13.5; selling or soliciting on public rights-of-way, § 16-3; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 17; visual obstructions to right-of-way, § 17-6; required streets in subdivisions, §§ 14-181 et seq., 14-376 et seq.; vehicles for hire, § 15-375 et seq.; local laws relating to streets and sidewalks, App. B, § 1401 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of power to provide for street and road construction and maintenance, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4); roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; county road system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1. - Procedures for changing street names. 
(a)  An application requesting a street name change shall be submitted to the planning department and contain the following: 
(1)  A written petition bearing signatures of a minimum of fifty-one (51) percent of the property owners fronting the street. The property owners signing shall also constitute a minimum of fifty-one (51) percent of the linear street frontage. Linear street frontage shall include frontage of properties that abut both sides of the street right-of-way. 
(2)  Existing and proposed street names. 
(3)  Reason for requesting change. 
(4)  Map showing street or portion of street affected by change. 
(5)  A filing fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(b)  The application shall be processed and scheduled for public hearing as follows: 
(1)  The proposed name shall be checked by the county to ensure nonduplication. 
(2)  Public hearings before the planning commission and the board of commissioners may coincide with the schedule for rezoning cases adopted annually by the board. 
(3)  The county shall notify, by regular mail, all owners of record who have property fronting on the affected street, according to tax records available to the department, of the time and place of the public hearings. The postmaster shall also be notified of the hearings by regular mail. 
(4)  Legal notice of the application and the date, time and place of the public hearings shall be published in the official legal organ of the county at least ten (10) days prior to the first public hearing. 
(5)  The application shall be forwarded with the planning department's recommendation to the planning commission for consideration at the scheduled public hearing and then forwarded to the board with the recommendations of the planning department and the planning commission. 
(6)  The final decision on the proposed change shall be made by the board after having held the scheduled public hearing. 
(7)  Petitioners shall bear all costs necessary for street marker changes as determined by the county. 
(c)  Applications affecting the same street or portion thereof shall not be submitted more than once every twenty-four (24) months. 
(d)  Requests initiated by any department or agency of the county shall be submitted to the planning department. Review and processing procedures shall be the same as that of a property owner's application except that the fee and a property owner's petition shall not be required in requests of this nature. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1116; Ord. No. 23-02, Pt. I, 5-28-02) 
Sec. 23-2. - Construction work on major streets, intersections; time restrictions. 
No construction work or maintenance work shall be done within the traffic lanes of major through streets or intersections thereof from the hours of 7:00 to 9:00 a.m., and 4:00 to 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. All underground construction work shall be paved or covered with steel plates during such rush hours or at other times when construction is not being accomplished. A list of the streets is included in section 17-351. This section does not apply to emergency repairs. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3021) 
Sec. 23-3. - Street lighting standards—Adoption. 
(a)  To ensure adequate illumination of the public rights-of-way for the promotion of safety and security for the users of these rights-of-way and adjacent properties, the American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illuminating Engineering Society, 1981 edition, as approved by the American National Standards Institute, is adopted as the standard (except as noted in subsection (b) below) for the installation and operation of public right-of-way lighting in the unincorporated area of the county. Permanent copies of the standard are on file with the clerk of the board of commissioners and the traffic engineer. 
(b)  Lighting fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way to be operated for the purpose of street illumination shall comply with these standards. The minimum average horizontal footcandle illumination level by roadway classification shall be: 

 
The uniformity of illumination shall be such that the point of lowest illumination shall have at least one-third of the average horizontal footcandle required illumination level, except that on local or residential streets it may be not less than one-sixth of the average. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3022) 
Sec. 23-4. - Same—Compliance. 
(a)  Any party requesting permission to install or operate lighting fixtures within public rights-of-way shall furnish plans and specifications to the public works department for approval showing how the proposed lighting meets the standards, and no lighting shall be installed or operated without this approval. Should the department disapprove the request to install or operate lighting fixtures within any right-of-way, the same shall be communicated in writing to the party requesting approval. The written communication shall include the specific reasons for disapproval. Any disapproval of a light or lighting system by the department may be appealed to the board of commissioners. If any party desires to appeal an adverse decision by the department, a notice of appeal shall be filed with the department within thirty (30) days from the date following the written notice of disapproval, and it shall be the responsibility of the department to transmit forthwith to the board of commissioners all papers and allied documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken and to ensure that the appeal is promptly placed upon the agenda of the board for its determination. The board of commissioners may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from. 
(b)  Roadway or street lighting luminaires or fixtures installed within the public rights-of-way as security lights, or for the purpose of lighting areas other than the public streets, shall be mounted on the side of the pole opposite from the street and shall be oriented in such a manner to ensure that the lateral light distribution pattern is parallel to the street, and that the vertical light distribution, at the initial light source, is perpendicular to the street, so as to protect the users of the street from objectionable glare. The approval of the county shall be obtained before installation of these lights. 
(c)  Other lighting fixtures to be installed within or outside of public rights-of-way for whatever purpose shall be installed and operated in such a manner to prevent glare from being a hazard to or interfering with the normal use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3023) 
Sec. 23-5. - Public transportation carrier transit bus stop shelters. 
Bus stop shelters may be erected on private property, public streets, public property, or public rights-of-way by a public transportation carrier or as authorized by a public transportation carrier, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Plans and specifications for the proposed installations shall be submitted and approved by the county in accordance with county requirements. 
(2)  Bus stop shelters may be erected at any bus stop utilized by a public transportation carrier. 
(3)  The owner or constructor of the bus stop shelter shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure. 
(4)  A bus stop shelter may be erected only at bus stops identified by a public transportation carrier providing service to that location. The public transportation carrier may contract with appropriate subcontractors to provide and maintain bus stop shelters at various locations. 
(5)  Bus stop shelters may carry advertising placed upon them, subject to the following rules or regulations: 
a.  Such advertising matter must be attached to the shelter and not extend out beyond the parameters of the shelter; 
b.  Bus stop shelters carrying advertising matter must be constructed so as not to obstruct vision triangles at intersecting driveways and rights-of-way; 
c.  Advertising shall not violate ordinances or state law obscenity provisions; 
d.  Advertising shall not contain flashing lights or lights that would interfere with motorists on the roadway. 
e.  Comply with all county, state and federal regulations. 
(6)  A bus stop shelter must conform to the reasonable rules and regulations established under this section, including the following: 
a.  Bus stop shelters should be at least forty-eight (48) inches from the curb, where no curb or gutter is present the front of the bus shelter shall be at least ten (10) feet from the edge of the main traveled roadway; 
b.  Bus stop shelters shall permit a clearance of at least forty-eight (48) inches on pedestrian paths, driveways, sidewalks, drainage structures, etc.; 
c.  Sides and/or internal dividers in shelters shall be constructed to provide visibility of waiting passengers to the oncoming traffic flow on the road, highway or street on which the shelter is located, provided, however, one double-faced panel containing advertising may be attached to the end of the shelter farthest from the traffic flow on the side of the street on which the shelter is located; 
d.  Each bus stop shelter shall be properly lighted to ensure public safety and provide complete visibility of the shelter from the abutting roadway. 
e.  Comply with all county, state and federal regulations. 
(7)  On application by a public transportation carrier or a contractor authorized by a public transportation carrier to provide bus stop shelters to a public transportation carrier, a permit shall be issued to build a shelter and allow advertising thereon unless there is adequate reason for denying the permit. 
(8)  Any public transportation carrier which provides more than one (1) bus stop shelter shall make application for a permit to cover each of its various locations. 
(9)  An application for a building permit for construction of a bus shelter shall be submitted and accompanied by the following: 
a.  Authorization and approval of the public transportation carrier and the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
b.  Plans and specifications for the proposed installation. 
c.  If a bus shelter is to be erected or maintained on property other than the right-of-way of a public road or street, an authorization of the owner of the property. 
(10)  The public transportation carrier shall remove the shelter upon the request of the county upon the county showing that such shelter poses a traffic hazard, impediment to pedestrian traffic or other reasonable cause. 
(11)  Notwithstanding any other ordinance or part of ordinance prohibited the construction of bus stop shelters or commercial advertising on public rights-of-way, a bus stop shelter complying with the provisions of this section may be constructed on public rights-of-way and have commercial advertising placed thereon and the provisions of this section shall control such construction and advertisement. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3024; Ord. No. 92-29, § 1, 10-13-92) 
Sec. 23-6. - Permit, franchise fee required prior to installation of poles, pipes, etc., on public roads or alleys. 
(a)  No person shall install, construct, maintain or cause to be installed, constructed or maintained any pipe, main, conduit, cable, wire, pole, tower, traffic or other signal and other equipment, facilities, appliance, receptacle or sign, in, on, along, over or under the public roads or alleys of the county which are a part of the county road system lying outside the corporate limits of a municipality without first obtaining a permit therefor and paying franchise fees hereafter provided; provided, however, that such franchise fees shall not be in excess of those paid by such persons to municipalities lying wholly or partially in the county for the purposes permitted herein or as may be authorized by any federal regulatory agency where applicable. 
(b)  There is assessed a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, for the use of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers and public rights-of-way. 
(c)  For each sign and each receptacle on the public right-of-way, excepting those used in connection with the collection and delivery of the United States mail, there is assessed a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3025) 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 21; removal of signs from public right-of-way, § 17-41. 
Sec. 23-7. - Defacing streets, sidewalks or curbs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to mark or otherwise deface any public sidewalk, street, or curb in the county by painting any numbers, symbols, or advertising thereon, regardless of the purpose. This section does not apply to public utilities and their agents, Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority, and other governmental agencies. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1004; Ord. No. 88-16a, § 1, 11-22-88; Ord. No. 89-11, § 1, 3-28-89) 
Secs. 23-8—23-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 23-26. - Definition. 
In this article, "excavation" means the removal of earth, rock or other soil materials for the purpose of installing utility facilities, non-single-family residential building foundations, or other similar uses. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3041) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 23-27. - Applicability. 
This article applies to all excavations made for the purposes of land development, utility installations, building construction or similar activity within the unincorporated area of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3042) 
Sec. 23-28. - Federal regulations—Adopted. 
Any person making an excavation shall meet the requirements as set forth in the federal occupational safety and health regulations for construction, as adopted April 17, 1971, and each amendment thereafter, with the exceptions and amendments included in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3043) 
Sec. 23-29. - Same—Amendments and exceptions. 
The following amendments and exceptions shall apply to the development requirements adopted by section 23-28. 
(1)  Excavations involved in the construction of a basement or foundation for a single-family residential structure are exempt from all of these requirements, with the exception that any excavation or foundation grading on which construction does not proceed within thirty (30) days shall be fenced, so as to prevent general public entrance to the building site, or filled in. However, an extension may be allowed if justified and if approved by application to the county. 
(2)  The administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article shall be the responsibility of the department having applicable jurisdiction over the type of work involved. 
(3)  Table P-2, the line reading "ten (10) to fifteen (15) feet, likely to crack" and the column "Maximum Spacing, Vertical Feet," shall contain the number "4." 
(Code 1976, § 5-3044) 
Secs. 23-30—23-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING BUILDINGS AND OTHER OVERSIZE LOADS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 23-46. - Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish uniform permitting regulations and procedures for the moving of houses and other oversize loads on county roads, streets and bridges within the unincorporated area of the county, thereby protecting private property and lives against loss and damage, protecting the public investment in rights-of-way, roadbeds, traffic signs and signalizations and other structures, controlling and regulating the flow of traffic and ensuring the safety of the public. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3061) 
Sec. 23-47. - Variances. 
The public works department shall be authorized to grant a variance from the requirements of this article, but only where, by reason of the exceptional historical, architectural or social uniqueness or significance of the structure, the strict application of the provisions of this article would work an undue hardship upon the owner of the structure, and provided that the grant of any variance shall not substantially impair the intent and purpose of this article and further provided that the provisions of this article shall be complied with to the maximum extent possible. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3069) 
Secs. 23-48—23-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 23-61. - Required. 
No person shall move a house or other oversize load on any county road, street or bridge within the unincorporated area without a permit to do so issued by the public works department. 
Sec. 23-62. - Application. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a permit under the provisions of this article shall make application on the form prescribed by the county. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Name, address and phone number of the mover/applicant. 
(2)  Name, address and phone number of the owner of the structure. 
(3)  Address of the present location of the structure. 
(4)  Destination of the structure. 
(5)  Name and address of insurance company. 
(6)  Total height, outside width and length of vehicle and load. 
(7)  Certification that the person making application on behalf of the mover has lawful authority to execute such application and that all requirements under this section, sections 23-63 and 23-64 have been met. 
(8)  The proposed date and time of the move. 
(9)  A statement that the mover/applicant agrees to hold the county harmless from all claims or causes of action arising out of any damage to a public road or bridge, to persons, to public or private property caused by a permitted load or vehicle, or its private escort vehicle, and to recompense the county for any expenditures made by the county to repair such damages caused by the permitted vehicle or load. 
(c)  As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the county, when deemed necessary in the interest of public safety, may require the use of a front or rear escort, or both, either or both of which may be a public safety vehicle. 
(d)  All permit applications must be filed at least five (5) days prior to the date of the proposed move and shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. If the application is not approved, the fee will be refunded to the applicant, less an administrative processing charge in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3062) 
Sec. 23-63. - Scope limited. 
(a)  Except as authorized under section 23-47, a permit under this division shall not authorize the operation of a vehicle or load with: 
(1)  Total load length exceeding seventy-five (75) feet; 
(2)  Total load width exceeding fourteen (14) feet, including mirrors and accessories attached thereto; or 
(3)  Total height exceeding thirteen (13) feet, six (6) inches. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, no vehicle or load shall be operated over any bridge with a posted limit which is less than the total gross weight of the vehicle and its load or less than the total gross weight permitted under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3063) 
Sec. 23-64. - Conditions to issuance. 
In addition to compliance with other conditions imposed under the provisions of this division, any person receiving a permit under this division thereby certifies that such person will comply or has complied (as applicable herein) with the following conditions governing the operation of the permitted vehicle or load: 
(1)  Federal and state laws and regulations. 
(2)  The movement of the permitted vehicle or load will take place only on Monday through Thursday, and between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. 
(3)  The permitted load or vehicle will not be operated over any county road other than those described or allowed in the permit. 
(4)  The operator of a permitted vehicle and load shall maintain fifty-foot intervals between each vehicle load. In addition, when the normal flow of traffic becomes impeded, such vehicle or load shall move off the traveled portion of the public road until such traffic congestion has been cleared. Normal movement may then be resumed until another traffic congestion occurs. 
(5)  The permittee shall maintain, during the existence of the permit, public liability and property damage insurance in at least the following amounts: public liability, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) each accident; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each person injured; total property damage, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00); provided that nothing herein shall prevent the county from requiring any additional undertaking or security as may be deemed necessary to compensate the county for any injury to any public property therein, including a bridge. Proof of such liability insurance and other security shall accompany the permit application. 
(6)  The permittee shall ensure that the operator of a leased vehicle carries on such operator's person written proof of the identity of the lessee. 
(7)  The permittee shall not allow the permit to be used other than for the movement by the particular vehicle for which the permit was issued. 
(8)  The minimum equipment which shall be used for moving a house is: a tandem truck, one (1) set of tandem dollies in good condition, and one (1) extra skidder or wrecker in good condition and capable of moving the whole load in case of a breakdown. 
(9)  The permittee shall measure the house and, prior to applying for a permit, check the route stated in the permit application to ensure obstacle clearance and necessary places periodically to pull off the road for the purpose of preventing unnecessary traffic congestion. 
(10)  Before moving a house, all masonry shall be removed from a masonry-veneered house. 
(11)  All mailboxes, highway signs and other movable obstacles to the move of the house shall be removed as the house approaches such an obstacle and reerected immediately after the house passes such obstacle in equal or better condition than prior to removal. 
(12)  The movement shall be confined to the route stated in the application, and in no case shall exceed any straight line distance of fifty (50) miles. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3064) 
Sec. 23-65. - Route approval. 
Prior to the issuance of a moving permit under this division, the transport route proposed by the mover/applicant must be reviewed and approved by the public works department and police department. Unless no other reasonable alternative route exists, only those sections of county roads designated as truck routes by the county shall be used for the moving of such structures. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3065; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Cross reference— Truck routes, § 17-361. 
Sec. 23-66. - Revocation, suspension or denial. 
(a)  The traffic engineer shall be authorized to deny, suspend or revoke a permit under this division requested by an applicant or issued to a permittee. Permits may be denied, suspended or revoked for cause including, but not limited to, any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Repeated past violations by the applicant or permittee, of a relatively minor nature. 
(3)  A single, but aggravated violation. 
(4)  A material misrepresentation made by the applicant for a permit. 
(5)  Any other facts indicating that the applicant or permittee is a poor risk with regard to the safety of the traveling public and/or damage to public property. 
(b)  The county shall provide the applicant or permittee written notice of the decision to deny, revoke or suspend the application or permit. Such notice shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for such action and shall include notice of the right to appeal under the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3066) 
Sec. 23-67. - Appeals. 
An applicant or permittee under this division shall be entitled to appeal a decision of the traffic engineer or designee denying, suspending or revoking a permit, to the roads and drainage director, by filing a notice of appeal with the public works department within ten (10) days of the decision appealed from. The department shall schedule a hearing on the appeal to be held within thirty (30) days of the date the appeal is filed and shall provide the appellant notice of the date of such hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 5-3067) 
Secs. 23-68—23-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENCROACHMENT PERMITS FOR ACTIVITIES ON COUNTY ROADS, RIGHTS-OF-WAY, AND PERMANENT EASEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 12-16, Pt. I, adopted Oct. 23, 2012 , repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 23-86—23-88, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 12-03, Pt. I, adopted Feb. 28, 2012. 

Sec. 23-86. - Purpose; scope; exemption. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Establish a uniform permitting and inspection process, and reasonable regulations for encroachment permits for the installation, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal, or relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over, or under the public roads, rights-of-way, and permanent easements that are a part of the county road system lying outside the corporate limits of a municipality, hereinafter collectively referred to as "the county's public roads;" 
(2)  Establish a uniform permitting and inspection process, and reasonable regulations for encroachment permits for the construction, maintenance, relocation, or removal of driveways, sidewalks, curbing, bike lanes, multi-use trails, associated drainage facilities, and landscaping in, on, along, over, or under the county's public roads; 
(3)  Efficiently manage use of the county's public roads and maintain and preserve the physical integrity and layout of the county's public roads; 
(4)  Ensure that work is planned and performed in a manner that does not cause damage and does not create hazardous conditions in, on, along, over, or under the county's public roads; 
(5)  Inspect and monitor work to ensure that appropriate signage, barricades, and lighting are utilized to protect the public when work is in progress on the county's public roads; 
(6)  Inspect and monitor work so that it is performed in a safe manner that reduces the risk of injury to persons using the county's public roads; 
(7)  Inspect and monitor work to reduce damage to private property, including but not limited to cars, motorcycles, and bicycles traveling on the county's public roads; 
(8)  Inspect and monitor work to reduce damage to water and sewer lines, sidewalks, rights-of-way, or road surfaces; 
(9)  Regulate the time and location of excavation and other work to preserve effective traffic flow and prevent hazardous road conditions; and 
(10)  Recover a share of the cost of processing permits, inspecting and monitoring permitted work, and tracking repairs and paving made necessary due to repeated excavation associated with permitted activity. 
(b)  If there is a conflict between the provisions and requirements in this article, and federal law, state law, and/or any applicable state regulations adopted by the Georgia Department of Transportation ("GDOT"), as they exist now or may be amended hereafter, then federal law, state law, and/or the GDOT regulations shall govern. 
( Ord. No. 12-16, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 23-87. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform the work listed in subsections (1) and (2) below without the prior issuance of an encroachment permit by the director of public works: 
(1)  Installation, construction, maintenance, renewal, removal, or relocation of pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, facilities, or appliances of any utility in, on, along, over, or under the county's public roads. 
(2)  Construction, maintenance, relocation, or removal of driveways, sidewalks, curbing, bike lanes, multi-use trails, associated drainage facilities, and landscaping in, on, along, over, or under the county's public roads. 
(b)  The director of public works shall develop the documentation and information required for an encroachment permit application; develop written criteria for granting, denying or revoking encroachment permits; develop guidelines listing the information required to be submitted on or with plans and specifications; promulgate all guidelines and necessary forms; and take such other administrative steps as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The director of public works may attach reasonable conditions to the issuance of an encroachment permit for the purpose of maintaining the free flow of road traffic, protecting public safety, and preventing an applicant/permittee from jeopardizing the county's public roads' structure or the maintenance thereof. 
(d)  All information and plans required to be submitted by an applicant and the written criteria for evaluating permits shall relate solely to managing the use of the county's public roads, and shall be designed solely to obtain information that furthers the stated purposes of this article as reflected in section 23-86. 
(e)  The application for an encroachment permit may require the applicant to describe the nature, extent, and location of the work, and may also require the applicant to furnish a maintenance bond or performance bond or other acceptable security to pay for any damages to any part of the county's public roads or to any member of the public caused by work performed under authority of such permit. 
(f)  The governing authority may require each applicant to pay cost recoupment fees in an amount established by official action of the governing authority. 
(g)  Each encroachment permit shall expire if the work covered by the permit is not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance by the county as reflected on the permit. 
(h)  Any encroachment permit may be denied or revoked by the director of public works for a violation of written criteria or guidelines established pursuant to this article, a violation of any condition attached to an encroachment permit, or for work otherwise in violation of the Code. The decision to deny or revoke an encroachment permit shall become effective fourteen (14) days after the date written notice is mailed to the applicant at the address on the encroachment permit application. The applicant/permittee may contest the denial or revocation by sending written reasons to the DeKalb County Executive Assistant explaining why an encroachment permit should not be denied or revoked prior to the effective date of denial or revocation. The executive assistant shall consider the written reasons and advise the applicant/permittee of his/her decision in writing within five (5) business days of receipt of the applicant/permittee's written reasons. The executive assistant's decision in this regard is final. If the applicant/permittee contests the decision to deny or revoke an encroachment permit, the effective date of such denial or revocation shall be three (3) days after the date of the executive assistant's final decision. 
( Ord. No. 12-16, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 23-88. - Plans, specifications and responsibility. 
(a)  Plans and specifications for all work to be covered by an encroachment permit shall be submitted to the public works director, and shall show in detail all required pertinent data and features of construction. 
(b)  Ground-mounted facilities shall be of a design compatible with abutting property. 
(c)  All work covered by an encroachment permit shall meet and comply with all applicable county, state and federal laws, regulations, requirements and permits, including but not limited the Code, the GDOT Standard Specifications For Construction of Roads and Bridges, the GDOT Policy For Accommodation of Utilities, the National Electrical Safety Code, the American National Standards Institute Standard Code For Pressure Piping, the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Manual, and the Georgia Sedimentation and Erosion Control Act. 
(d)  Permittees shall be solely and fully responsible for any claims, actions, damages or injury related in any way to the design and construction of permitted work. 
(e)  Permittees shall be solely responsible for providing adequate safety measures during all phases of permitted work. 
( Ord. No. 12-16, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
Sec. 23-89. - Penalties. 
Violations of this article shall be handled in accordance with section 1-10 of the Code. 
( Ord. No. 12-16, Pt. I, 10-23-12 ) 
ARTICLE V. - SIDEWALK DISTRICTS 

Sec. 23-90. - Program established. 
There is established a residential sidewalk district program whereby eligible residential areas may petition the county to install sidewalks within their neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 31-03, Pt. I, 11-25-03) 
Sec. 23-91. - Sidewalk district requirements. 
(a)  A sidewalk district can only be established in residentially zoned districts where the streets or roads within the proposed sidewalk district have been accepted by the county for perpetual maintenance. 
(b)  Sidewalk construction must begin and end at existing sidewalks or public road intersections, or immediately across from public road intersections, but may extend past a public road intersection to complete the frontage adjoining the proposed sidewalk construction. 
(Ord. No. 31-03, Pt. I, 11-25-03) 
Sec. 23-92. - Application and petition. 
(a)  Application. Anyone who desires to have a sidewalk district created shall submit an application to the director of public works or designee. Said application shall be made on forms made available by the director of public works and shall at a minimum contain a plat showing the area of the proposed sidewalk district and the location of the proposed sidewalks. 
(b)  Estimate of costs. 
(1)  Based upon the plat submitted with the application, the director of public works or designee shall prepare an estimate of the total project cost and pro rata cost per property owner for the creation of the proposed sidewalk district, including the costs for the design, contracting, acquisition of rights-of-way, and inspection for sidewalk construction funded by the sidewalk district. The director of public works' estimate may not establish a limit on the amount of the project costs and may not limit the amount that may be assessed against the property owners. 
(2)  If the application is incomplete or does not contain information sufficient for the director of public works to prepare the estimate, then the director of public works shall return the application to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt indicating the additional information required. Otherwise, the director of public works shall prepare the estimate of costs and send the estimate to the applicant within ninety (90) days of receipt of a complete application. 
(c)  Petition. 
(1)  Circulation. The applicant shall be responsible for gaining the required signatures on a sidewalk district petition from property owners within the proposed sidewalk district. 
(2)  Contents. The petition shall contain the name, property address within the proposed sidewalk district, mailing address, and phone number of all property owners who sign the petition. If the property owner does not reside at the property within the sidewalk district, then the petition shall contain both the property address within the district and the property owner's actual address outside the district. 
(3)  Plat. The petition shall have attached to it a copy of the plat submitted to the director of public works showing the boundaries of the proposed sidewalk district and a copy of the director of public works' estimate of the total project cost and the pro rata cost per property owner. 
(Ord. No. 31-03, Pt. I, 11-25-03) 
Sec. 23-93. - Procedure. 
(a)  Return of petition. The petition for creation of the proposed sidewalk district must be returned to the director of public works within ninety (90) days after the director of public works notifies the applicant that the preparation of the estimate of costs and pro rata costs for the project is complete; however, the director of public works has the discretion, for good cause shown, to extend the time for the return of the petition an additional thirty (30) days, for a total of one hundred twenty (120) days, when a request for such extension is made by the applicant to the director of public works before the expiration of the original ninety-day period. 
(b)  Signatures. No assessment shall be made against abutting property, unless the same is consented to in writing by the owners of fifty-one (51) percent of the property abutting such improvements. Said consent shall be deemed to have been given if the requisite number of signatures of such abutting property owner(s) is included in the petition requesting the proposed sidewalks and the creation of the assessment district. 
(c)  Notice. Upon the timely receipt of a petition containing the required number of signatures, the director of public works shall cause the matter to be placed upon the board of commissioners' public hearing agenda for a hearing on the creation of the proposed sidewalk district. The director of public works or designee shall cause a notice to be published in the county's legal organ or a newspaper of general circulation in which the sheriff's advertisements are published at least once ten (10) days prior to the date of said hearing, which notice shall give a brief description of the subdivision in which the work is to be done, the nature of the improvements to be made and the beginning and terminus of the road or street upon which such improvements are to be made and such notice shall set forth the time and place of the hearing. 
(d)  Notification of decision. Within sixty (60) days of a final decision on the petition by the board of commissioners, the director of public works or designee shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, each affected property owner of the decision of the board of commissioners. If the final decision is an approval of the petition, then the public works director shall notify each affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested, of a good faith estimate of the individual assessment. A final decision means the approval or denial of the petition by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 31-03, Pt. I, 11-25-03) 
Sec. 23-94. - Funding. 
(a)  Assessment. Each owner of property abutting the sidewalks shall be assessed a share of the cost to be funded by the district, which cost shall be added to the ad valorem property taxes for each owner as provided in this section. No assessment shall be made against abutting property, unless the same is consented to in writing by the owners of fifty-one (51) percent of the property abutting such improvements. Abutting shall mean adjacent to, contiguous with, or adjoining. 
(b)  Pro rata costs. Each property owner's share of the cost shall be determined as follows: The total cost of the project shall be calculated by the county, and the figure so derived shall be known as the total project cost. The county shall next determine the linear feet of sidewalk that was constructed. The total cost shall then be divided by the total linear feet of sidewalk to derive the cost per foot. Each property owner abutting the sidewalks shall then be assessed an amount that equals the linear feet of street frontage the property owner has multiplied by the cost per foot. 
(c)  Payment. The sidewalk tax assessment shall be paid by one (1) of two (2) options, as follows: 
(1)  Option one. The assessment may be paid in cash by the property owner within ninety (90) days of the mailing of the assessment by the county. If paid under this option, the assessment will not bear an administrative fee and no lien shall be recorded against the property. Payment shall be made to "DeKalb County" and delivered to the public works department. If payment is not made in full within ninety (90) days of the county's initial billing of the assessment, then payment option two shall automatically take effect. Once option two is in effect, the payment via option two shall be the property owner's sole option until all assessment payments are satisfied. 
(2)  Option two. The assessment shall be paid in five (5) equal annual installments. Payment of each such assessment shall be due and payable within sixty (60) days from the mailing by regular mail of a bill from the tax commissioner. In the event option two is selected, the cost of processing, administration, recording the lien, and satisfaction of such lien shall be added to the assessment. 
(d)  The property owner shall advise any purchaser of its property within the sidewalk district of the assessment. The property owner may conduct a proration of the assessment with the purchaser. The county shall not be responsible for the proration of the assessments between sellers and purchasers nor shall the county be under any duty to notify any purchaser of the existence or liability for the assessment. 
(e)  If the assessment is not paid when due, the assessment shall be collected in the same manner as delinquent ad valorem taxes and shall be subject to the same interest and penalties. 
(f)  The assessment shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recorded by the tax commissioner in the lien records of the clerk of the county superior court. 
(g)  The fee for processing and administration of this option shall be established by the tax commissioner and approved by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 31-03, Pt. I, 11-25-03) 
Chapter 24 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, taxation and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; tax on sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink, § 4-71 et seq.; special services tax district act, App. B, § 566 et seq.; local laws relating to taxation, App. B, § 1501 et seq. 
State Law reference— Revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24-1. - Insurance premium tax. 
All foreign, alien and domestic insurance companies doing business in this state, other than life insurance companies, shall pay a county tax levied upon the gross direct premiums received by such companies. The tax shall be levied upon premiums derived from policies insuring persons, property or risks in the state from January 1 to December 31, both inclusive, of each year without regard to business ceded to or assumed from other companies. The tax shall be imposed upon gross premiums received from direct writing without any deductions allowed from premium abatement of any kind or character or for reinsurance or for losses or expenses of any kind; provided, however, deductions shall be allowed for premiums returned or change of rate or cancelled policies; provided, further, that deductions shall be permitted for returned premiums or assessments, including all policy dividends, refunds or other similar returns paid or credited to policyholders. The tax provided in this section shall be collected and distributed in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 33, ch. 8 [§ 33-8-1 et seq.]. Each insurance company shall pay a tax at a rate of two and one-half (2.5) percent. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1011) 
State Law reference— Insurance premium tax, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 
Secs. 24-2—24-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Value of improvements exempt from ad valorem tax, App. V, § 1502; millage rates, App. B, § 1531 et seq. 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.1 et seq. 

Sec. 24-26. - Certain inventories partially exempt (Freeport amendment exemption). 
(a)  Inventories of finished goods which, on the first day of January, are stored in a warehouse, dock or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside of the state, and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into the state from outside the state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state shall be granted a partial exemption from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes. 
(b)  The partial exemption from taxation shall be set at one hundred (100) percent of the value of the inventories of finished goods. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1012) 
State Law reference— Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.1 et seq. 
Sec. 24-27. - Certain improvements exempt. 
(a)  The value of improvements made to buildings, structures or portions thereof in the county by the owner is exempted from ad valorem property taxes by the county and the county school system. The exemption shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the fair market value of the building, structure or portion thereof, as it existed prior to the improvement, exclusive of the value of the land on which it is situated. 
(b)  If the improvements are completed by January 1 of any given year, but the final inspection and approval of the improvements as meeting all building code requirements by the county inspectors is issued subsequent to that date in that year, then the exemption shall be for two (2) years from January 1 of the year of such approval. If, however, the improvements are not completed by January 1 of a given year, but are completed prior to the next succeeding January 1, and the above-mentioned final inspection and approval is granted in that same year, then the exemption shall be for two (2) years beginning January 1 following the aforesaid final inspection and approval. 
(c)  In this section "improvements" does not include furniture, fixtures, equipment or machinery. The exemption shall be in addition to all other exemptions provided by law. 
(d)  The exemptions shall expire at the end of the second year after the effective date of the exemption unless all such exemptions are sooner terminated by action of the board of commissioners; however, when terminated, any such exemption which has been established shall continue until the two-year exemption period has expired. The exemptions shall not become effective until application therefor has been filed in the form approved by action of the board of commissioners. The exemption application must be filed by April 1 of the first year the exemption is applicable. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1013) 
Secs. 24-28—24-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE HOMES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-02, Pt. I, adopted Oct. 23, 2001, deleted former Art. III, §§ 24-41—24-44, of this chapter and enacted new provisions as Art. III, §§ 24-41—24-43. Former Art. III, §§ 24-41—24-44, pertained to mobile homes and derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 3-1005—3-1008. 

Sec. 24-41. - Decal required. 
(a)  All persons owning a mobile home based in the county on January 1 of each year shall obtain from the tax commissioner a decal before May 1, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-492. This requirement pertains to all mobile homes, including those exempt from taxation by homestead exemption, or other provisions of state law. 
(b)  Such decals shall be affixed to the mobile homes in such a manner as to cause them to be easily visible for inspection. 
(c)  Owners of mobile homes locating in the county after January 1 of any year shall be required to report their mobile homes to the office of the tax commissioner within ten (10) working days. 
(d)  The tax commissioner shall issue a decal only after a valid development permit has been issued by the public works department to ensure that all applicable zoning and other development standards have been met. However, this requirement shall not apply within municipalities of the county. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, Pt. I, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 24-42. - Reports by mobile home park owners. 
(a)  Every owner and operator of a mobile home park is required to give the tax commissioner or designated representative an inventory report of all mobile homes based in the park as of October 1 of each year. Such reports shall consist of the manufacturers identification number, title number (if any), manufacturer, year of manufacture, model, serial number, the location including lot number and park name or situs address, and the mobile home owner's name and mailing address for each mobile home in the park. Such report shall be submitted to the tax commissioner no later than October 15 of each year. The tax commissioner or designated representative shall make the mobile home inventory report available on November 1. 
(b)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park is required to report any mobile home removal from the park prior to said home being removed, if known to the park manager, operator or owner. 
(c)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park shall furnish to the tax commissioner an updated lot map of each park, and any changes shall be reported before January 1 of each year. 
(d)  Every owner, manager and operator of a mobile home park shall notify the county of any change in ownership or of name of any mobile home park within thirty (30) days of such change. 
(e)  Any mobile home park managers, owners or operators convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 06-02, Pt. I, 10-23-01) 
Sec. 24-43. - Mobile homes without decals may not remain on property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling land in the county to authorize any mobile home to remain upon its premises for more than forty-eight (48) hours without the display of a decal issued by the issuing authority of the county. 
(Ord. No. 06-02, Pt. I, 10-23-01) 
Secs. 24-44—24-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— County business license tax on depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 24-61. - Levy; applicability. 
An annual business license tax is hereby levied upon all depository financial institutions located within the county at a rate of one-quarter of one percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations, and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 1976, § 3-5001) 
Sec. 24-62. - Minimum tax. 
The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Code 1976, § 3-5002) 
Sec. 24-63. - Filing of return; payment. 
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file a return of its gross receipts with the business license section of the finance department not later than March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. The return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the state department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. The tax imposed by this article shall be paid at the time of filing the return. 
(Code 1976, § 3-5003) 
Sec. 24-64. - Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax; executions. 
(a)  In accordance with section 2-112, any portion of the tax levied by this article not paid before it comes delinquent shall be assessed a late penalty and shall bear interest from the date the tax is due until the tax is paid. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, any period of less than one (1) month shall be considered to be one (1) month. The finance department shall issue executions against such taxpayer owing taxes, penalties or interest as provided in this section when the same become delinquent. The execution shall be recorded on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of superior court. 
(Code 1976, § 3-5005) 
Sec. 24-65. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of finance department. The finance department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The finance director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the county and the state or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The finance director or any person authorized in writing by the director may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the licensee, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Disclosure of business of operators, etc.; limitations on rule. The finance director or any person having an administrative duty under this article shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any licensee or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or to permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this article, except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax hereby levied and assessed. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, and assignees if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax, interest and penalties, or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. 
(Code 1976, § 3-5006) 
Secs. 24-66—24-81. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Local excise tax on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 24-82. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
County means those unincorporated areas of the county and shall not include incorporated municipalities within the county. 
Guestroom means a room occupied, or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants. 
Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. It does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention or other buildings in which human beings are housed or detained under legal restraint. 
Monthly period means the calendar month in which the tax imposed by this article was collected from the occupants. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or apartment in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Operator means any person operating a hotel in the county, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of the premises, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating the hotel. 
Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied, or has or shall have the right of occupancy, of any guest room in a hotel for at least ten (10) consecutive days next preceding that date. 
Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or other group or combination acting as a unit excepting the United States of America, the state and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the county is without power to impose the tax herein provided. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom. 
Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
Tax means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2001; Ord. No. 90-15, § 1, 6-12-90) 
Sec. 24-83. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to any person as to whom, or to any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the board to impose the tax. This article does not apply to any person not licensed by or required to be licensed by the county for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin or any other place in which rooms, lodging or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(b)  No tax shall be imposed under this article upon any of the following: 
(1)  Rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of more than ten (10) consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. 
(2)  Rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one (1) or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Code 1976, §§ 3-2006, 3-2014) 
Sec. 24-84. - Imposition; rate. 
There shall be imposed, assessed, levied and paid an excise tax of eight (8) percent of the rent for occupancy of a guestroom in a hotel in the unincorporated area of the county, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b). 
(Code 1976, § 3-2002; Ord. No. 06-23, Pt. I, 11-14-06; Ord. No. 13-09 , Pt. I, 5-28-13) 
State Law reference— Authority to levy above tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 24-85. - Persons liable for tax; extinguishment of liability. 
Every person occupying a guestroom in a hotel in this county is liable for the tax. The person's liability is not extinguished until the tax has been paid to the county except that a receipt from an operator maintaining a place of business in this county or from an operator who is authorized by the finance department, under such rules and regulations as the finance department may prescribe, to collect the tax and who is, for the purposes of this article, regarded as an operator maintaining a place of business in this county, which receipt is given to the occupant pursuant to section 24-86, is sufficient to relieve the occupant from further liability for the tax to which the receipt refers. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2003) 
Sec. 24-86. - Collection by operator; receipt, rules for collection schedules. 
Every operator maintaining a place of business in the county as provided in section 24-85, and renting guestrooms in the county, not exempted under section 24-83 of this article shall, at the time of collecting the rent from the occupant and on demand, give the occupant a receipt therefor. In all cases of transactions upon credit or deferred payment, the payment of tax to the operator may be deferred in accordance therewith, and the operator shall be liable therefor at the time and to the extent that these credits are incurred in accordance with the rate of tax owing on the amount thereof. The finance department shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations prescribing methods and schedules for the collection and payment of tax. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2004) 
Sec. 24-87. - False advertising. 
It is unlawful for any operator to advertise or hold out or state to the public or to any guest, directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator or that it will not be added to the rental of the guestroom, or that, if added, it or any part thereof will be refunded. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2005) 
Sec. 24-88. - Registration of operator; certificate of authority. 
(a)  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in the county shall immediately register with the finance department on a form provided by the finance department. This registration shall set forth the name under which the person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of the person's place of business and such other information to facilitate the collection of the tax as the finance department may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in the case of a corporation, by an executive officer or some person specifically authorized by the corporation to sign the registration. The finance department shall, within ten (10) days after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each registrant to collect the tax from the occupant, together with a duplicate thereof for each additional place of business of the registrant. Each certificate and duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable and shall be prominently displayed therein so as to be seen and come to the notice readily of all occupants and persons seeking occupancy. This certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be rendered immediately to the finance department upon the cessation of business at the location named or upon its sale or transfer. 
(b)  If the finance department deems it necessary in order to facilitate initial registration hereunder of persons engaged in business or prior to the date of imposition of tax as set forth in this article, the finance department may prescribe provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Those provisions shall be made to effect the purposes of this article. For these purposes, those provisions shall be in lieu of those provided herein. The registration and the certificate thereof shall have the same effect as that provided herein. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2007) 
Sec. 24-89. - Determinations, returns, payments. 
(a)  Due date. The tax imposed by this article shall become due and payable from the occupant at the time of occupancy of any hotel in this county. All amounts of taxes collected by any operator are due and payable to the finance department on or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period. 
(b)  Filing of returns. On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the finance department, in such form as the finance department may prescribe, by every operator and by every person liable to payment of tax hereunder during that monthly period who has not paid the tax, and made return in regard to the related occupation which is the subject of the tax. 
(c)  Contents of return. All returns shall show the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the related period and such other information as required by the finance department. 
(d)  Delivery of return and remittance. The person required to file the return shall deliver the return, together with the remittance of the net amount of tax due to the finance department. 
(e)  Collection fee. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8, art. 1 [§ 48-1-1- et seq.], as now or hereafter amended. 
State Law reference— Collection fee, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-8-58, 48-13-52. 
(f)  Extension of time for filing return, paying tax. For a good cause the finance department may extend, but not to exceed one (1) month, the time for making any return or payment of tax. No further extension of time may be granted. Any person to whom an extension of time has been granted, who makes a return and pays the tax within the period of extension shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the amount thereof at an annual rate specified by section 2-112. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, for the period of the extension to the time of return and payment. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2008; Ord. No. 90-15, §§ 2, 3, 6-12-90) 
Sec. 24-90. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax. If the finance department is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax imposed by this article or the amount of such tax required to be paid to the county by any person, it may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within its possession or that may come into its possession. One (1) or more than one (1) deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more than one (1) period. 
(b)  Interest on deficiency. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at an annual rate specified by section 2-112. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month, following each monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(c)  Offsetting of overpayments. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments for a period or periods against underpayments for another period or periods, against penalties and against the interest on underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in section 24-91, subsection (c). 
(d)  Penalty for negligence or disregard of rules and regulations. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination has been made is due to negligence or disregard of rules and regulations, a penalty in accordance with section 2-112 shall be added thereto. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If any part of the deficiency for which a deficiency determination is made is due to fraud or an intent to evade any provisions of this article or other authorized rules and regulations, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the deficiency shall be added thereto. 
(f)  Notice of determination; service. The finance department representative shall give to the operator written notice of the determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 9-11-5 and shall be addressed to the operator at the operator's address as it appears in the records of the finance department. In case of service by mail of any notice required by this article, the service is complete at the time of deposit in the United States post office. 
(g)  Time within which notice of deficiency mination to be mailed. Except in the case of fraud, intent to evade this article or authorized rules or regulations, or failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the last day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period expires later. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2009; Ord. No. 90-15, § 5, 6-12-90) 
Sec. 24-91. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return under this article, the finance department shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipt of the person, or as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in the county which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is in its possession or may come into its possession. Upon the basis of this estimate, the finance department shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid the county adding to the sum thus arrived at a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent thereof. One (1) or more determinations may be made for one (1) or more than one (1) period. 
(b)  Manner of computation; offsets; interest. In making a determination, the finance department may offset overpayments for a period or penalties, and against the interest on the underpayments. The interest on underpayments shall be computed in the manner set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  Interest on amount due. The amount of the determination, exclusive of penalties, shall bear interest at the rate specified by section 2-112. Interest shall be assessed for each month, or fraction thereof, from the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(d)  Penalty for fraud or intent to evade. If the failure of any person to file a return is due to fraud or an intent to evade this article or rules and regulations, penalties shall be added as provided in section 2-112. 
(e)  Notice; manner of service. Promptly after making a determination, the finance department shall give to the person written notice to be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2010; Ord. No. 90-15, § 6, 6-12-90) 
Sec. 24-92. - Penalties and interest for failure to pay tax; license suspension or revocation. 
Any person who fails to pay any tax to the county or any portion of the taxes specified by this article within the time required shall pay a late payment penalty, in addition to the taxes, plus interest on the unpaid tax or any portion thereof as specified by section 2-112; failure to pay said taxes, penalty and interest shall subject the person to business license suspension or revocation in accordance with section 15-48. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2011; Ord. No. 91-08, § 1, 4-25-91) 
Sec. 24-93. - Collection of tax; security bond; refunds. 
(a)  The finance department, whenever necessary to ensure compliance with this article, may require any person subject hereto to deposit such security as the finance department may determine. The amount of the security shall be fixed by the finance department, but shall not be greater than twice the person's estimated average liability for the period for which the person files returns, determined in such a manner as the finance department deems proper, or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), whichever amount is the lesser. The amount of the security may be increased by the finance department subject to the limitations herein provided. The finance department may sell the security at public auction, with the approval of the board of commissioners, if it becomes necessary to do so in order to recover any tax or any amount required to be collected, interest or penalty due. Notice of the sale may be served upon the person who deposited the security personally or by mail; if by mail, service shall be made in the manner prescribed for service of a notice of a deficiency determination, and shall be addressed to the person at the person's address as it appears in the records of the finance department. Upon any sale, any surplus above the amounts due shall be returned to the person who deposited the security. 
(b)  If any person is delinquent in the payment of the amount required to be paid, or if a determination has been made against a person which remains unpaid, the finance department may, not later than three (3) years after the payment became delinquent, give notice thereof by registered mail to all persons in the county having in their possession or under their control any credit or other personal property belonging to the delinquent person, or owing any debts to the delinquent person. After receiving the notice, the persons so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of the credits, other personal property or debts in their possession or under their control at the time they receive the notice until the finance department consents to a transfer or disposition or until twenty (20) days elapse after the receipt of the notice. All persons so notified shall within five (5) days after receipt of the notice advise the finance department of all these credits, other personal property, or debts in their possession, under their control or owing by them. 
(c)  At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the finance department may bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state or of the United States in the name of the countyto collect the amount delinquent together with penalties and interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(d)  If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out the business or quits the business, successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover this amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the finance department showing that the amount has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(e)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase price as required, the purchaser becomes personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within thirty (30) days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, the finance department shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at the purchaser's address as it appears on the records of the department of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the finance department to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further obligation to withhold purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells out the business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs later. 
(f)  Whenever the amount of the tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the county under this article, it may be refunded provided a verified claim in writing therefor, stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the finance department within three (3) years from the date of payment. The claim shall be audited and shall be made on forms provided by the finance department. If the claim is approved by the finance department and the board, the excess amount collected or paid may be refunded or may be credited on any amount then due and payable from the person from whom it was collected or by whom paid and the balance may be refunded. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2012) 
Sec. 24-94. - Administration. 
(a)  Authority of finance department. The finance department shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the imposition. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The finance department shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the county and the state, or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the taxes hereunder. 
(c)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in the county shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the finance department may require. 
(d)  Examination of records; audit. The finance department may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any person renting guestrooms and any person liable for the tax and may investigate the character of the business of the person in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the person, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the tax, the finance department may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having possession or custody of information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the finance department as required and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy and such other information as the finance department may require. 
(f)  Disclosure of business of operator; limitation on rule. The finance department shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having that administrative duty under this article. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2013) 
Sec. 24-95. - Fraudulent returns, reports. 
Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this article, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the finance department, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, is guilty of and punishable for a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this article to be made, is guilty of and punishable for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2015) 
Sec. 24-96. - Disposition of proceeds. 
All proceeds generated from the assessment of a hotel/motel occupancy tax shall be spent only for those purposes which benefit the citizens of the unincorporated county. In no event shall any of the proceeds generated by the application of this article be spent in any fashion which would benefit both the citizens within and without the unincorporated limits of the county. The finance department shall maintain a separate accounting of the proceeds generated under this article. The proceeds shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). 
(Code 1976, § 3-2016; Ord. No. 06-23, Pt. I, 11-14-06) 
Secs. 24-97—24-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENTERPRISE ZONE PROGRAM 

Sec. 24-101. - Purpose and scope. 
(a)  The DeKalb County Board of Commissioners has found that there is a need for revitalization in certain areas of DeKalb County. Revitalization will improve geographic areas within DeKalb County that are suffering from disinvestments, underdevelopment, and economic decline and will encourage private businesses to reinvest and rehabilitate such areas. This article should be liberally construed to accomplish these purposes. 
(b)  The eligibility requirements contained herein are the minimum necessary to consider granting an application to participate in the enterprise zone program. The fact that an area or business may meet such eligibility requirements shall not entitle any such area, business or applicant to an enterprise zone designation or to additional incentives. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-102. - Criteria and boundaries of area-wide enterprise zones. 
(a)  In order to be designated as an enterprise zone, a nominated area shall meet at least three (3) of the five (5) criteria specified in subsections (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of this Code section 24-102. Creation of an enterprise zone shall be consistent with the DeKalb County Comprehensive Plan, as amended. The criteria for designation of an enterprise zone as set forth herein tracks the criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6 and, in the event of conflict with state law, state law shall control. 
(b)  Pervasive poverty shall be evidenced by showing that poverty is widespread throughout the nominated area and shall be established by using the following criteria: 
(1)  The poverty rate shall be determined from the data in the most current United States decennial census prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Census; 
(2)  For each census geographic block group within the nominated area, the ratio of income to poverty level for at least twenty (20) percent of the residents shall be less than one (1.0); 
(3)  Census geographic block groups with no population shall be treated as having a poverty rate which meets the standards of paragraph (2) of this subsection; and 
(4)  All parcels of a nominated area must abut and may not contain a noncontiguous parcel, unless non-abutting parcel qualifies separately under the criteria set forth under paragraph (2) of this subsection. 
(c)  Unemployment shall be evidenced by the use of data published by the Office of Labor Information Systems of the Georgia Department of Labor indicating that the average rate of unemployment for the nominated area for the preceding calendar year is at least ten (10) percent higher than the state average rate of unemployment or by evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the nominated area such as the closing of a manufacturing plant or federal facility. 
(d)  General distress shall be evidenced by adverse conditions within the nominated area other than those of pervasive poverty and unemployment. Examples of such adverse conditions include, but are not limited to, a high incidence of crime, abandoned or dilapidated structures, deteriorated infrastructure, and substantial population decline, relative to other comparable areas of the state. 
(e)  Underdevelopment shall be evidenced by data indicating that recent development activities, or lack thereof, in the nominated area is lower than other development activity within DeKalb County. Such evidence may include data on land disturbance permits, business license fees, building permits, development fees, or other similar data indicating that the level of development in the nominated area is lower than development activity in other parts of DeKalb County. The data used shall be comparable in point or period of time and methodology employed. 
(f)  General blight within the nominated area shall be evidenced by the inclusion of any portion of the nominated area in an urban redevelopment area as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-61-2(20) for which an urban redevelopment plan has been adopted by the affected governing bodies according to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1. 
(g)  The DeKalb County Board of Commissioners finds that based on the evidence, the area contained in the enterprise zone delineated in subparagraph (h) of this section satisfies at least three (3) of the five (5) criteria set forth in subsections (b) through (f) above and in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6 and constitutes the enterprise zone(s) of DeKalb County. There is evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by levels of poverty of at least twenty (20) percent, unemployment of ten (10) percent or more than the state average rate of unemployment as reported by the Office of Labor Information Systems of the Georgia Department of Labor, evidence of general distress within the enterprise zones of DeKalb County other than poverty and unemployment, including population loss, tax delinquency or high incidence of crime, evidence of underdevelopment lower than development activity within DeKalb County as a whole, and/or evidence of general blight. 
_____
(h)  The enterprise zone(s) of DeKalb County created herein shall consist of the following census tract boundaries that are first identified by the census tract number followed by the block group number: 
205.00 block group 1; 205.00 block group 2; 206.00 block group 1; 
206.00 block group 2; 207.00 block group 2; 208.01 block group 6; 
208.01 block group 7; 208.02 block group 3; 208.02 block group 4; 
208.02 block group 5; 209.00 block group 1; 209.00 block group 2; 
212.04 block group 1; 212.08 block group 1; 212.08 block group 2; 
212.09 block group 1; 212.09 block group 2; 212.12 block group 2; 
213.01 block group 1; 213.02 block group 1; 213.02 block group 2; 
213.02 block group 3; 213.02 block group 4; 213.03 block group 1; 
213.03 block group 2; 214.01 block group 1; 214.01 block group 2; 
214.01 block group 3; 214.01 block group 4; 214.04 block group 1; 
214.06 block group 1; 214.06 block group 2; 215.01 block group 1; 
215.01 block group 2; 215.01 block group 3; 215.01 block group 4; 
216.03 block group 1; 219.04 block group 1; 219.04 block group 2; 
219.04 block group 3; 219.04 block group 4; 219.04 block group 5; 
219.06 block group 1; 219.06 block group 2; 219.06 block group 3; 
219.08 block group 1; 219.08 block group 2; 219.08 block group 3; 
219.09 block group 1; 219.09 block group 2; 219.09 block group 3; 
220.04 block group 1; 220.04 block group 2; 220.05 block group 3; 
220.05 block group 4; 220.06 block group 1; 220.06 block group 2; 
220.06 block group 3; 220.07 block group 1; 220.07 block group 2; 
220.08 block group 1; 220.08 block group 2; 221.00 block group 1; 
221.00 block group 2; 223.01 block group 1; 223.01 block group 2; 
223.02 block group 1; 223.02 block group 2; 223.02 block group 3; 
224.02 block group 1; 224.02 block group 2; 225.00 block group 3; 
229.00 block group 1; 229.00 block group 2; 229.00 block group 3; 
229.00 block group 4; 231.01 block group 1; 231.01 block group 2; 
231.01 block group 3; 231.01 block group 4; 231.05 block group 1; 
231.05 block group 2; 231.05 block group 3; 231.05 block group 4; 
231.06 block group 1; 231.06 block group 2; 231.06 block group 3; 
231.06 block group 4; 231.07 block group 1; 231.07 block group 2; 
231.08 block group 1; 231.08 block group 2; 231.08 block group 3; 
232.03 block group 1; 232.03 block group 2; 232.03 block group 3; 
232.03 block group 4; 232.06 block group 2; 232.06 block group 3; 
232.06 block group 4; 232.09 block group 1; 232.09 block group 2; 
232.10 block group 1; 232.10 block group 2; 232.10 block group 3; 
232.11 block group 1; 232.11 block group 2; 232.12 block group 1; 
232.12 block group 2; 233.03 block group 1; 233.03 block group 2; 
233.03 block group 3; 233.03 block group 4; 233.05 block group 1; 
233.05 block group 2; 233.05 block group 3; 233.05 block group 4; 
233.06 block group 1; 233.06 block group 2; 233.09 block group 1; 
233.09 block group 2; 233.09 block group 3; 233.10 block group 3; 
234.11 block group 1; 234.11 block group 2; 234.12 block group 1; 
234.12 block group 2; 234.12 block group 3; 234.13 block group 1; 
234.13 block group 2; 234.14 block group 1; 234.14 block group 2; 
234.14 block group 3; 234.15 block group 1; 234.15 block group 2; 
234.15 block group 3; 234.15 block group 4; 235.01 block group 1; 
235.01 block group 2; 235.04 block group 1; 235.04 block group 2; 
235.04 block group 3; 235.06 block group 2; 235.06 block group 3; 
235.06 block group 4; 236.01 block group 1; 236.01 block group 2; 
236.01 block group 3; 236.01 block group 4; 236.02 block group 1; 
236.02 block group 2; 236.03 block group 4; 236.03 block group 5; 
237.00 block group 1; 237.00 block group 2; 237.00 block group 3; 
237.00 block group 4; 238.01 block group 1; 238.01 block group 2; 
238.01 block group 3; 238.02 block group 1; 238.03 block group 4. 
(Census tract data based on the 2000 U.S. Census.) 
Applicant(s) are directed to contact the director to determine whether an entity falls within one of the designated enterprise zone(s). 
_____
(i)  The DeKalb County Board of Commissioners shall report designations of enterprise zones to the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, providing such sufficient information to identify at a minimum the geographic boundaries of the zone(s), the specific fees and taxes to be exempted, and the beginning and ending dates of the designation period. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-103. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended: 
Ad valorem tax means property taxes levied for state or county operating purposes but does not include property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for general obligation or special revenue bond debt. 
Business enterprise means any business or the headquarters of any business engaged primarily in manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, research and development industries, new residential construction, and residential rehabilitation. 
Chief executive officer means the Chief Executive Officer of DeKalb County. 
Comprehensive plan means the DeKalb County Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time, adopted by the board of commissioners which divides the unincorporated areas of the county into land use categories and constitutes the official policy of the county regarding long-term planning and use of land, as defined in the chapter 27 of this Code (Zoning Ordinance of DeKalb County). 
Director means Director (Department Head) of the DeKalb County Office of Economic Development. 
Enterprise zone means the geographic areas of census tracts designated in section 24-102 of this article. 
Full-time job equivalent means a job or position with no predetermined end date, with a regular workweek of thirty (30) hours or more, and with the same benefits provided to similar employees. 
Low-income and moderate-income individual means a person currently: 
(1)  Unemployed or unemployed for three (3) of the six (6) months prior to the date of hire; 
(2)  Homeless; 
(3)  A resident of public housing; 
(4)  Receiving temporary assistance to needy families or who has received temporary assistance to needy families at any time during the eighteen (18) months previous to the date of hire; 
(5)  Participating in the Workforce Investment Act, P.L. 105-220, 112 Stat. 936 (1998) or who has participated in the Workforce Investment Act at any time during the eighteen (18) months previous to the date of hire; 
(6)  A participant in a job opportunity program where basic skills are required or who has participated in such a job opportunity program at any time during the eighteen (18) months previous to the date of hire; 
(7)  Receiving supplemental social security income; or 
(8)  Receiving food stamps. 
New job means employment for an individual created within an enterprise zone by a new or expanded qualified business or service enterprise at the time of the initial staffing of such new or expanded enterprise. 
Qualified or qualifying business means an employer that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4, including a service enterprise, which increased employment by five (5) or more new full-time job equivalents in an area designated as an enterprise zone and which provides additional economic stimulus in such zone. The quality or quantity of such additional economic stimulus shall be determined, on a case-by-case basis, by the DeKalb County governing authority. Such business or service enterprise may be new, an expansion or reinvestment of an existing business or service enterprise, or a successor to such business or service enterprise. Whenever possible, ten (10) percent of such new employees shall be low-income or moderate-income individuals. A tenant may be eligible for consideration as a qualified or qualifying business if the tenant's written lease contains a term of no less than five (5) years and written conditions sufficient to legally obligate the tenant to pay ad valorem taxes. 
Rehabilitation means the making of improvements to existing real property such that the value of the real property after improvement exceeds the previous appraised value, as determined by the DeKalb County Tax Assessor, by a factor of five (5) to one (1) (5:1). 
Service enterprise means any entity that is engaged primarily in finance, insurance, and real estate activity or activities listed under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 60 through 67 according to the Federal Office of Management and Budget Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 Edition, or engaged primarily in day-care activities. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-104. - Qualifications and incentives. 
(a)  To encourage revitalization within the designated enterprise zone, the following exemptions from county and state real property ad valorem taxes are available to qualifying businesses and service enterprises, not to exceed the following schedule: 
(1)  One hundred (100) percent of the ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the first five (5) years; 
(2)  Eighty (80) percent of the ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next two (2) years (sixth and seventh years); 
(3)  Sixty (60) percent of the ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next year (eighth year); 
(4)  Forty (40) percent of the ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next year (ninth year); and 
(5)  Twenty (20) percent of the ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the last year (tenth year). 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-88-7(a)(1), the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners may offer the following additional economic incentives on an annual basis: 
(1)  A qualifying business or service enterprise may receive a waiver of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in building permit fees incurred during the first year following the qualifying business' designation as an enterprise zone participant. Any building permit fees in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) must be paid by the qualifying business. 
(2)  A qualifying business or service enterprise may receive a waiver of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in business license fees for the first year following its designation as an enterprise zone participant. Any business license fees in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) must be paid by the qualifying business. 
(3)  A qualifying business or service enterprise may receive a waiver of up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) in water/sewer tap fees incurred during the year following its designation as an enterprise zone participant. Any water/sewer system tap-on fee in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) must be paid by the qualifying business. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall authorize DeKalb County or the director to waive, amend, provide exceptions to or otherwise modify or alter any ordinance that is expressly required to implement or enforce any statutory provisions or is designed to protect persons against discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, or handicap. 
(d)  For a qualifying business or service enterprise located within the enterprise zone or any business or enterprise designated as eligible for enterprise zone advantages and incentives, the schedule provided for in section 24-104(a) shall begin in any year during which an area has an enterprise zone designation. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as giving any business or service enterprise or property owner a vested right to be designated as a qualifying business or service enterprise. 
(e)  If, on or after the effective date of this article [Sept. 18, 2006], a project within the designated enterprise zone consists of rehabilitation and improvement of existing real property, including structures, such that the value of the real property after improvement exceeds the previous appraised value, as determined by the DeKalb County Tax Assessor, by a ratio of five (5) to one (1) (5:1), then the exemption schedule in section 24-104(a) shall also apply to the property whether or not the rehabilitation project is carried out by a qualifying business or service enterprise. The tax exemptions pursuant to this paragraph shall commence on the first day of the year following designation of the project by the director as a qualifying project under this paragraph. However, the director shall not grant this designation until the rehabilitation project has been completed and the DeKalb County Tax Assessor confirms its value. 
(f)  In no event shall the total value of the property tax exemptions granted within enterprise zones within DeKalb County as a whole exceed ten (10) percent of the value of the entire property tax digest of DeKalb County. 
(g)  The enterprise zone designation shall run with the qualifying business or service enterprise and not with the land. Therefore, the designation shall apply only to the entity granted the designation through an application to DeKalb County under this article. 
(h)  A business or service making application to receive enterprise zone tax exemptions and incentives shall have a right to appeal any denial of an application to the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners. The request for appeal shall be filed with the Director, the County Attorney and the Clerk of the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners within seven (7) days of the date of denial of the application. The DeKalb County Board of Commissioners shall render a final decision on the appeal within ninety (90) days of the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-105. - Duration. 
(a)  The area herein designated as an enterprise zone shall remain in existence for ten (10) years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following its designation as an enterprise zone. Ad valorem tax exemptions available to a qualified business or service enterprise in the enterprise zone herein created shall remain in effect for the full ten-year schedule established in section 24-104(a) of this article, regardless of the whether the designated enterprise zone area changes or is terminated. 
(b)  Any areas designated as an enterprise zone may be redesignated as an enterprise zone if the area continues to meet the criteria for an enterprise zone contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-106. - Administration. 
(a)  The director shall manage the implementation and enforcement of the DeKalb County Enterprise Zone Program; develop and accept applications, oversee zone activities and administration and communicate with qualified business. The director shall grant designations consistent with the purposes and intent of this article and state law. 
(b)  The director shall have the power to administer, require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article, and issue such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereafter, including, but not limited to, that reports, data and information be submitted from qualifying businesses or service enterprises within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this article. 
(c)  Evidence of the creation and maintenance of all new jobs within the enterprise zone shall be submitted to the DeKalb County Board of Commissioners by the director no less than four (4) times annually. At the conclusion of each year, the director will prepare a comprehensive report including but not limited to the following enterprise zone evaluation tools; jobs created, amount of capital invested in the enterprise zone and amount of taxes exempted. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-107. - Application. 
(a)  An entity desiring designation as a "qualifying business" or "service enterprise" under this article must apply to the director. An application fee in an amount to be determined by the director shall be required. In addition to other information requested by DeKalb County, the following items shall accompany the application: 
(1)  A description of business conducted by the applicant at the each location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documentation reflecting the number of full-time job equivalents maintained by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone as of the date of application, as compared to the number of such full-time job equivalents maintained as of the effective date of this article, and the projected number of full-time job equivalents three (3) years after the proposed investment; 
(3)  The name and address of each employee occupying each new full-time job at the subject location within the enterprise zone, and a determination of whether each such employee was a low-income or moderate-income individual as of the date of hire for the new full-time job; 
(4)  Description and documentation of any additional economic stimulus provided within the enterprise zone by the applicant; 
(5)  A legal description of the property; 
(6)  Documentation reflecting any expenses incurred in rehabilitation of existing real property and improvements; 
(7)  Data from the DeKalb County Tax Assessor reflecting the value of the real property and improvements both before and after rehabilitation, if applicable; 
(8)  Photographic documentation of the real property and improvements both before and after rehabilitation, if applicable. 
(b)  Falsification of documents, failure to develop the project or comply with any provision of this article may result in revocation of any designation granted and recapture of any and all incentives granted to any otherwise qualifying business or service enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-108. - Business location. 
Where a business is operated at more than one (1) location, only the locations within the enterprise zone shall be eligible for the tax exemptions provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-109. - Record of exemption; contractual agreement. 
(a)  Any location for which the tax exemptions provided in this article have been granted shall maintain documentation relating to the grant of said exemptions at the address for which the exemptions were approved. 
(b)  As a condition of receiving tax exemptions provided for in this article, a qualifying business or service enterprise shall enter into a contractual agreement with DeKalb County that specifies the tax exemptions and any additional incentives offered to such business or service enterprise, and the amount of capital to be invested by the business, and the square footage of improvements or units of housing to be constructed or rehabilitated. Guidelines for the recapture, revocation or reimbursement of taxes shall also be included in the terms of the contractual agreement in the event that this article or the Georgia Enterprise Zone Act is violated by the business or service enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 24-110. - Severability. 
It is declared to be the intent of DeKalb County that, if any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions herein. 
(Ord. No. 13-02, Pt. I, 12-20-01; Ord. No. 06-15, Pt. I, 9-12-06) 
Secs. 24-111—24-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCISE TAX ON RENTAL MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 24-150. - Definitions. 
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Director of finance means the DeKalb County Director of Finance or his or her agent or designee. 
Month or monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for thirty-one (31) or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage and charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten (10) or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in the State of Georgia. 
Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity that owns or leases five (5) or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value in incorporated or unincorporated DeKalb County, with the exception of territory located within the boundaries of a municipality imposing an excise tax on rental motor vehicles under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-90 et seq., as amended. 
Tax, excise tax or taxes means the tax imposed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-151. - Authority; effective date; rules and regulations; records. 
(a)  Authority. The DeKalb County Finance Department shall administer and enforce this article for the levy and collection of the tax as authorized by, and in accordance with, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-90 et seq., and as may hereinafter be amended. 
(b)  Effective date. The tax levied by this article shall be effective on the first day of January, 2007 and shall continue until December 31, 2038 as provided by law, or unless earlier terminated by the Georgia General Assembly or the DeKalb County Governing Authority. 
(c)  Rules and regulations. The director of finance shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable administrative rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other ordinances of the county or laws of the state or the constitution of this state or the United States for the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of the tax under this article. 
(d)  Records required. Every rental motor vehicle concern subject to this article shall keep records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers reflecting the number of rental motor vehicles rented or leased and the gross rental charges received by each rental motor vehicle concern for each month, in such form as the director of finance may require. 
(1)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside the State of Georgia and returns it within the State of Georgia; 
(2)  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in the State of Georgia and returns it outside the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-155. - Amount of tax allowed to be retained for expenses. 
Each rental motor vehicle concern collecting the tax imposed by this article shall be allowed to retain three (3) percent of the tax due and collected and may retain that amount in the form of a deduction for expenses incurred in submitting, reporting and paying the amount of taxes due, but only if the amounts due are not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-156. - Monthly statement required showing rental charges and taxes. 
(a)  On or before the 20th day of each month following the month of January, 2007, the rental motor vehicle concern liable for the tax provided for herein shall transmit to the director of finance a statement showing the rental charges and taxes collected by authority of this article for the immediately preceding calendar month. Along with said statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the director of finance the taxes due pursuant to this article for that particular month. 
(b)  Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five (5) percent of the taxes then due and in addition to such penalty, interest on the unpaid taxes then due computed at the rate of one (1) percent per month. Interest shall not be assessed on interest or penalties. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-157. - Records. 
In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of the number of rental motor vehicles rented or leased and all rental charges for rental motor vehicles and taxes collected which are related thereto. Said records shall be open for inspection and copying by any duly authorized agent of DeKalb County during regular business hours. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-158. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  If the director of finance is not satisfied with the statement or statements of the excise tax provided for in section 24-156(a) herein, or the amount of the tax paid to DeKalb County by any rental motor vehicle concern, the director of finance may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information that is or may come into possession of the director of finance. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the deficiency determination made by the director of finance shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof from the due date of the taxes found to be due but not paid. 
(c)  The director of finance shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern a written notice of any such deficiency determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail and if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as the same appears in the business license or other records of the director of finance as provided to him by each rental motor vehicle concern. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by an addressee or agent of the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period shall expire last. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-159. - Failure to file a statement. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to file a statement as required by section 24-156(a), the director of finance shall make an estimate of the excise tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the rental motor vehicle concern has failed to file a statement and shall be based upon such information that is or may come into the possession of the director of finance. Written notice shall be given in the manner as prescribed above in section 24-158(c). 
(b)  The amount of the delinquency determination shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month or fraction thereof from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount of any portion thereof should have been paid until the date of payment. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-160. - Audit authority. 
Duly authorized employees of DeKalb County upon exhibition of identification and during regular business hours may examine and copy the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities if necessary of any rental motor vehicle concern in order to verify the accuracy of any statement filed pursuant to section 24-156(a), or if no statement is filed by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain or determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-161. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article transfers or sells its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient amounts from the purchase price to cover any amounts required to be paid pursuant to this article until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the director of finance or his designee showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business or rental motor vehicle concern fails to withhold from the purchase price all amounts due as required herein such purchaser will be personally liable for the payment of the amount of the outstanding tax required to be withheld to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
Sec. 24-162. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  In addition to the interest charges and delinquent penalties specified in this article, any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter, upon citation by the finance department and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, will be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment in accordance with section 1-10 of the DeKalb County Code. Where any violation or offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof will constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  For a third and each subsequent violation of this chapter, the court shall impose a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 06-26, Pt. I, 12-12-06) 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAX ON ENERGY USED IN MANUFACTURING 

Sec. 24-163. - Energy excise tax definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms: "dealer;" "energy;" "local sales and use tax;" and "purchaser" shall have the same meanings as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-164. - Imposition; rate; remitting; recovery; liabilities. 
In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-110 et seq., there is imposed within the territorial limits of the special district created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-111, an excise tax on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy when such sale, use, storage, or consumption would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq. but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-165. - Excise tax rate; phase-in. 
(a)  Such excise tax shall be levied and collected by the governing authority of DeKalb County pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-112 and 48-13-114 and as provided in this section. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the rate of such excise tax shall be phased in over a four-year period as follows: 
(1)  For the period commencing March 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to seventy-five (75) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to one hundred (100) percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016 limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(d)  (l)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the governing authority of DeKalb County, Georgia shall be directed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two (2) percent (except in the case where the municipal option water and sewer tax is levied, where that maximum rate will be three (3) percent). 
(2)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two (2) percent to one (1) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(3)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one (1) percent to two (2) percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-166. - Imposition; remittance; recovery. 
(a)  The excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be imposed at the time and be recoverable as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c); 
(b)  The excise tax is due and payable in the same manner as would be required under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-1 et seq., except as otherwise provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-8-110 et seq.; 
(c)  The excise tax shall be a debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts; 
(d)  The excise tax shall be remitted to the governing authority of DeKalb County by the dealer collecting such excise tax; and 
(e)  A liability of the dealer at the applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of excise taxes collected from purchasers, whichever is greater. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-167. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of DeKalb County, or the collecting officer appointed under section 24-170 of this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the special district and to ascertain whether such a purchaser has completed a uniform exemption certificate provided from the website of the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser for the exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates. No penalty shall attach to such provider for failure to collect the excise tax under this article when it has properly collected and remitted local sales and use taxes on such energy where the purchaser would have qualified for the uniform exemption certificate but failed to apply for such certificate or where the purchaser received such certificate but failed to file it with the energy provider. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-168. - Commencement of collections. 
The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on March 1, 2013, and shall be due and payable to the governing authority of DeKalb County as would otherwise be required under Article 1 of Chapter 8 of Title 48 of the O.C.G.A. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-169. - Distribution and expenditure of proceeds. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-114(b), an amount equal to one (1) percent of such proceeds collected by the county shall be paid into the general fund of the county to defray the costs of collection and administration. 
(b)  The remainder of the proceeds, following the subtraction of costs of collection and administration, shall be allocated and distributed by the governing authority of the county, as follows: 
(1)  For that portion derived from the HOST sales and use tax in effect in the special district, such amounts shall be distributed by the county at the same time and in the same manner as other HOST sales and use tax proceeds pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-104(c); and 
(2)  For that portion derived from the MARTA sales and use tax in effect in the special district, such amounts shall be distributed at the same time and in the same manner as other MARTA sales and use taxes. 
(c)  Such remaining proceeds shall not be subject to any use or expenditure requirements provided for under any of the local sales and use taxes now subject to exemption under O.C.G.A. § 48-8-3.2, but shall be authorized to be expended in the same manner as otherwise would have been permitted under such local sale and use taxes or may be expended for any lawful purpose as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-112(c), including deposit in the general fund of DeKalb County and any participating municipality. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-170. - Administrative provisions; audits; examinations; collecting officer. 
(a)  The governing authority of DeKalb County shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. The collecting officer, or the designee of the collecting officer, is specifically authorized to examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment, or other facilities of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax under this article. 
(c)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-118, as part of the audit report required under O.C.G.A. § 36-81-7, the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Sec. 24-171. - Repealer. 
All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
( Ord. No. 13-05, Pt. I, 2-26-13 ) 
Chapter 25 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing, § 7-251 et seq.; solid waste, Ch. 22; utilities in county rights-of-way, § 23-86 et seq.; local laws relating to water, sewers and sewage disposal, App. B, § 1551 et seq. 
Note— It should be noted that Res. No. 96-02R, adopted June 11, 1996 prohibited the self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors in DeKalb County as specified in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d). The user's attention is directed to Act No. 1046, § 3 which provides for the exemption from said self-inspection procedures. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25-1—25-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNTY WATER SYSTEM[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Water system requirements in subdivisions, § 14-311 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of power to provide for development, storage, treatment, purification and distribution of water, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(7); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq.; Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-170 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-26. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Agreement means a contract for water service between the county and other public or private water systems, counties or municipalities. 
Approved means accepted in writing for planning, installation or activation by the director. 
Appurtenance means an item attached to or made part of a water main to divert or control flow, excluding taps and waterlines. 
As-built design means a graphical presentation of the characteristics and scope of work performed which has been prepared by the engineer and approved by the county. 
Authorized person means a regular and designated employee of the county or its legal agent. 
Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, gases or other substances into the distributing pipes of the potable water supply from any source or sources. 
Backflow prevention device means any effective device, method or construction approved by the county, used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of device used should be based on the degree of hazard, either existing or potential. 
Back-siphonage means a form of backflow due to a negative pressure within a potable water system. 
Back pressure means a form of backflow due to a negative pressure within a potable water system. 
Billing period means the time interval between issuance of statements for service. 
Commercial customer means a person receiving service at premises where such person engages in nonmanufacturing business operations, as licensed by the county. 
Commodity charge means a billing to a customer reflecting the volume of water delivered. 
Comprehensive plan means the currently adopted future land use plan for the county. 
Construction cost means the contractor's expense in constructing any additions or modifications to the water system. 
Contractor means a person with whom the county or a developer contracts for execution of work. 
Cross-connection means any actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between the public potable water system or a consumer's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent devices through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to be cross-connections. 
Customer means a person receiving water service from the county. 
Department means the public works department or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce this article. 
Developer means a person engaged in building residential subdivisions, commerical or industrial complexes. 
Development means any action in preparation for construction activities which results in alteration of either land or vegetation. This definition shall not apply to individual single-family dwelling unit construction within a subdivision recorded subsequent to July 28, 1970, or to alteration, modification or additions to single-family dwelling units except for, in either case, individual single-family lots where site plans for each are required by special designation on the recorded plat or such lots are located within the intermediate regional floodplain. 
Director means the public works director of the county, or when a department other than the public works department is designated to enforce provisions of this article, the director of such department. 
Dwelling means a domicile intended for one (1) or more families. 
Dwelling unit means that portion of a dwelling in which only one (1) family resides. 
Engineer means a professional engineer practicing civil-sanitary engineering who is licensed by the state. 
Extension means an addition to the water system consisting of mains six (6) inches or larger in diameter and all appurtenances required or accepted by the county. 
Fire hydrant means a system appurtenance for connection and flow control to temporary fire lines. 
Fire line service means an unmetered or metered permanent connection to the system restricted to fire control use. 
Guarantee deposit means a sum of money specified by the county deposited by a prospective customer as guarantee that bills for service will be paid. 
Health hazard means an actual or potential threat of contamination, or pollution of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system to such a degree of intensity that there would be a danger to health. 
Hearing means a public meeting called at the discretion of the county with appropriate public notice to evaluate merits of a system extension or modification. 
Industrial customer means a person engaged in manufacture or processing of goods or materials, as licensed by the county. 
Inspection means an action by an authorized person who may enter a customer's premises to inspect the water system and any plumbing connected thereto for their compliance with county ordinances. 
Inspection fee means a charge to a customer, contractor, developer or other person for inspecting extensions or existing or new connections to the water system for their compliance with county ordinances. 
Meter means a manufactured unit which is part of the system, used to measure and totalize volume of water flowing from the system into a customer's piping system. 
Miscellaneous service means any noncontinuous service for which charges are set. 
Off-site mains means system water mains installed outside of private property or tracts planned for development. 
On-site mains means system water mains installed in easements or dedicated rights-of-way within private property or tracts planned for development. 
Oversized mains means water mains sized for capacity in excess of that required to meet the short-term needs that prompted extension. 
Planned extension means an extension of the water system by the county done as a programmed fulfillment of a step in its long-range planning process. 
Plans means engineering drawings and specifications for extension of the system or for connections thereto, prepared by an engineer or by the county. 
Plumber means a person licensed to render plumbing services in the county. 
Plumbing means piping and associated fixtures on a premises that are connected in any way to the water system. 
Plumbing fee means that fee paid to the county for the issuance of a plumbing permit. 
Potable water means water meeting the requirements of the latest United States Public Health Service set of regulations, Drinking Water Standards, for use in control of water quality for interstate carriers. 
Premises means building, house, store, plant or any other place where people live, work or congregate. 
Private water system includes the water source, delivery piping and all appurtenances, excluding building plumbing, that serve more than one (1) dwelling unit or a commercial or industrial premises as a potable water supply. 
Property owner means a person holding legal title to a premises or an authorized representative thereof. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries sanitary sewage and excludes groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters. 
Service means the acts and procedures of supplying water to system customers. 
Service charge means billing for recurring service that is provided, whether service is used or not. 
Service cock means the valve placed on the service connection which is used to turn on and turn off the flow of water from the water main to the premises. 
Service connection means the procedure of making service available to a customer, which includes the service line, water meter, service cock and the tap on initial installation; subsequent service connections will normally only require a water meter. 
Service connection charge means a charge made by the county for the service connection including the tap fee when performed. 
Service line means the waterline from a tap to and including meter and service cock if they are required. 
Standard Methods refers to Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, latest edition, published by APHA, AWWA, WPCF. 
Sterilize or sterilization means the procedure of disinfecting water mains, service lines, plumbing and appurtenances by county-approved methods. 
Subdivision means any tract of land, divided, planned or developed as a subdevelopment with two (2) or more residences, buildings or building sites. 
Surge means a sudden pressure change in the water system caused by rapid valve operation. 
Tap means the procedure and result of connecting a service line or water main to an existing or new water main. 
Tap fee means a charge made by the county for making a tap on its water main. 
Unsanitary means unclean, unhealthy or harmful to the public health. 
Valve means a plumbing appurtenance used to control flow in a water main or service line. 
Water main or line means a pipeline in the water system. 
Water system or system means the interrelated network for purification and delivery of drinking water owned by the county, including all water mains, service lines and appurtenances. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1008) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 25-27. - Cross-connection survey team. 
The cross-connection survey team shall work under the direction of the department, and shall have authority for implementation of the cross-connection requirements of the county. It shall have responsibility to see that backflow prevention devices are installed where required, tested for proper functioning upon completion of installation, and periodically tested for proper functioning after installation. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1008) 
Sec. 25-28. - Feasibility of providing service. 
Water service and fire protection shall be provided in the order of application and only if determined to be feasible and consistent with sound system operation. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1001) 
Sec. 25-29. - Water quality standards; inspection; record of treatment operations. 
The system shall supply potable water meeting current drinking water standards established by federal, state and local authorities. The system shall be open to inspection and tests by such authorities upon reasonable notice. The county shall maintain a record of water treatment operations available for public inspection by appointment with the director. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1002) 
Sec. 25-30. - Continuity of service, consistency of quality. 
The county shall make every reasonable effort to provide continuous service and potable water. The county does not warrant that system malfunctions will not result in service interruptions or pressure changes, nor does it guarantee that water quality will not vary, nor does it guarantee that it will be directly suitable for special commercial or industrial processes. The county assumes no liability for damages caused by varying pressure, interrupted service or water quality changes. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1003) 
Sec. 25-31. - Emergency restriction of service. 
(a)  The county reserves the right to shut off or diminish flow in system mains due to repairs, emergencies or water shortage. Notice shall be given in the event of water shortage or prolonged routine maintenance interruptions of service. Notice is not required for emergency diversions of water or emergency repairs. 
(b)  During periods of dry weather, upon determination by the county that a water shortage or potential water shortage exists to the extent that the county water system may not have sufficient flows for domestic service and fire protection, the chief executive may issue such warning to the public as appropriate to effect conservation measures or the chief executive may by order direct that unessential water usages, such as lawn watering and automobile washing, may be restricted to certain hours of the day or not permitted at all until the shortage or potential shortage no longer exists. Persons shall not violate such an order. 
(c)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required either by this section or by an order of the chief executive officer, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with this section and section 1-10. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(d)  For a first violation of the provisions of this section or of an order entered by the chief executive officer pursuant to this section, the director of watershed management or designee shall issue a written warning of the violation and if the violation is not corrected immediately, a notice of violation shall be issued. If the first violation presents an imminent threat to public health or safety, the director of watershed management or designee shall issue an immediate citation in lieu of a written warning. 
(e)  Upon conviction of any violation of this section or of an order entered by the chief executive officer pursuant to this section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(f)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of this section or of an order entered by the chief executive officer pursuant to this section, the court shall impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(g)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of this section or of an order entered by the chief executive officer pursuant to this section, the court shall terminate water service to the property where the violation occurred for a period of time to be determined in the discretion of the court, impose a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and impose a minimum jail sentence of twenty-four (24) hours in the DeKalb County Jail. 
(h)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit DeKalb County from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this code, state, or federal law. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1004; Ord. No. 07-26, Pt. I, 11-13-07) 
Sec. 25-32. - Enlargement, improvement of water supply. 
The county may contract for additional water sources to enlarge and improve the water supply. A public evaluation study prior to contracting shall be made to determine cost effectiveness and to assess the impact of substantial improvements. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1006) 
Sec. 25-33. - System financing. 
The system shall be self-sustaining from its revenues, grants and other incomes. Expansions and improvements of service shall be effected using funds in system accounts or by sale of system revenue certificates. The department shall prepare annual reports of planned expansion and improvement for review by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1007) 
Sec. 25-34. - General maintenance and protection of service policy. 
The county shall take all reasonable and necessary measures to protect the water system from contamination and to assure a continuous supply of potable water. Customers and other persons shall observe all procedures promulgated by the county to meet the above objectives with particular reference to the maintenance and protection procedures contained in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1011) 
Sec. 25-35. - Protection of water sources, storage facilities. 
No person shall enter the premises of water storage facilities or reservoirs without authorization from the department. No person shall place any contaminating substances in water sources or water storage facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1012) 
Sec. 25-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, adopted June 22, 2010, deleted § 25-36, which pertained to connections, taps, etc., by authorized persons only and derived from Code 1976, § 6-1013. 
Sec. 25-37. - Proximity of waterlines to sanitary sewers. 
No sanitary sewer shall be placed within ten (10) feet horizontally of a waterline nor less than three (3) feet above or below a waterline without special protection approved by the department. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1014) 
Sec. 25-38. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, adopted June 22, 2010, deleted § 25-38, which pertained to fire hydrant use and derived from Code 1976, § 6-1015. 
Sec. 25-39. - Surge protection. 
Customers shall not employ fast-acting valves on any line or connection thereto without surge protection approved by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1016) 
Sec. 25-40. - Electrical grounding. 
No new or revamped wiring systems or electrical appliances that may induce shock shall be grounded to the water system or connected thereto. Grounding rods or other devices will be employed. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1017) 
Sec. 25-41. - Covering of appurtenances. 
Pavement or earthwork shall not be placed over any valve or box cover nor shall such appurtenances to the system be rendered inaccessible to the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1018) 
Sec. 25-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— The provisions of former § 25-42, taps on waterlines, derived from Code 1976, § 6-1019, were repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 89-06, adopted Feb. 28, 1989. 
Sec. 25-43. - Location, ownership of facilities. 
The entire water system up to and including meters is the property of the county, except for other water systems connected by agreement. In no case shall mains or appurtenances be placed outside of public rights-of-way or appropriate easements. Title shall not be conveyed to the county for mains or appurtenances without simultaneous conveyance of necessary easements or rights-of-way. Title to any water system property or components shall not be conveyed to any person unless the director and the board of commissioners approve such to be obsolete, surplus, and not needed in long-range system plans and further provided that the county receives compensation or credit in amount of fair market value. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1040) 
Sec. 25-44. - Inspection of premises; right of entry. 
(a)  Application for water service shall constitute agreement that a customer shall allow the county inspection of the premises for violation of this article, maintenance of the system, meter reading, testing, surveys, and inspection of waterline construction. Entry to premises for any purpose other than routine and agreed-upon operations shall be preceded by due notice served as provided in this section. 
(b)  Due notice shall consist of a certified letter, return receipt requested, being mailed to the person refusing to allow entry. This notice shall require acknowledgement and agreement of that person to allow entry, giving ten (10) days' time after receipt of due notice for this to be made. When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten (10) days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter the county may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined above. 
(c)  The county and its authorized agents and employees may enter upon any lands in the county for the purpose of making such surveys, soundings, drillings, and examinations as the county may deem necessary or desirable to accomplish the purposes of planning and engineering water system improvements; and such entry shall not be deemed a trespass nor shall it be deemed an entry which would constitute a taking in a condemnation proceeding, providing that reasonable notice of such entry shall be done in a reasonable manner with as little inconvenience as possible to the owner or occupant of the property, and the county shall make reimbursement for any actual damages resulting from such entry. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1042; Ord. No. 91-24, 10-8-91) 
Sec. 25-45. - Inefficient plumbing fixtures replacement plan. 
Sections 25-45 through 25-49 shall be known as the "DeKalb County Inefficient Plumbing Fixtures Replacement Plan". 
(Ord. No. 08-04, Pt. I, 2-26-08) 
Sec. 25-46. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of sections 25-45 through 25-49, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in this code and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the Georgia codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to state law. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 25-45 through 25-49, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment means one (1) or more rooms intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters with cooking, sleeping and bathroom facilities provided within the dwelling where the occupants have no ownership interest in the dwelling but rather occupy the dwelling as tenants paying rental payments to a landlord. 
Architectural or historic restrictions means a building or structure that has been identified by this Code or a state or federal government entity as a historic site or is one hundred (100) years or older and has special historic or esthetic interest or value. 
Certificate of compliance means a written form in which a home inspector, department of watershed management inspector, or a licensed plumber pursuant to the laws of the state asserts, under penalty of perjury, that all structures on the property only contain water-conserving plumbing fixtures and that all other kinds of plumbing fixtures have been removed from all structures on the property. 
Commercial qualifying property means all land except residential qualifying property in unincorporated DeKalb County containing a structure(s) constructed prior to 1993, including apartments. 
Extreme economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of these sections that exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per toilet in a single-family residential building or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per toilet for a commercial building. 
Residential qualifying property means any land in unincorporated DeKalb County containing a structure(s) constructed prior to 1993 that is an attached or detached single-family dwelling or dwelling unit as those terms are defined by section 27-31. Residential qualifying property does not include apartments as that term is defined in this section. 
Qualifying property means any land in unincorporated DeKalb County containing a structure(s) constructed prior to 1993 and includes commercial and residential qualifying property. 
Water conserving plumbing fixtures means ultra-low-flow toilets (ULFTs) that use a maximum of 1.6 gallons per flush; urinals that use a maximum of 1.0 gallon per flush; showerheads that emit a maximum of 2.5 gallons per minute; lavatory faucets that emit a maximum of 2.0 gallons per minute; kitchen faucets that emit a maximum of 2.2 gallons per minute. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, Pt. I, 2-26-08) 
Sec. 25-47. - Purpose, scope, and policy. 
(a)  The county is authorized to adopt ordinances for the purpose of protecting and preserving the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(b)  Georgia Constitution article 9, § 2, ¶ 3(a)(7) gives the county the authority to provide for distribution of water to its citizens and the governing authority believes that enactment of this inefficient plumbing fixtures replacement plan will help to ensure that its citizens are provided with a continuous supply of potable water for domestic service and fire protection. 
(c)  The drought in the state and in DeKalb County has reached epic proportions and this inefficient plumbing fixtures replacement plan designed to ensure that the county takes reasonable and effective measures to protect DeKalb County's water supply to its residents. 
(d)  The availability of sufficient water is a fundamental necessity and a serious public health issue and this inefficient plumbing fixtures replacement plan designed to provide beneficial public regulations to ensure that potable water remains available to the citizens of DeKalb County now and in future years. 
(e)  Buildings and homes constructed in DeKalb County after January 1, 1993, are required to be built with water-conserving plumbing fixtures like ultra-low-flow toilets that use a maximum of 1.6 gallons per flush and showerheads that emit a maximum of 2.0 gallons per minute. Buildings and homes constructed prior to 1993 do not necessarily contain these water-conserving plumbing fixtures and therefore the continued use of these outdated plumbing fixtures contravenes the governing authority of DeKalb County's obligation to protect DeKalb County's water supply to its residents; and 
(f)  Droughts may very well continue to occur and the availability of an adequate supply of water for domestic service and fire protection will be a serious issue in the coming years. 
(g)  The requirements set forth in this inefficient plumbing fixtures replacement plan will conserve desperately needed water resources so that the citizens of DeKalb County continue to have adequate water for their use. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, Pt. I, 2-26-08) 
Sec. 25-48. - Inefficient plumbing fixtures replacement plan requirements. 
(a)  Disclosure requirements. Any person selling qualifying property after the applicable effective date of these sections shall disclose the requirements of these sections to potential purchasers prior to the execution of any contract to purchase and sell such property. 
(b)  Forms. The chief executive officer or designee shall promulgate all forms and administrative processes required by the enactment of the DeKalb County Inefficient Plumbing Fixtures Replacement Plan. 
(c)  Purchaser's responsibility. No person who purchases qualifying property after the applicable effective date of these sections shall be allowed to obtain water service from DeKalb County until such time as that person has attached a certificate of compliance to the application for water service. 
(d)  Effective date. These sections shall become effective for sales of residential qualifying property on June 1, 2008, and shall become effective for sales of commercial qualifying property on January 1, 2009. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following transactions or types of real property are exempt from compliance with the requirements set forth in sections 25-45 through 25-49: 
(1)  Any real property in unincorporated DeKalb County containing a structure that was constructed after January 1, 1993; 
(2)  Any real property that is being advertised for foreclosure; or 
(3)  Any qualifying property that will not be inhabited but instead will be demolished after sale provided that prior to demolition the purchaser shall not be allowed to obtain water service for the qualifying property unless such water service is solely for demolition or construction-related purposes; 
(4)  Any qualifying property that is sold or conveyed between spouses, or between parents and their children, including conveyances during the administration of the estate of such spouse, parent or child; or 
(5)  Any qualifying property that, because of its architectural or historic restrictions, plumbing configurations, and/or drainage system configurations, would cause the owner to suffer extreme economic hardship. 
(f)  Duty. Nothing in these sections is intended to or shall be construed to create any duty upon the agent of any transferee of any qualifying property; unless otherwise mutually agreed to in writing. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, Pt. I, 2-26-08) 
Sec. 25-49. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by the DeKalb County Inefficient Plumbing Fixtures Replacement Plan set forth in sections 25-45 through 25-49, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 1-10. 
(b)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of the DeKalb County Inefficient Plumbing Fixtures Replacement Plan set forth in sections 25-45 through 25-49, the court shall impose a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of the DeKalb County Inefficient Plumbing Fixtures Replacement Plan set forth in sections 25-45 through 25-49, the court shall impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(d)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit DeKalb County from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this code, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 08-04, Pt. I, 2-26-08) 
DIVISION 1.5. - ILLEGAL USE OF WATER REGULATIONS 

Sec. 25-50. - Title. 
Sections 25-50 through 25-50.14 shall be known as the illegal use of water regulations of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2 or elsewhere in chapter 25 of this Code, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. 
Commercial establishment means any hotel, motel, apartment, multifamily dwelling, rooming house, restaurant, business, industrial, public or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever but does not include a single-family dwelling or a condominium. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.2. - Illegal use of water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain water from the county's water system with the intent to avoid payment for said water. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.3. - Fraudulent representation for use of water. 
It shall be unlawful to make a false representation on the county application for water service to any premises, or to use water in or upon any premises for purposes not set forth in the application. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.4. - Unauthorized connections prohibited. 
No person shall connect to, tap on, or discharge water from any water line or water main belonging to the county without first obtaining the written permission of the chief executive officer or his/her designee to do so and without first paying the required deposit, tap fee, and/or connection charge. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.5. - Unauthorized reconnection prohibited. 
No person shall reconnect or turn on any water connection where the water connection has been disconnected by the county for nonpayment of water bills, or for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.6. - Damage of any appurtenances to water supply system prohibited. 
No person shall damage, destroy, deface, impair the function of, or otherwise vandalize any portion of the county water supply system. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.7. - Meter tampering prohibited. 
No person shall break, alter, change the reading of, or tamper with the mechanism of any water meter of the county. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.8. - Bypassing meter prohibited. 
No person shall attach any pipe, device or mechanism of any kind or type to any county water line, pipe, meter, or main in such a manner as to cause any water to flow through, by or around any county water meter without the meter properly measuring and recording the quantity thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.9. - Permission required to use unmetered water. 
No person shall attach any pipe, device or other mechanism of any kind or type to any county water line, pipe or main where a water meter has not been installed and the water taken does not flow through a water meter without first obtaining written permission from the chief executive officer or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.10. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  No person shall attach a hose, pipe or other mechanism to a county fire hydrant or open a fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the director of the department of watershed management or the county fire chief, except in case of a fire. 
(b)  No person shall be allowed to use water from any fire hydrant connected to the county water system, except by special permit from the director of the department of watershed management or the county fire chief, except in case of fire. 
(1)  Schedule of charges. In cases where a special permit is issued, the department of watershed management shall install a hydrant meter with a backflow preventer. The quantity of water used shall be charged to the customer at the prevailing rates in effect at the time of usage of water. 
(2)  Deposits required. A deposit, as established from time to time by the board of commissioners, shall be required with each application for installation of a hydrant meter. Part of the deposit may be credited against the water charge for the hydrant usage when the meter is removed. If the meter is damaged prior to removal by the county, the deposit shall be forfeited and retained by the county. 
(3)  Backflow prevention. Proper backflow prevention measures shall be used in the manner required by the county cross connection control survey team. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.11. - Unauthorized possession of a fire hydrant meter 
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his/her possession any unauthorized fire hydrant meter. Fire hydrant meters shall be installed by the department of watershed management after the requesting party completes an application and pays applicable fees. The hydrant meter shall be installed as close as possible to the requested location. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.12. - Unauthorized operation of valves or other water system control or regulating devices. 
No person shall operate or change the adjustment of any water system valve, pressure regulating device, or other water system control device without first obtaining written approval from the director of the department of watershed management or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.13. - Water to be cut off in case of violation. 
If any person, either as owner or tenant, shall violate or permit other persons to violate any provision of this division, the supply of water to the premises shall be shut off and service discontinued forthwith. The water shall not again be turned on until such unauthorized use of water is stopped and there shall have been paid to the county such charges as the finance director or his/her designee may determine to be due for water used in violation of this division and for the expense of discontinuing and restoring water service. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Sec. 25-50.14. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person who does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by these illegal use of water regulations, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 1-10. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than one thousand [dollars] ($1,000.00) and impose a minimum jail sentence of twenty-four (24) hours in the DeKalb County Jail. 
(d)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit DeKalb County from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code, state, or federal law. No provision of this division shall prevent DeKalb County from prosecuting the crime of theft of services to the fullest extent allowed by Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 10-11, Pt. I, 6-22-10) 
Secs. 25-51—25-54. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 1.75. - WATER WASTE 

Sec. 25-55. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of section 25-55 through 25-57, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in this Code and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the Georgia codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to state law. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 25-55 through 25-57, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of section 25-56 that exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) 
(Ord. No. 11-20, Pt. I, 11-8-11) 
Sec. 25-56. - Waste of water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to be wasted by leaks, breaks, or malfunctions in any water pipe or fixture on premises owned or occupied by that person. If a person does not repair or report a leak, a break or a malfunction for any period of time beyond which the leak, break, or malfunction reasonably should have been corrected, the county may terminate water service to the premises. A period of two (2) business days after the person discovers such leak, break, or malfunction, or within two (2) business days of receiving a notice from the county of such condition, whichever comes first, shall be presumed to be a reasonable time within which the person shall correct such a condition. Notice from the county shall be hand delivered or posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. If the leak, break, or malfunction poses a public health, public safety, or environmental threat to the citizens of the county, the county may terminate water service immediately with no notice to the occupant of the premises. Water service to the premises shall not be restored until the leak, break, or malfunction is repaired, and all outstanding water bills, including the administrative fee(s) for termination and restoration of water service, have been paid to the county. Within thirty (30) calendar days after the effective date of this section, the chief executive officer or designee shall promulgate a written policy for crediting accounts for water leaks occurring before the leaks are discovered by the property owner or before the property owner receives written notification from the county. If, at any time, the chief executive officer or designee revises the written policy, the policy shall be presented to the board of commissioners for review and concurrence. 
(Ord. No. 11-20, Pt. I, 11-8-11) 
Sec. 25-57. - Economic hardships. 
Any person who can provide proof of economic hardship to the director of the department of watershed management (hereinafter referred to as "director") may petition the director, within two (2) business days after the person discovers such leak, break, or malfunction, or within two (2) business days of receiving a notice from the county of such condition, for additional time to repair a leak, a break, or a malfunction. Should the director grant the petition, the petitioner will receive no more than an additional fifteen (15) business days to correct the condition and, during this period, water service to the premises shall not be terminated. The petitioner shall be responsible for all costs and associated fees of water usage and wastage following the initial two (2) business-day period after discovery or notification until the leak, break, or malfunction is corrected. 
(Ord. No. 11-20, Pt. I, 11-8-11 
Secs. 25-58—25-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE 

Sec. 25-61. - Planned extensions to developed areas. 
The county may, as part of its continuing service to residents, extend water service without petition to developed areas presently obtaining service from other sources. In such cases, a property owner must tie onto the county system if service is available within three hundred (300) feet of the premises' property line after due notice from the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1032) 
Sec. 25-62. - Planned extensions to developing areas. 
The county may, as part of its continuing service to residents, extend water service to areas planned for development or in the course of development provided that cost benefits analysis shows projected revenues or cost participation to be sufficient to warrant extension. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1033) 
Sec. 25-63. - Incorporation of private systems. 
Existing water systems in apartment and condominium developments, office complexes and similar developments including subdivision water mains may be incorporated into the county water system on approval by the county. System water mains and appurtenances must meet county standards for materials and design. Remedial work costs to meet standards shall be borne by developers, owners or customers using or administering the system prior to conveyance. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1034) 
Sec. 25-64. - Requests for installation of water mains on existing county roads. 
(a)  A request for the installation of a water main by county residents who live on existing county roads not serviced by the water system shall be presented to the board of commissioners through the department on petition forms provided by the department. The petitioner shall agree to pay the service connection charge for each residence prior to installation of the new main for use when the main is complete. This purchase will not be required if the petitioner has previously purchased a meter for the address in the petition. 
(b)  A maximum of one hundred (100) linear feet of water main will be installed by the county for each petitioner without charge. If additional footage is required to serve all petitioners, the petitioners shall reimburse the county for any excess footage at the per-linear-foot charge of an eight-inch line based upon the actual estimated cost of construction. This sum shall be on a pro rata basis or in a specified amount for each petitioner listed on the petition with the total of the amounts specified equaling the total reimbursable cost. Pro rata costs shall be equally divided based on the total number of petitioners rather than on the length required to cover the frontage of each petitioner. 
(c)  Prior to submission of the petition, the petitioner shall be provided with cost data by the county for the total length of water main installation required. The petition shall be presented to the county at which time a preliminary design will be prepared for the water main as submitted. If a water main larger than eight (8) inches is required to conform with plans for future water service, cost data shall be prepared for both the eight-inch and larger mains and the county shall bear the difference in cost at that time. 
(d)  The department shall, before placing the petition on the agenda, coordinate with the county board of health to ascertain whether any health hazards exist in the petition area that may be alleviated or corrected by the installation of the requested water main. 
(e)  This information shall be presented for consideration by the board of commissioners together with the petition and estimate of cost for review and decision. 
(f)  The board of commissioners may waive the provisions of this section at its discretion, particularly in those instances where the board of health has determined that a health hazard exists as a consequence of the use of private water supply systems. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1035) 
Sec. 25-65. - Developer requests for extension or replacement of water mains on existing county roads. 
[Developer requests for the extension or replacement of water mains on existing county roads shall be processed as follows:] 
(1)  In the event the county's plans for future water service call for a main to be installed larger than the size of the main required to supply the development, then the county may pay the difference in cost of the materials to install the size main required by the county. The comparison of material costs will be based upon the county's material cost for the larger pipe. Payment by the county will be made upon completion and satisfactory inspection of the work by the county and upon receipt of a maintenance bond equal to ten (10) percent of the cost of the construction of the water to ten (10) percent of the cost of the construction of the water facility. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the county in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. An eight-inch main will be considered as the minimum size main required to supply a development of any size. 
(2)  Water main design shall be accomplished by county water system engineers unless otherwise authorized by the county. 
(3)  When the developer completes his work in accordance with county specifications and the work has been duly inspected by the water and sewer division of public works, the developer shall provide "as-built" drawings in accordance with section 25-66(2) and any required easements for the water main installation to the county. 
(4)  After the work has been completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the county, the developer shall provide a maintenance bond equal to ten (10) percent of the costs of the construction of such facilities. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the county in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. 
(5)  The developer shall be required to maintain the water lines for a period of twelve (12) months. During this developer maintenance period, the county shall make inspections and instruct the developer by letter as to what corrections must be made, if any. 
(6)  At the end of the twelve-month developer maintenance period, the county shall make a final inspection and notify the developer and the bonding company, if any, of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable at this time, the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit shall be released. 
(7)  If required corrections are not made within thirty (30) days of notice, the county shall have the authority to make these corrections at the expense of the bonding company. In cases where funds are being held under letter of credit or letter of escrow, the cost of making these corrections shall be drawn by the county from these funds, and the developer charged with any costs above the amount of such funds. 
(8)  The county shall have full authority to inspect, test and sterilize all water mains installed under this section. 
(9)  No use shall be made of such systems nor shall the county accept such systems until the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section and until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-10-36; Ord. No. 89-06, § 2, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 89-16, § 1, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 92-25, 7-28-92) 
Cross reference— Sterilization of water mains, § 14-330. 
Sec. 25-66. - Installation of water mains in residential subdivisions. 
Water mains installed in residential subdivisions shall be installed subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Water mains shall be designed by the county. 
(2)  Installation shall be accomplished by a qualified contractor and shall be in accordance with latest county specifications. Upon comletion of the water line construction, an engineer, registered in the State of Georgia must provide a statement that the system, as installed, is in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
(3)  The county shall have full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such systems until satisfactory sterilization and test have been completed. 
(4)  If it is necessary to route the proposed water main through private property of the developer for circulation or supply purposes, the developer will provide the county with the required easements. Requests for water mains should be submitted to the public works department after the development plat has been approved by the planning department. A sepia drawing of the proposed development and a properly executed request form should be submitted in order that a layout and estimate of the cost may be prepared by the county. All known requirements for water to satisfy the underwriters, as well as the needs of the prospective occupants, should be stated to assist in the preparation of the layout and estimate. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1037; Ord. No. 89-06, § 3, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 92-21, 7-28-92) 
Sec. 25-67. - Installation of water mains in dedicated streets of residential, commercial, industrial developments. 
(a)  Installation of water mains in dedicated streets of residential, commercial and industrial developments shall be installed under the following conditions: 
(1)  Water mains to serve the development shall be designed by the county. 
(2)  Installation shall be accomplished by a qualified contractor approved by the county and shall be in accordance with latest county specifications. 
(3)  The county shall have full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such systems until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(b)  Installation of water mains in commercial/industrial developments in other than dedicated streets shall be in accordance with the policy concerning shopping centers and other similar developments. 
(c)  Requests for water mains should be submitted to the department after the development plat has been approved by the planning department. A sepia drawing of the proposed development and properly executed request form should be submitted in order that a layout and estimate of the cost may be prepared by the county. All known requirements for water to satisfy the underwriters, as well as the needs of the prospective occupants, should be stated to assist in the preparation of the layout and estimate. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1038; Ord. No. 89-06, § 4, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 92-22, 7-28-92) 
Sec. 25-68. - Installation of water mains in shopping centers, certain apartment and condominium developments, developments not dedicating streets to county. 
(a)  Shopping centers, apartment and condominium developments of R-A5 or greater density, and similar developments which do not dedicate streets to the county shall be served by a master meter. In cases where fire protection is required to be installed, an eight-inch or larger fire line main may be served through an eight-inch or larger master meter and potable water service taken from the fire line main within the development. As an alternate to this, an unmetered fire line may be installed with a separate master-metered potable water service line. Exception to the requirement for the master meter may be made when, in the opinion of the county, conditions are such that the installation of individual meters within the development would prove more feasible than serving the development by a master meter. 
(b)  Installation of an eight-inch or larger water main within developments shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Design of all lines six (6) inches and larger shall be approved by the county, and all materials used in construction of the water main shall be in accordance with county specifications. 
(2)  All water main materials and labor shall be paid for by the developer, and installation shall be in accordance with county specifications and by a qualified contractor. 
(3)  The county shall have the full authority to inspect, test and require sterilization of all water mains. No use shall be made of such water mains until satisfactory sterilization and tests have been completed. 
(Code 1976; Ord. No. 6-1039; Ord. No. 89-06, § 5, 2-28-89) 
Sec. 25-69. - Purchase of materials for water system construction on private property. 
(a)  A water system constructed on private property will not be accepted for maintenance by the county unless all water line and appurtenant materials required for the installation is inspected by the county prior to construction and are found to meet the material specifications published by the water and sewer division of public works. 
(b)  All water system construction on private property must be inspected by the county during construction before maintenance acceptance will be considered. 
(c)  Any planned water system construction considered as private by the owner during the permitting and development review stage of plans review by the county will remain private unless subparagraphs (a) and (b) are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 91-26, 11-12-91; Ord. No. 92-23, 7-28-92) 
Secs. 25-70—25-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - INITIATION, CONNECTION AND TERMINATION OF SERVICE 

Sec. 25-81. - Application for service for all classifications. 
Persons desiring water service shall file application with the department and sign a standard contract form prior to receiving service. Application shall be made in person by customer or agent. A prospective customer will be assigned to the proper user classification. Separate application is required for each classification of service desired. A completed application in the form prescribed by the county shall be received at least ten (10) days prior to service connection availability. The use of water service binds a person as if such person had signed a contract. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1051) 
Sec. 25-82. - Application for miscellaneous services. 
Written application for miscellaneous services shall be made to the department, which shall prescribe uniform procedures and guidelines for initiation of such services. Miscellaneous services shall be scheduled in the order of approved application except in cases of emergency or requirement for financial participation by the county requiring approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1052) 
Sec. 25-83. - New service connections. 
Where a service line does not exist to premises, the county shall tap the water main and install a service line, including meter, meter box and service cock. Service connection shall be made only by an authorized person. No contractor, plumber or other person shall tap any water main without written permission from the county. The customer at this point shall connect the plumbing to the water system. Only one (1) service line shall be provided per application. Service cocks shall be operated only by an authorized contractor or plumber making repairs on plumbing or waterlines, or by an authorized person. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1053) 
Sec. 25-84. - Existing connections. 
Where a service line exists, the county shall determine whether this service line is to be used or requires replacement. Where service line replacement is required, the application shall be charged as though it were a new service connection. Service connection shall be made as provided for a new service connection. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1054) 
Sec. 25-85. - Metering. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are defined. Where words have not been defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Apartment means one (1) or more rooms with a private bath and kitchen facilities comprising an independent self-contained residential unit in a building(s). 
Condominium for the purposes of this section is defined in the same manner as it is defined in section 27-31. 
Master meter means a utility-owned meter that measures and totalizes the volume of water flowing from the water distribution system into a multifamily dwelling unit as that term is defined in section 27-31, building piping system. 
Newly constructed apartment means any structure for which a building permit for construction of an apartment is issued after June 1, 2008. 
Newly constructed single-family dwelling or condominium means any structure for which a building permit for construction of a single-family dwelling or condominium is issued after June 1, 2008. 
Separate water meter means a utility-owned meter that measures and totalizes the volume of water flowing from the water distribution system into a single family dwelling or condominium's piping system. 
Single-family dwelling for the purposes of this section is defined in the same manner as it is defined in section 27-31 but also includes dwelling units on an individual lot attached to another dwelling unit by a common party wall, commonly referred to as a town house or town home. 
Sub-unit water meter means water meters owned and managed by the property owner with a utility-owned master meter that bills for water service based on volume of use. Sub-unit water meters shall allow for the water use in each apartment to be tracked separately. 
(b)  Meters. All users except those classified as fire line users shall be metered. All meters shall be sized on the basis of expected volume of water usage. All meters, except sub meters, are part of the service line provided by the county and are the property of the county. 
(c)  Sub-unit water meters for newly constructed apartments. No water shall be furnished to any newly constructed apartment except through sub-unit water meters so that the water use in each apartment can be accurately tracked. Sub-unit water meters allow tenants to know how much water they use and may encourage wiser use of water. Water service however, shall be billed by the county on a master meter basis and the property owner and/or landlord is responsible for paying the county for all charges contained in such bills. The enactment of this section in no way prevents property owners and/or landlords from using sub-unit water meters to bill each tenant for actual water usage which will encourage wiser use of water by tenants in apartments. 
(d)  Separate water meters for single family dwellings and condominiums. No water shall be furnished to any newly constructed single-family dwelling or condominium except through separate water meters. Water service shall be billed by the county to the property owner based on individual unit water meters and each property owner is responsible for paying the county for all charges contained in such bills. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1055; Ord. No. 08-05, Pt. I, 3-25-08) 
Sec. 25-86. - Inspection of service connections. 
All plumbing or yard piping connections to a service line shall be subject to inspection by an authorized person prior to service connection. Refusal to allow inspection shall result in refusal of service until inspection is permitted. Inspection may include requirement that plumbing and piping plans be submitted where, in the director's opinion, possibility of system contamination or cross-connection may result from service connection. In no case shall service connection be made until all inspection requirements are met. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1056) 
Sec. 25-87. - Refusal of service. 
Water service may be refused only for the following justifications; reapplication may be made where reasons are rectified: 
(1)  Refusal to allow entry. Where admittance to property for necessary work or inspection is not allowed, the county may refuse service. 
(2)  Damage to system by connection. Where in the opinion of the county connection will seriously reduce system pressure and fire protection, the county may refuse service. 
(3)  Remoteness from system. Where connection requires investment in transmission mains that would not be justified by likely revenues, the board of commissioners may refuse service or require substantial cost sharing by the customer. 
(4)  Technical infeasibility. Where connection would require special pumps or other devices to effect service, the board of commissioners may refuse service or require substantial cost sharing by the customer. 
(5)  Health hazard. Where connection could cause contamination of the system, the county may refuse service. 
(6)  Unpaid water bills. New connections or reconnections shall not be made until all previous financial obligations to the system have been met or resolved. This paragraph only applies to owner-occupied property. 
(7)  Fraudulent misrepresentation in application. If water service has been approved for a location, and thereafter it is determined that the application for the water service contained false or misleading information or omitted material facts, or that the water is being used in or upon the premises for purposes not set forth in the application made for the water service, then the water shall be shut-off by the county, and shall remain shut-off by the county, until the application for water service has been corrected to the satisfaction of the director of finance or until all unauthorized use of water has ceased and any past due sums payable for the water service account have been fully paid to the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1057; Ord. No. 17-03, Pt. I, 7-22-03) 
Sec. 25-88. - Customer-requested termination. 
A customer shall give at least ten (10) days' notice of desire to terminate service to the finance director, who will advise the customer of approximate date. However, the county is not bound to terminate on a certain date. Service turnoff shall be done only by an authorized person. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1058) 
Sec. 25-89. - Termination due to violations of operating and maintenance procedure. 
(a)  If the county determines that procedures established by the county for operating and maintaining the system are being violated by a user or other person, the county will give due notice as provided herein. If such violation continues, service to the responsible person shall be terminated and penal actions as provided herein may be taken. 
(b)  Assessments of all penalties shall be preceded by due notice, except in case of emergency requiring termination of service. Due notice shall be given by a certified letter, return receipt requested, mailed to the person presumed to be violating a section of this article. This notice shall set forth remedial action required of that person, giving ten (10) days' time after receipt of due notice for remedial action to be completed. If the county determines after this period that the violation continues unremedied, the director may recommend to the proper authorities that the presumed violator be cited for each day that the violation continues unresolved not including the ten-day period. 
(c)  When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten (10) days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter, the county may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined above. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1059) 
Sec. 25-90. - Termination due to improper usage. 
(a)  The making of improper connections to the system endangering system integrity or possibly leading to system contamination shall be cause for immediate termination of service. Restoration of service after rectification of improper connection shall be treated as a reconnection. Improper usage not determined by the county to be of emergency potential shall result in termination after due notice is given. 
(b)  Assessments of all penalties shall be preceded by due notice, except in case of emergency requiring termination of service. Due notice shall be given by a certified letter, return receipt requested, mailed to the person presumed to be violating a section of this article. This notice shall set forth remedial action required of that person, giving ten (10) days' time after receipt of due notice for remedial action to be completed. If the county determines after this period that the violation continues unremedied, the county may recommend to the proper authorities that the presumed violator be cited for each day that the violation continues unresolved not including the ten-day period. 
(c)  When due notice is given for purpose of access for surveys or inspection, acknowledgement and agreement to allow entry shall be made within the same ten (10) days and no offense is presumed. Thereafter, the county may issue citations by certified letter for each day of violation now presumed only after issuing a second due notice for violation as outlined above. 
(d)  Any person or user of the system who has been found to be in violation of mandatory water restrictions or mandatory water conservation policies as imposed by the director shall first be issued a notice of violation. If the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in recorder's court. If the person or user of the system continues to be in violation of mandatory water restrictions or mandatory water conservation policies thereafter, the continuing violation shall be cause for immediate termination of service. Restoration of service after rectification shall be treated as a reconnection. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1060; Ord. No. 00-74, 6-27-00) 
Sec. 25-91. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Whenever the director determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the director shall serve upon the violator a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in recorder's court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)  If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the director shall issue a summons to the violator to appear in recorder's court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the violator is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may issue a summons to appear in recorder's court or terminate connection to the water system without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the director, the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or to the water system. Nothing in this code section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action to terminate connection to the water system or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(d)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction in recorder's court shall be subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-10 of this Code. Each day of violation is considered a separate offense and is subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 00-74, 6-27-00) 
Sec. 25-92. - Authority to write summons. 
The director may designate authorized personnel of the department to write summons to appear before a court pertaining to violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 00-74, 6-27-00) 
Secs. 25-93—25-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 25-101. - Generally. 
(a)  All water system rates and charges shall be as established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, upon recommendation by the director. 
(b)  Procedures for revenue collection shall be established by the finance director. 
Sec. 25-102. - Classification of users. 
The following list of system users establishes classifications of service as a basis of charges: 
(1)  Single. All dwelling, commercial and industrial customers are in this classification who use all of the water supplied through a connection for any use besides fire protection. 
(2)  Fire line. A customer shall only use the connection applied for under this classification for fire protection. 
(3)  Combined potable and fire line. Any shopping center and/or other development served by a combination potable and fire line located outside the public right-of-way shall be classified as a combined potable and fire line user, where either of the following exists: 
a.  A fire line main is served through a master meter with potable water service taken from that fire line main within the development. 
b.  Potable water is taken from the fire line through multiple meters. 
(4)  Multiple. No multiple dwelling, commercial or industrial customers shall be on one (1) meter, except in case of apartments, shopping centers and office parks, where in the judgment of the director multiple meters are impractical. Approved multiple category customers shall have one (1) meter per premises and shall be charged as single category users. 
(5)  Temporary. Temporary use permits shall be granted for periods not exceeding thirty (30) days. After permit expiration the county may, at its option, renew the permit or assign the customer to a permanent classification. This service shall not be used for permanent installation. 
(6)  Flat rate. Any existing flat rate customers shall be changed to single or fire line as appropriate. There shall be no unmetered or flat rate customers except as provided under temporary and fire line classifications. 
(7)  Contract. Contract users shall include only counties and incorporated municipalities with separate water systems. The service is provided by agreement. 
(8)  Illegal. Any user who has not made application for service and received a service connection or whose service has been terminated or who uses a connection for purposes other than as provided in the user's assigned classification is an illegal user. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1072) 
Sec. 25-103. - Recurring charges. 
The following charges are set by the board of commissioners and shall be billed on a recurring basis as continuing charges: 
(1)  Service. All classifications of users except fire line shall be billed a base charge for service availability, whether service is used or not. This charge shall be fixed on the basis of meter size. For combined potable and fire line users who provide a specific means of determining the requirements of the development, such as by the installation of private meters by the owner, the service charge shall be based on the number and size of private meters installed. 
(2)  Commodity. All classifications of users except fire line shall be billed a commodity charge in addition to a service charge on the basis of actual volume of water delivered at the single unit volume rate set by the board of commissioners. 
(3)  Fire line. Fire line customers shall be billed for service availability on the basis of diameter of connection to system mains and number of fire hydrants on premises. If a building complex has establishments each with different owners, then the fire line charges will be prorated by the director based on square footage protected. For combined potable and fire line users: 
a.  Where fire hydrants are installed on private lines served through a master meter and/or where such lines serve building sprinkler systems, the owner will be billed for fire service availability on the basis of diameter of connection required to the system mains for fire protection only and on the number of hydrants. There will be no charge, however, for any hydrant which is determined by the county to be adjacent to and available to a public roadway. In addition, potable water readiness to serve charge will be based on the size line required for estimated average flow based on commodity billing as determined by the county. 
b.  Where an owner elects to dedicate lines and rights-of-way outside the public road right-of-way in order to utilize multiple meters and where such lines have hydrants installed or serve building sprinkler systems, the owner will be billed for fire service availability on the basis of diameter of connection required to the system mains for fire protection only and on the number of fire hydrants. There will be no charge, however, for any hydrant which is determined by the county to be adjacent to and available to a public roadway. If a building complex has establishments each with different owners, then the fire line charges will be prorated by the county based on square footage protected. 
(4)  Contract. Contract service is only by agreement. Billing shall be on the basis of a service charge plus metered volume of water delivered at the unit volume rate set by the board of commissioners. Billing shall be at equal periods set by the board and not less than semiannually. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1073; Ord. No. 92-24, 7-28-92) 
Sec. 25-104. - Miscellaneous charges. 
(a)  Certain noncontinuous services provided by the county water system have set charges as designated by the county. Charges shall be reviewed from time to time to assure that they cover the cost of services. 
(b)  A charge shall be set by the board for installing a service line and meter based on the size of the meter. This charge shall apply to all classifications except fire line users. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1074) 
Sec. 25-105. - Special assessments. 
The following charges must be ascertained by the director on a case-by-case basis reflecting exigencies involved: 
(1)  Damage. The county shall determine charges to be assessed against any person causing damage to any part of the water system. 
(2)  Unauthorized activity. Such actions include any connection to or tampering with the system without prior approval of the county. Charges assessed shall reflect the county's assessment of costs involved in inspecting such work or in taking remedial action. Additionally, persons involved shall be assessed such charges as would apply were the work preauthorized and shall be subject to other penalties. 
(3)  Replacement of improvements. Persons engaged in work affecting or connecting to the system shall bear the total cost of replacement of any improvements or for making such improvements whole again. These include, but are not limited to, grassing, embankments, pavement and base curbing to county standards. After due notice, the county may elect to proceed with restorative work and charge the damaging person on a materials and force account basis. 
(4)  Service termination. A single charge shall be set for termination of service whether initiated by the customer or by the county. Customers relocating within the system service area must terminate old service and make new application. 
(5)  Reconnection fee. A charge shall be set for resumption of service to a customer where termination was due to failure to pay bills. New or relocated customers using an existing service line are charged under this paragraph. All previous bills shall be paid before a service reconnection will be made. This paragraph only applies to owner-occupied property. 
(6)  Meter testing. The county may periodically test all meters on its system. A customer may request a test to be made without charge. 
(7)  Tap fee. A fee shall be set by the county for providing a connection for a service line or water main to an existing or new water main. Fee shall be based on diameter of service line or water main to be connected to the tap. 
(8)  Inspection and sterilization. The county shall establish a list of charges for inspection and line sterilization which shall apply to various categories of construction, duly reflecting force and material requirements. 
(9)  Temporary use. Temporary use charges shall be set by the county on a case-by-case basis; such fees shall be no less than the sum of appropriate recurring charges and miscellaneous charges. Such temporary uses, whether connected to mains or fire hydrants, shall be metered. Fire hydrant connections shall also be approved by the department of fire and rescue services. 
(10)  Other services. For any services not falling within these definitions, the county may fix a charge on the basis of cost of labor and materials required. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1075; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. 1, § 2, 11-27-01) 
Sec. 25-106. - Revenue collections. 
(a)  Payment. A meter reading of all water meters and fire line checks shall be made by the county on a regular basis. All bills are issued by and shall be paid to the finance department. Payment is due within ten (10) days of issuance and may be made by mail or in person at the address noted on the statement. Failure to receive the bill shall not relieve the customer of payment responsibility. 
(b)  Delinquent payment. Notice of delinquent payment shall require payment within ten (10) days of the date due. Service will be terminated after that period without notice. Failure to receive a bill shall not relieve a customer of payment responsibility. 
(c)  Excess payments and refunds. Excess payments for all customers shall be credited to the next billing unless service is terminated or written refund request is made. 
(d)  Liability of owner. When service is terminated to a rented premises, service may be restored to the premises upon request of a party, renter or owner, who is not personally liable for or who did not personally apply for water service previously and who was previously not delinquent in payment of the water bill at these premises. 
(e)  Estimated bills. The county may estimate bills in the case of a broken, inaccurate or inaccessible meter on the basis of previous billings, adding retroactive charges where appropriate. 
(f)  Contested charges. A customer may make written notice of an error in charges. In such cases the customer shall make payment equal to that portion of charges uncontested or equal to previous billing, whichever is larger, by payment due date. The finance director will review contested charges and adjust the next billing as appropriate. The customer may make written request for a hearing with the director or the director's representative if the review is unsatisfactory. Payment must be made for reviewed contested charges when due. Credit shall be made if findings are reversed by the director, whose decision is final. 
(g)  Discounts. No discounts shall be made for payments due or for large volume use. Discounts in the form of credits or refunds may be made for change in meter sizes or charged materials returned to the county in satisfactory condition. 
(h)  Application fee. Any applicant for water or sewer service shall complete an application for service, shall provide the county with identification for billing purposes, and shall pay an application fee to the county. Application fees shall be set by the board of commissioners. 
(i)  Reserved. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1076; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 5-23-95; Ord. No. 97-14, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 01-13, § 1, 7-10-01) 
Secs. 25-107—25-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Water system requirements in subdivisions, § 14-311 et seq. 
State Law reference— Water Well Standards Act of 1985, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 25-126. - Generally. 
Private water systems and vendors shall be governed by all criteria in this chapter relating to water purity, protection of supply and system sanitation, and shall be licensed by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1081) 
Sec. 25-127. - Approval of plans. 
All plans for private water systems shall be prepared by an engineer of the county and approved by the county prior to construction. Materials of construction shall meet minimum standards set by the county for the public water system. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1082) 
Sec. 25-128. - Connection to public water system. 
No connection shall be made between the county water system and a private water system except by approval of the board of commissioners. Such approved connections shall be metered and equipped with backflow prevention devices approved by the county and subject to all conditions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1083) 
Sec. 25-129. - No county warranty. 
By its regulation of private water systems and suppliers, the county assumes no liability for the purity of such water or for damages caused by operators of private facilities. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1084) 
Secs. 25-130—25-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Jurisdiction of sewer department, App. B, § 1551; on-site sewage disposal systems, § 13-246 et seq.; sewer systems in subdivisions, §§ 14-351 et seq., 14-396 et seq. 
State Law reference— Constitutional grant of power to provide for sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX § II, ¶ III(a)(6); Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 25-146. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approval authority means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Municipal Permitting Program. 
Authorized person means a regular employee of the county authorized to enforce the provisions of this article. Authorized representative of the user: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second-quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in paragraphs (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized, representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the department. 
BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at two hundred (200) centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge of wastes from the drainage pipes within the walls of a building and conveys this discharge to the building sewer beginning ten (10) feet outside the inner face of the building. 
Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sanitary sewer system or other place of disposal. 
Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits, promulgated by the federal EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471. 
Categorical user means any significant industrial user that is subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
COD (chemical oxygen demand) means the amount of oxygen equivalent that the organic matter in a sample utilizes in the presence of a strong chemical oxidant (expressed in milligrams per liter). 
Combined sewer means a sewer intentionally receiving groundwaters, surface waters, and stormwaters together with sewage. 
Constituents means the combination of particles or pollutants which exist in wastes. 
Control manhole means a manhole on or near a user's property used for sampling purposes through which the user's discharge to the sanitary sewer passes. 
Department means the public works department. 
Designated area means any tract of land, parcel of land, subdivision or section of the county which, by virtue of its topography or existing sanitary sewer facilities, can be treated as a unit. The director shall be the sole judge as to the boundaries, limits,, and extent of these areas, whether or not these areas abut present public roads. 
Director means the public works director or any of that person's authorized representatives. 
Environmental Protection Agency or Federal EPA means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the Federal EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Federal Clean Water Act or Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, presently codified at 33 U.S.C § 1250 et seq., and all regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
Flammable means any material which is easily ignited and burns with unusual rapidity as defined by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce, tin cans, glass containers and newspapers. 
Georgia EPD or EPD means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Grab sample means a sample which is taken from a wastestream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes and solid and gaseous materials contained therein, of whatever nature, arising out of any manufacturing, processing, fabricating, treating, renovating or any other commercial operation. 
Inspection fee means the amount of money charged to the contractor or plumber for each inspection. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composited sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate of the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, and therefore is a cause of violation of the county's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or thereunder, stringent regulations: permits issued or any more state or local Section 405 of the Federal Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
Lot of land means the smallest unit, owned by the same party or parties, into which any tract or parcel of land has been divided either by deed, plat or any other means of subdivision. 
Medical waste means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Federal Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does-not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of section (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
Noncontact cooling water means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
Objectionable means unacceptable, unsatisfactory or displeasing to the physical senses. 
Outlet means point of discharge into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, stream or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the county's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Person means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
pH means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
Plumbing fee means that fee paid to the county for the issuance of a plumbing permit. 
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
Premises means building, house, store, plant or any other place where people live, work or congregate. 
Pretreatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment on a user other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standard or standards means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards and local limits. 
Priority pollutant means any contaminant in water which is identified as being toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic, teratogenic or is chemically similar to compounds identified as such, by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. The list includes one hundred twenty-nine (129) compounds and such other compounds as may be added from time to time, less any compound which may be deleted by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 
Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges means the absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. 
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods, which have been cut in such a way that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sanitary sewers, with no particle larger than one-half (½) inch in any dimension. 
Publicly owned treatment works or POTW means a "treatment works", as defined by Section 212 of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the county. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
Public sewer means a common sanitary sewer directly controlled by the county and approved by the county for use as a sanitary sewer. 
Sanitary sewer means a pipe which carries sewage and by design excludes groundwaters, surface waters and stormwaters. 
Septic tank means a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with the following: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with unperforated pipe, with sealed joints, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub-out. 
(2)  A subsurface drainage field system consisting of piping and other materials producing drainage of the clarified discharge from the tank while distributing it underground to be filtered or absorbed. 
Sewage means the water-carried wastes, including human excrement and grey water (household showers, dishwashing operations, etc.) from residences, business buildings and institutions. 
Sewer means an artificial, usually subterranean, conduit to carry off sewage. 
Sewer system and sewerage means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, transporting and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer tap fee or tap fee means the service charge for making a connection to the sewer system. 
Significant industrial user means: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons per work month or twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the county on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the county may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Slug load or slug means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of this ordinance; or, any discharge in which the concentration of any given constituent exceeds, for any period longer than fifteen (15) minutes, five (5) times the average twenty-four-hour concentration of that constituent during normal operations. 
Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, excluding sewage and industrial wastes. 
Stormwater means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
Subdivision means any tract of land divided, planned or developed as a subdevelopment with two (2) or more residences, buildings or building sites. 
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
Tap fee or sewer tap fee means the service charge for making a connection to the sewer system. 
Unsanitary means unclean, unhealthy or harmful to the public health. 
User or industrial user means a source of indirect discharge. 
Wastewater means the liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater discharge permit means a permit in the form prescribed by the county, which establishes the wastewater characteristics which a significant industrial user may contribute or cause to be contributed to the sewer system. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2002; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 25-147. - Certain agreements unaffected. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of: 
(1)  The Standards of Acceptability for Sewage Discharged into the Metropolitan Sewer System being annex C to the Metropolitan Sewer Agreement between the City of Atlanta and DeKalb County, dated July 16, 1968. 
(2)  The Sewer Agreement between DeKalb County and Gwinnett County, dated May, 1971. 
(3)  The DeKalb-Clayton Conley Creek Drainage Area Sewer Agreement, dated November 13, 1973. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2142) 
Sec. 25-148. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Whenever the director determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the director shall serve upon the violator a notice of violation. The notice of violation shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, and state that, if the violation is not remedied within a specified reasonable time to be determined by the director, a summons shall be issued for the violator to appear in recorder's court. The notice of violation shall set forth the potential penalty involved and the fact that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the director may issue a summons to appear in recorder's court without first issuing a notice of violation if, in the judgment of the director, the violation constitutes a threat to the public health, safety, general welfare, or to the sewer system. 
(c)  If the violation has not been remedied within the time specified in the notice of violation, the director shall issue a summons to the violator to appear in recorder's court. The summons shall be in writing, include a description of the property sufficient for identification of where the violation has occurred, list the provisions of this article which have been violated, set forth the penalty if the violator is convicted of the violation, and state that each day the violation continues shall constitute a new and separate violation. 
(d)  Nothing in this code section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency action action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(e)  Any person who shall do anything prohibited or fail to do anything required by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a violation of this article and upon conviction in recorder's court shall be subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-10 of this Code. Each day of violation is considered a separate offense and is subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment or both as set forth in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2141; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-149. - Authority to write summons. 
The director may designate authorized personnel of the department to write summons to appear before a court to answer questions pertaining to violations of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2131) 
Sec. 25-150. - Right of entry: inspection and sampling of industrial or commercial properties. 
The director and other employees designated by the director, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this ordinance and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the director or his designees ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where the user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the director or his designees will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The director or his designees shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operation. 
(3)  The director may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated quarterly to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the director or his designees and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the director or his designees access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this ordinance. 
(6)  If the director or his designees has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as a part of a routine inspection and sampling pro gram of the county designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of an inspection warrant through the county attorney from recorder's court. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2132; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-151. - Right of entry to inspect private properties. 
The director and the director's designated agents, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter during reasonable working hours, except in the event of an emergency, all private properties through which the county holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, measurement, maintenance, observation, repair and sampling any portion of the sewage system lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the specific easement pertaining to the property involved. Specific permission is granted the director and the director's designated agents, upon proper notification, to enter all private properties for the purpose of surveying or inspecting the premises, or sampling or monitoring of wastewater. While working on private properties referred to in this section, all county employees shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. The owner of the private properties shall not be held liable for injury to county employees while on the owner's properties. 
The county and its authorized agents and employees may enter upon any lands in the county for the purpose of making such surveys, soundings, drillings, and examinations as the county may deem necessary or desirable to accomplish the purposes of planning and engineering sewer system improvements; and such entry shall not be deemed a trespass nor shall it be deemed an entry which would constitute a taking in a condemnation proceeding, providing that reasonable notice of such entry shall be done in a reasonable manner with as little inconvenience as possible to the owner or occupant of the property, and the county shall make reimbursement for any actual damages resulting from such entry. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2133; Ord. No. 91-25, 10-8-91) 
Sec. 25-152. - Inspection warrants. 
The director, in addition to other procedures provided, may obtain an inspection warrant for the purpose of inspection or investigation of conditions relating to the enforcement of this article, compliance with the terms of any permit, or observation, measurement, sampling or testing with respect to any federal or state regulation, and periodic investigations in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be issued by the recorder's court when the issuing judge is satisfied that the director has established by oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as a part of a legally authorized program of inspection that includes the property or that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of the property. 
(2)  An inspection warrant will be validly issued only if it meets the following requirements: 
a.  The warrant is attached to the affidavit required to be made in order to obtain the warrant. 
b.  The warrant describes, either directly or by reference to the affidavit, the property upon which the inspection is to occur and is sufficiently accurate that the executor of the warrant and the owner or occupant of the property can reasonably determine from it the property for which the warrant authorizes an inspection. 
c.  The warrant indicates the conditions, objects, activities or circumstances which the inspection is intended to check or reveal. 
d.  The warrant refers, in general terms, to the Code provisions sought to be enforced. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2143; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-153. - Discontinuance of water service for nonpayment of sewer bill. 
(a)  This section only applies to owner-occupied property. The policy of discontinuing the furnishing of water at any meter service where there is a delinquent sewer bill after the occupant of the premises has been notified of the delinquency and has failed to remove the delinquency by payment of the bill is continued in full force and effect. 
(b)  Where there remains a delinquent sewer bill at any meter service after the occupant of the premises thereof has been notified by the inclusion of the amount of the past due bill in a current water bill or a separate bill and given an opportunity to pay the bill and refuses to promptly pay it, water service to this meter service shall be discontinued regardless of whether the bill remaining delinquent was incurred by a prior owner or occupant of the premises, and the county shall not again supply water to this building, place or premises until the arrears are fully paid. 
(c)  Upon the failure or refusal of the owner or occupant to pay the delinquent sewer bill, the department shall remove the meter serving the premises, and service shall not be restored to the premises until a fee for installation of a new meter has been paid in advance. Such fee shall be a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2003; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-154. - Mandatory connections to public sanitary sewer. 
(a)  The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation and other such purposes, located within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer, is required to install, at the owner's expense, suitable toilet facilities, and to connect such facilities directly to the public sanitary sewer. In accordance with the provisions of this article, the owner has twenty-four (24) months after the date of official notice to accomplish this, provided that the public sanitary sewer is within one hundred (100) feet of the property line. 
(b)  Exceptions to the provisions of subsection (a) of this section may be granted by the county upon application. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2031; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-155. - Private sewage disposal facilities generally. 
Except as specifically permitted by this article or by the board of health, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other similar facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2032; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-156. - Discharge of untreated sewage or polluted waters. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge to any outlet or to any portion of the public storm drain system, or to any natural stream within the jurisdiction of the board, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of this article. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the county to treat the outflow from the public storm drain system. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2033; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-157. - Deposit of objectionable wastes on public or private property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit the deposit of, in any unsanitary manner, human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable wastes on any public or private property within the jurisdiction of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2034; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-158. - Nonavailability of public sanitary sewer. 
Where a public sanitary sewer is not available, the building sewer shall be connected to another means of sewage disposal. The private sewage disposal system must comply with all applicable regulations of the department, the county board of health, and the Georgia Department of Human Resources. Unless specific exceptions are made, a private sewage disposal facility in the county shall consist of an approved septic tank. 
(Code 1976, § 62035; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-159. - General prohibition. 
It shall be a violation of this article for any person to maliciously or negligently break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any part of the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-160. - Severability. 
If any term, requirement or provision of this division or application thereof to any person or circumstance shall, to any extent, be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder of this division or the application of such terms, requirements and provisions to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid or unenforceable, shall not be affected thereby and each term, requirement or provision of this division shall be valid and be enforced to the fullest extent permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Secs. 25-161—25-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER CONSTRUCTION AND ASSESSMENTS FOR NEW DEVELOPMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, adopted Nov. 14, 2017, repealed Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 25-176—25-193 pertained to sewer construction and assessments, and derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 6-2092—6-2109; Ord. No. 89-16, § 2, adopted April 11, 1989; Ord. No. 91-27, adopted Nov. 12, 1991; and Ord. No. 92-20, adopted July 28, 1992. 

Sec. 25-176. - Compliance with agreements. 
The operation of the sanitary sewer system shall remain in compliance with all sanitary sewer usage agreements between the county and other county and municipal governments and agencies. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-177. - Sanitary sewer main extensions. 
(a)  The county sanitary sewer main extension policy shall apply to the extension or replacement of existing sanitary sewer mains on existing county roads or other dedicated rights-of-way to serve new developments. A developer may request the application of this policy if a project site is not adjacent to an existing main or the existing main is inadequate to serve the proposed development. 
(b)  The developer may apply for preapproval of the sewer main extension application with the understanding that such reimbursement shall be made only after the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section. Conversely, the developer may apply for reimbursement after complying with all the requirements of this section and such reimbursement shall be made on approved applications if funds are available for that purpose. Approval of all application requests shall be within the sole discretion of the governing authority. 
(c)  Sanitary sewer mains approved and installed under this section shall be subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  All materials shall meet the specifications of the water and sewer division of public works. 
(2)  A sanitary sewer main design shall be prepared by and furnished to the county by a registered professional engineer licensed by the state. 
(3)  The developer shall contract for the installation of the sewer lines and shall furnish the county a copy of the contract. When the work has been completed according to the county specifications and duly inspected by the county, the developer shall provide "as-built" drawings and any required easements of the sewer main installation to the county. As-built drawings shall be completed under the direction of an engineer/land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia and sealed. 
(4)  After the work has been completed and inspected to the satisfaction of the county, the developer shall provide a maintenance bond equal to ten (10) percent of the costs of the construction of such facilities. The developer may provide a letter of escrow or letter of credit acceptable to the county in lieu of the maintenance bond required in this section. 
(5)  After receiving the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit, the county shall reimburse the developer a sum equivalent to fifty (50) percent of the cost of the sewer main materials required to supply the proposed development. An eight-inch main will be considered as the minimum size main required to supply a development of any size. In the event the county's plans for future sewer service call for a sewer main to be installed larger than the size of the main required to supply the development, then the county may: 
a.  If the size of sewer main planned by the county is fifteen (15) inch[es] or smaller, pay the difference in cost of the materials to install the size main required by the county plans. 
b.  If the size of sewer main planned by the county is greater than fifteen (15) inch[es], pay the difference in both the cost of labor and materials to install the size main required by county plans. 
(6)  The developer shall be required to maintain the sanitary sewer lines for a period of twelve (12) months. During this developer maintenance period, the county shall make inspections and instruct the developer by letter as to what corrections must be made, if any. 
(7)  At the end of the twelve-month developer maintenance period, the county shall make a final inspection and notify the developer and the bonding company, if any, of any corrections to be made. If the work is acceptable at this time, the maintenance bond, letter of escrow or letter of credit shall be released. 
(8)  If required corrections are not made within thirty (30) days of notice, the county shall have the authority to make these corrections at the expense of the bonding company. In cases where funds are being held under letter of credit or letter of escrow, the cost of making these corrections shall be drawn by the county from these funds, and the developer charged with any costs above the amount of such funds. 
(9)  The county shall have the full authority to inspect and test all sanitary sewer mains installed under this section. 
(10)  No use shall be made of such systems nor shall the county accept such systems until the developer has complied with all the requirements of this section and until satisfactory tests and inspections have been completed by the county. 
(11)  In calculating county participation for material costs, the maximum material costs considered will be the county's contract price for like material. 
(d)  Private sanitary sewer extensions will not be accepted for maintenance by the county unless materials used for installation are inspected and approved by the county prior to construction and are found to meet county specifications and unless the installation was inspected by the county during construction. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Secs. 25-178—25-184. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2.5. - SPECIAL SEPTIC TANK TO SEWER CONVERSION TAX DISTRICT—SEWER EXTENSIONS FOR EXISTING DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 25-185. - Purpose, intent and legislative findings. 
(a)  The governing authority of DeKalb County is tasked with the protection and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the county. 
(b)  Certain areas within the county are served by septic tanks, many of which are old and may potentially fail. 
(c)  If a septic tank is deficient and in need of repair, seepage and overflows of sewage can occur. 
(d)  The governing authority finds that failing septic tanks may create potentially significant public health and safety hazards for all residents of the county and that the long term welfare of all the residents of DeKalb County is served by greater accessibility to public sewer. The governing authority further finds that the water quality of DeKalb County's waterways can be improved by connecting existing homes and businesses on septic tanks to public sewer. The governing authority finds that costs associated with connecting to the public sewer can be burdensome and, thus, it is in the best interests of all residents of the county to assist in the connection of existing homes and businesses on septic tanks to the county's public sewer system. 
(e)  The governing authority intends for division 2.5 to encourage extension of public sewer up to and into developed areas. 
(f)  To achieve this public purpose, the governing authority wants to make available a cost-sharing process to connect existing homes and businesses on septic tanks to the county's public sewer system when a sanitary sewer must be laid. 
(g)  Article IX, section II, paragraph VI of the Georgia Constitution gives the governing authority the power to create special districts for the provision of local government services within such districts, and to levy and collect taxes within such districts to pay for the cost of providing such services. 
(h)  Nothing in this division shall be construed to require the governing authority to approve any petition submitted and it shall be in the sole legislative judgment of the governing authority to approve any submitted petition. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-186. - Compliance with agreements. 
The operation of the sanitary sewer system shall remain in compliance with all sanitary sewer usage agreements between the county and other county and municipal governments and agencies. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-187. - Submission of pre-petition request; submission of petition; creation of a special tax district. 
(a)  Prior to initiating a petition for sewer facilities, a request for a preliminary survey and feasibility study to determine if sewer can be provided to an area must be made to the department. This request must be made in writing by five (5) or more property owners within the same drainage basin and within a quarter-mile diameter. If the department determines that sewer can be provided to the area, the department shall define the designated area for purposes of a petition. 
(b)  Whenever the owners, as listed on the latest ad valorem tax digest, of fifty-one (51) percent or more of the property within any designated area, as defined by the department, petition the county for sewer facilities, and this action requires the laying of a sanitary sewer, the petition shall be filed with the department. Each property shall be identified by address and tax map parcel identification number, as used by the tax assessor and the tax commissioner. The petition shall be examined to see if the signatures are valid and if it sufficiently describes the services required. No more than ten (10) percent of the length of the new sewer should front undeveloped land, meaning property on which structures have not been built. Cost for construction and engineering services are also estimated at this time. Before final approval of any plans, the county must also ensure that sufficient stub-out connections are designated to adequately serve the territory affected. The petition is then advertised and a public hearing is held before the board of commissioners. If the governing authority approves the petition, construction will be programmed and the designated area shall become a special tax district. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-188. - Public hearing; public notices. 
(a)  When a petition for the construction of a sanitary sewer line has been filed, then a public hearing must be held before the board of commissioners. The department shall notify the governing authority of the impending petition. The department shall then give notice to all persons concerned by publication of a notice on the county's website and in the newspaper where sheriffs notices are published for a period of at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall state the date and location of the proposed public hearing and shall give a general description of the proposed sanitary sewer construction and include that if the petition is approved, the designated area shall become a special tax district. 
(b)  All owners of property abutting the proposed sanitary sewer line who shall be assessed for the costs of the proposed sanitary sewer shall be notified in writing by the county at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. The notice shall include a provision which notifies the owners that if the petition is approved, the designated area shall become a special tax district. The county shall comply with the intent of this section by addressing all notices to the owners listed on the latest ad valorem tax digest of the county at the addresses indicated. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-189. - Notification to abutting property owners of public hearing. 
In addition to the published notice of a public hearing on a petition for sanitary sewer construction, all owners of property abutting the proposed sanitary sewer line who shall be assessed for the costs of the proposed sanitary sewer shall be notified in writing by the department at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. The county shall comply with the intent of this section by addressing all notices to the owners listed on the latest ad valorem tax digest of the county at the addresses indicated. The records of the county showing evidence of the mailing of the notices shall be prima facie evidence of receipt, and failure of the owner of any property concerned to receive a notice shall in no way affect the validity of the proceedings or the assessment. The purpose of this written notice is to furnish the owner with an additional statement of the public hearing. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-190. - Conduct of hearing. 
At the hearing provided for in this division, any person who will be assessed costs for the proposed sanitary sewer may appear before the governing authority either in person or through an agent or attorney. The decision of the governing authority with respect to the approval or rejection of the proposed sanitary sewer shall be final and conclusive. Any decision by the governing authority in favor of the construction shall indicate a public need for the sanitary sewer, and this shall make all matters pertaining to the construction of the sanitary sewer and the assessment of costs against the abutting property owners legal and binding. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-191. - Procedure after plans and specifications received. 
When the county has approved the sanitary sewer, it shall procure the necessary right-of-way for construction of the sanitary sewer line whether by agreement or by condemnation. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-192. - Performance of construction. 
All sanitary sewers shall be constructed by the county or by such contractors retained by the county. All sanitary sewer construction performed by a private contractor shall be guaranteed against defects in contractor-supplied material and workmanship for a minimum period of one (1) year from the final inspection date. Construction shall be under the supervision of the county. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-193. - Budget, assessments and criteria, generally. 
(a)  Before construction of a sanitary sewer line begins, the department shall make up an assessment roll properly describing the sanitary sewer line and containing the names of all owners of abutting property. Each owner's property abutting the sanitary sewer shall be correctly described as it pertains to the construction. The cost of the sanitary sewer, including costs of easement acquisition, design, permitting by agencies other than DeKalb County, construction and related activities, shall then be shared by the county, if budgeted funds are available, and the various property owners. The property owners in the designated area shall collectively pay one-third ( 1/3 ) of the costs associated with the sanitary sewer line, but in no event shall the portion of costs assigned to each lot, whether improved or unimproved, or each condominium unit, as that term is defined by state law, exceed a seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) cap. The county shall pay two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the costs associated with the sanitary sewer line, or a greater amount if necessary to enforce the seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) cap. 
(b)  Each property owner in the designated area shall be responsible for and pay his/her pro rata share of the costs, which shall be divided equally among all property owners of abutting property within such designated area on the basis of the number of lots, whether improved or unimproved, or on the basis of condominium units, as that term is defined by state law. The costs shall be amortized over a period of ten (10) years. 
(c)  An annual budget shall be established for the county's expenditures related to sanitary sewer petitions. If the budget becomes exhausted before the end of the fiscal year, then no further petitions will be presented until the following year, unless the governing authority authorizes an increase in the budget. 
(d)  In the event that petitions are presented which compete for the available remaining budget, the department will make recommendations based upon criteria including, but not limited to, the following: cost effectiveness ($/lot), public health and water quality problems, in collaboration with the DeKalb County Department of Health. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-194. - Outfall sewers. 
(a)  In this section, "outfall sewer" means a section of sanitary sewer line, either in a public street or across private property, which normally does not provide direct service to the abutting property. Usually the outfall sewer is a section of a trunk sewer providing service to several street sanitary sewers serving properties and its cost is not included in the assessment rate. However, when an outfall does provide direct service to the abutting property, the cost of constructing the outfall shall be assessed against the abutting property owners. 
(b)  Property owners desiring connection to outfall sewers may do so with concurrence of the director and shall pay an assessment based on the current year linear foot rate prior to their obtaining a sewer connection permit. 
(c)  Exceptions to the provisions of this section may be granted by the department upon application. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-195. - Payment of assessments for cost of sanitary sewer in special tax district. 
Each year, the finance director shall be responsible for calculating each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs, in accordance with the provisions of this division. The tax commissioner shall be responsible for collecting from the property owners payment of their pro rata share of one-third ( 1/3 ) of the costs associated with the sanitary sewer. The finance director and tax commissioner shall be notified by the executive assistant at such time as the construction is complete. Beginning January 1 of the year following the completion of construction and for each year thereafter, the tax statement issued to each such property owner shall include a separate line item tax showing each property owner's annual pro rata share of the costs until paid. 
The annual pro rata share of the one-third ( 1/3 ) share of the costs, as limited by the seven thousand five hundred dollar ($7,500.00) cap, shall become due and payable at the same time that county taxes are due and payable. If such cost remains unpaid, the tax commissioner shall have the authority to issue a writ of fieri facias or execution against the property served, which writ shall have the same lien dignity and priority as writs of fieri facias or executions issued for county taxes. Each assessment shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner that a lien attaches for county taxes, and such lien shall cover the property of the owner until such assessment is paid. Any unpaid amount shall accrue penalty, interest and charges in the same manner and at the same rate as other delinquent county taxes. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-196. - Dissolution of special tax district for sanitary sewer. 
On December 31 of the tenth year following completion of construction of the sanitary sewer, the special tax district shall stand dissolved by operation of law. Dissolution of a special tax district in no way affects or invalidates enforcement and collection of any outstanding lien(s) for costs owed pursuant to this division. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Sec. 25-197. - Service connections. 
(a)  After sanitary sewer lines have been constructed and tied into the county sewerage system, each abutting property owner who will be assessed a portion of the costs of construction through assessment may desire a service connection. Property owners are encouraged to connect to the public sewer once it becomes available; however, immediate connection is not mandated unless required by another provision of this Code, or unless public health, water quality or nuisance conditions as determined by either the department or the DeKalb County Department of Health warrant immediate connection. To make such a connection, the property owner shall hire, at the owner's expense, a plumber or contractor to lay pipe from the building drain to the stub-out provided. Before this service line can be connected to the sanitary sewer, the owner shall secure a permit from the county by paying a plumbing fee and a sewer tap fee. If the service line then passes the inspection criteria of the county, the owner may have it connected into the sewerage system. 
(b)  The costs associated with service connections are not included as costs for the construction of a sewer line and shall not be shared by the county as part of the seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) cap. However, nothing in this section shall prevent abutting property owners from seeking admission to any sewer or lateral grant program that is now in existence or that shall hereafter be established by the department or the governing authority. 
(c)  When a property owner desires connection to the sewerage system after construction of the sanitary sewer line, and no owner, or previous owner, of the property has paid his or her share of the costs of constructing the sanitary sewer line, or is making payments, the owner must pay a share of costs proportionate to the share paid by other owners in the designated area prior to obtaining a sewer connection permit, but in no event shall the portion of costs assigned to the owner exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars ($7,500.00) per lot. 
( Ord. No. 17-05 , Pt. I, 11-14-17) 
Secs. 25-198—25-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 25-211. - Applications for building sewer permits. 
Applications for building sewer permits shall be supplemented by plans, specifications and other information considered pertinent to the issuance of a permit. At the time the application is filed, a plumbing and inspection fee in an amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners, shall be paid to the county. Installations and their respective tapping fees, as set by the board, shall be placed in one (1) of two (2) categories, residential or nonresidential. Proposed nonresidential discharges which meet the definition of significant industrial user shall also obtain a wastewater discharge permit as described in division 4 of this article. Nonresidential development has the option of requesting a recalculation of the tap fee based on actual water consumption after the first year of occupancy in a new building. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2051) 
Sec. 25-212. - Separate building sewer for each building. 
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building. An exception is made where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sanitary sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway; then, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole system considered one (1) building sewer. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2052) 
Sec. 25-213. - Old building sewers in new buildings. 
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the county, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2053) 
Sec. 25-214. - Location of building sewer and building drain. 
Unless otherwise authorized in writing by the department, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which a building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sanitary sewer, sewage carried by this drain shall be lifted by an approved sewage ejector to a height to permit gravity flow. All sewage ejector installations shall be approved by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2054) 
Sec. 25-215. - Owner to bear installation, connection costs. 
The owner shall bear all costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer. The owner shall compensate the county for any loss or damage that may have occurred to the public sanitary sewer as a result of the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2055) 
Sec. 25-216. - Conformity to county specifications. 
The size, slope, alignment and materials used in constructing a building sewer; the methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, and backfilling of the trench; and the testing of the pipe shall all conform to the specifications, guidelines and other applicable rules of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2056) 
Sec. 25-217. - Connection of building sewer into public sewer. 
(a)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer shall conform to the requirements and regulations of the county. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from specified procedures must be approved in writing by the department before installation. 
(b)  An applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the department when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sanitary sewer. Service shall not be instituted until the plumbing fee and sewer tap fee are paid and the connection is approved. Excavations necessary for the accomplishment of the connection shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights, so as to protect the public from hazard. All excavations greater than five (5) feet deep shall be covered when excavation is not being conducted. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of work shall be restored at the owner's expense, in compliance with county specifications. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2057) 
Cross reference— Excavations, § 23-26 et seq. 
Sec. 25-218. - Connection of surface runoff and groundwater sources to public sewer. 
Connection, directly or indirectly, of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains or other sources of surface runoff is not permitted to a building drain or building sewer connected to a public sanitary sewer. Existing connections of these items to a building sewer shall be disconnected when the building sewer is connected to the public sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2058) 
Sec. 25-219. - Connecting to public sewer without paying fees or obtaining permit. 
It is unlawful to connect to the public sanitary sewer without payment of the prescribed fee and without a permit. If such a sewer connection is made, a current sewer tap fee, the fee at the time the connection was discovered, will be assessed; back sewer use charges will be made and interest at the rate specified in section 2-112 will be charged. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2059) 
Sec. 25-220. - Maintenance and repair responsibility for building sewer service connections to public sanitary sewer system. 
The property owner shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of building sewer service connections to the public sanitary sewer system on private property. DeKalb County shall be responsible for maintenance and repair of building sewer service connections within county street rights-of-way and sanitary sewer easements. 
(Ord. No. 90-09, § 1, 5-30-90) 
Secs. 25-221—25-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS 

Sec. 25-231. - Wastewater discharge permit required. 
All significant industrial users connected to, proposing to connect to or otherwise contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit. Proposed new significant users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connection to the sewer system and shall obtain such permit prior to contributing to the system. 
(1)  The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
(2)  The director may deny permission to discharge or condition discharges from new, increased or significantly changed contributions from any industrial user, significant or otherwise, located within the county or in outside jurisdictions discharging to the county's POTW. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in this division. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements, or with any other requirements of federal, state and local law. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2061; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-232. - Application. 
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the department an application in the form prescribed and furnished by the county and accompanied by a fee in the amount established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2062) 
Sec. 25-233. - Compliance with all applicable regulations. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2064; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-234. - Permit contents. 
A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed three (3) years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable, except as defined in section 25-235 of this division; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state or local law; 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Limits on the rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of accidental discharge/slug control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
f.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
g.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this ordinance and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-235. - Expiration and renewal. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three (3) years. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. If no new local, state or federal pretreatment requirements are impending on the user and the user has had no violation of the existing permit, the county shall renew the permit for a time period at least equal to the existing permit. All other expiring permits shall be reviewed and revised or renewed as determined by the director. Should a timely applied for permit expire before issuance of a new permit by the county, the existing permit shall continue in force until the new permit is issued by the county. 
Discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation and normally are not transferable to any succeeding user or the current user for a new operation. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2066; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-236. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in paragraph b., below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information in paragraph b., below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(2)  Users described above shall submit the following information: 
a.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of operations. Brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. 
d.  Flow measurement. The measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams. 
e.  Measurement of pollutants. 
1.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
2.  The results of sampling and analyses identifying the nature and concentration of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 25-261 of this division. 
3.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 25-261 of this division. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and. requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional treatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
h.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-237 of this division. 
(b)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 25-236(1)(b)(7): 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards; 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the compliance schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. 
(4)  All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-237 of this division; and 
(5)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(c)  Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the following information: flow measurements; measurement of pollutants; and the certification statement, as described in section 25-236 (b)(4-6), the baseline monitoring report. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-237 of this division. 
(d)  Discharge monitoring reports (self-monitoring reports). All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the director and specified in the wastewater discharge permit but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report on the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards, and the measured daily flows for the reporting period. All discharge monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 25-237 of this division. 
(1)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(2)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in this division, the results of the additional monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(e)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director's designee as identified in the wastewater discharge permit within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analyses and submit the results of the repeated testing to the director within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the department monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the department samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of that sampling. 
(f)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least sixty (60) days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 25-232 of this division. 
(2)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 25-231 of this ordinance or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 25-246 of this division in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-237. - Signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports (section 25-236 of this division) must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-238. - Record keeping. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates the analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the county, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-239. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any user may appeal an altered or new permit condition or alleged violation of a current permit condition to the department. Such appeal must be received within thirty (30) workdays. The department shall schedule an appeal review meeting within thirty (30) days to discuss the appealed condition of this division or wastewater discharge permit and corrective or remedial action to be taken. 
(b)  If the user and the department can agree to appropriate corrective remedial or preventive measures, such measures and a reasonable compliance schedule shall be incorporated as a supplemental condition of the user's wastewater discharge permit. If an agreement is not reached through the conciliation process, the department shall refer the appeal to the board of commissioners and the board of commissioners shall review the appeal and adjudge the dispute. The board of commissioners shall then institute such actions as deemed advisable to ensure the user's compliance with the provisions of this division or other laws or regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2067; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-240. - Public participation and access to records. 
(a)  The county shall comply with the regulations for public participation as applicable under federal, state or local law. 
(b)  Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, monitoring programs and from the county's inspection and sampling activities shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law, or that such information is otherwise protected from disclosure under applicable federal or state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public. It shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving persons furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2068; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-241. - Federal limits supersede local limits. 
Upon the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, the national standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The county shall notify all affected significant industrial users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403.12. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2069; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-242. - Significant noncompliance. 
The director shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD; TSS; fats, oils and grease; and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the director believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the director's exercise of his emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-243. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  Upon determination that a violation of this ordinance has occurred, the director shall serve upon that discharger a written notice of violation. Within fifteen (15) days of receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific actions, shall be submitted by the violator to the department. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the director to take any action, including emergency actions or other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  The director may order a discharger which has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this ordinance to appear before the director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served by registered or certified mail, or by personal service on the user or the authorized representative of the user. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the discharger. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the discharger. 
(c)  When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this division or that the discharger's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the discharger directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the discharger to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and, 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation and to prevent recurrence of the violation. 
(3)  Each day of violation of a cease and desist order, after notice thereof, shall constitute a violation of this division, and shall constitute a separate violation of this division, subject to the maximum fine or imprisonment, or both, set forth in section 1-10 of this Code. 
(d)  Violation of the provisions of this ordinance constitutes an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation, imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, or by labor on the work gang for sixty (60) days for any single offense, in accordance with section 1-10 of this Code. DeKalb County may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this division or to correct violations of this division. Any court of competent jurisdiction may have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application for injunctive relief. 
(e)  When the director finds that a discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, the director may petition the courts through the county attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which rest rains or compels the requirements imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The director may also seek such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the discharger to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking other action against a discharger. 
(f)  The director may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the county, including, but not limited to, containment, cleanup, injury, death and other. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-244. - Permit revocation. 
The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to this chapter; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or any other required reporting; 
(4)  Falsifying self monitoring reports or other required reporting; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; 
(13)  Change of any condition that requires either temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge; or 
(14)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-245. - Permit modification. 
The director may modify any permit in whole or in part during its term for cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this ordinance; 
(2)  Engaging in any act that would constitute basis for revocation of the permit; 
(3)  For purpose of incorporating any new or revised federal, state or local pretreatment standard or requirements; 
(4)  For purpose of addressing significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(5)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the POTW, personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct clerical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  Changing any condition that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permitted discharge. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-246. - Affirmative defenses to discharge violations. 
(a)  Upset. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of section 25-246(a)(3), below, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
d.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
e.  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
f.  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 25-253(1) of this division or the specific prohibitions in section 25-253(2)(c) through (g) of this division if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the county was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permits, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(c)  Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section, 
a.  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  a. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(4)  a. Bypass is prohibited, and the director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
1.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
3.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (3) of this section. 
b.  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d)1. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Secs. 25-247—25-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DISCHARGE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 25-251. - Discharge of prohibited waters. 
Discharge to a public sanitary sewer of stormwater, surface runoff or groundwater is prohibited. These waters shall be discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers, combined sewers, or to an outlet approved by the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2071) 
Sec. 25-252. - Unauthorized tampering or use of sewers, appurtenances. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or open, use, alter or disturb any public sanitary sewer or appurtenance without first obtaining a written permit from the department. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2072) 
Sec. 25-253. - Prohibited substances, wastes or materials. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater: 
(1)  Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases, or any other pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-up flash point of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (60 degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH lower than 5.0 or higher than 11.5 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to sewerage or harm to personnel. 
(3)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems, or any water wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in a quantity sufficient to interfere with any sewerage or sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals or create a public nuisance, whether these wastes cause problems independently or via action with other substances. 
(4)  Solids or viscous liquids in quantities, types or sizes which will cause either flow obstruct ion in the sewer system or interference with the operation of the POTW (size may not be greater than one-half (½) inch in any dimension). 
(5)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW. 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; and 
(7)  Wastes or pollutants which have been classified as hazardous waste or hazardous materials in accordance with 40 CFR Part 261. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2073; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-254. - Limits set on certain substances, materials and wastes. 
(a)  Discharge of any of the following water substances, wastes, or materials into a public sanitary sewer in excess of the stated limits and/or conditions is prohibited: 
(1)  Liquid or water vapor having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F, or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees C. 
(2)  Water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils of a petroleum or mineral base, in a concentration greater than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(3)  Substances which become solids or very viscous liquids at temperatures greater than thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(4)  Garbage that has been improperly shredded (any dimension greater than one-half (½) inch). 
(5)  Water or waste containing the contaminants listed at a concentration greater than the limits set. This restriction includes, but is not limited to, discharges by any user of the collection and treatment system such that specific pollutants discharged to the county sanitary sewer system do not exceed concentrations specified below. 
The concentration limits on discharges by any user, listed below, may be used as a guide in design and plant control, but may be altered by the board in the event of a discharge causing upset, interference or pass through at the POTW or having a deleterious effect upon any other aspect of public welfare, either alone or in combination with other discharges: 
I.  LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITS FOR  ALL DEKALB COUNTY  INDUSTRIAL USERS  MAXIMUM DAILY  CONCENTRATION 
(As measured in discharges from manufacturing processes only, excluding domestic wastes or unpolluted discharges) 

 
II.  LOCAL DISCHARGE LIMITS FOR  DEKALB COUNTY  INDUSTRIAL USERS  DISCHARGING  TO THE CITY OF ATLANTA'S  RM CLAYTON WPCP  MAXIMUM DAILY  CONCENTRATION 
(As measured in discharges from manufacturing processes only, excluding domestic waste or unpolluted discharges) 

 
(6)  Water or wastes containing taste- or odor-producing contaminants in such quantities that, after treatment of sewage, these contaminants impart their tastes or odors to receiving waters. 
(7)  Water or wastes colored by dye or other solutions to such a degree that the color is not removed by treatment. 
(8)  Wastes containing substances emitting radiation greater than one thousand (1,000) picocuries per liter (pCi/l) for gross beta. 
(9)  Any other contaminant which the director deems harmful to the operation or efficiency of sewage treatment plants, the utilization or disposal of sludges, or to the health and welfare of the residents of the county. 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing any compound found to be toxic, in concentrations exceeding such acceptable limits as have been or shall be defined by the Environmental Protection Agency. This limitation includes compounds defined by the Environmental Protection Agency as priority pollutants pursuant to 40 CFR 403. 
(b)  Ground paper products shall be prohibited from being discharged into the public sewer system. 
(c)  All industrial users shall be required to meet pretreatment standards as set forth in Title 40 Part 403 of the Code of Federal Regulations, entitled "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution". The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405—471 are hereby incorporated. 
(d)  The county may establish by ordinance, or the director may establish in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards for requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2074; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 00-76, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 25-255. - Discharges which affect effluent quality from sewage treatment plants. 
Discharges of materials or substances which would cause interference, upset and/or pass-through in the POTW, whether alone or in combination with other substances and discharges, are prohibited. Included without limitation in this category are: 
(1)  Slug concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as lime slurries). 
(2)  Slug concentrations of inert dissolved solids (such as sodium chloride). 
(3)  Slug concentrations of colored wastes (such as dyes and tanning solutions). 
(4)  Slug concentrations of materials high in BOD or COD. 
(5)  Slug concentrations of ammonia or organic nitrogen compounds. 
(6)  Slug concentrations of phosphorus compounds. 
(7)  Other wastes not amenable to treatment. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2075; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-256. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
(a)  At least once every two (2) years, the director shall evaluate whether each significant user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The director may require any user to develop, submit for approval and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director or his designee of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 25-262 of this division; 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(b)  Pollutants, substances or wastewater prohibited by this division shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. Pollutants, raw materials, products, processed materials or waste materials shall not be stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the storm drain or cause a contaminated discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-257. - Separators and interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand separators shall be provided when wastes containing more than one hundred (100) mg/l of fat, oil, grease or sand are discharged. Separators shall also be provided for any other substance in the wastes which becomes viscous or solidifies at a temperature above thirty-two (32) degrees Fahrenheit. All interceptors or separators shall be approved in writing by the county and shall be located for easy inspection. All expenses of installation and operation shall be borne by the owner. Interceptors and separators shall not be required for private living quarters. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2076; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-258. - Industrial discharges and surcharges. 
(a)  Industrial contributors to the public sanitary sewer system shall be required to pay a sewer rate surcharge based upon the concentration of total suspended solids (TSS), five-day BOD, ammonia and/or total phosphorus in their effluents. Industrial dischargers whose wastes contain greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l of either five-day BOD and/or total suspended solids, thirty (30) mg/l ammonia, or ten (10) mg/l total phosphorus shall pay the surcharge in an amount set by the board. 
(b)  If values for any constituent exceed two (2) times the minimum surcharge concentration (i.e., five hundred (500) mg/l TSS) then the director may, if determined that these wastes adversely affect the POTW, require the industrial user to install pretreatment before discharging wastes to the public sanitary sewer system. This pretreatment must reduce the concentration of the wastes by treatment/removal of the excess constituent to the point where it no longer harms the POTW, and the values for all constituents are less than two (2) times the minimum surcharge concentration. 
(c)  Periodic determination of the values for constituents subject to surcharge shall be made on composite samples of industrial effluents by personnel of the county. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2077; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-259. - Discharges requiring pretreatment. 
The department may require pretreatment of wastewater to an acceptable condition before discharge to the public sanitary sewer system when wastewaters contain the substances or possess the characteristics of prohibited or limited discharges. Pretreatment may also be required if these wastewaters cause upset, interference or pass through at the POTW or have a deleterious effect upon any other aspect of public welfare, either alone or in combination with other discharges. In addition to lowering the concentrations of substances to an acceptable level through pretreatment or altering the characteristics of a wastewater, the department may require additional controls before discharge to the public sanitary sewer system. In particular, quantities or rates of discharge shall be altered so that the discharge becomes more compatible with the sewer system. Expenses incurred in the installation and operation of these controls shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2078; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-260. - Dilution. 
No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-261. - Measurements, tests and analyses, and sample collection. 
(a)  Any measurements, tests, analyses, sample types, sample containers and/or holding times to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with procedures and specifications as set forth in Title 40 Part 136 of the Code of Federal Regulations, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(b)  Analyses shall be determined at the control manhole, or upon a suitable sample taken at the control manhole. If no control manhole is available on the building sewer, the control manhole shall be considered the nearest downstream manhole to which the building sewer is directly connected. When the director deems it necessary, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole on the building sewer to facilitate observation and sampling of wastes. This manhole, when required, shall be accessible, safely located, and constructed at the owner's expense in accordance with county specifications. 
(c)  Except as indicated in section 25-261(d), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite sampling techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(d)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, Ph, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2079; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-262. - Accidental spills or drains. 
(a)  In the case of accidental spills, loss to the drains of any deleterious material or substances, discharges of a non-routine nature, non-customary batch discharges or slug loads, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the department of the incident. This notification shall include the time of occurrence, location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume if known and corrective actions taken by the user. The user shall take all possible actions to prevent a spill, and should a spill occur, shall take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the incident. Industrial users which store or otherwise handle toxic, hazardous or flammable materials must have an accidental discharge/slug control plan in place to prevent the discharge, accidental or otherwise, of said materials to the sewer system. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the user shall submit a detailed written report, unless waived by the director, describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar occurrences in the future. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause such a discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-263. - Discharge of trucked or hauled wastes. 
(a)  Discharge to any public sanitary sewer, appurtenance, or treatment facility of pumped, trucked or hauled wastes from commercial or industrial sources is prohibited. This ban specifically includes the disposal of greases and other grease trap-related wastes from food establishments. 
(b)  Discharge of domestic septage is allowable only at the county's authorized septic tank disposal site, located at the Snapfinger Creek Water Pollution Control Plant, in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Septic tank pumping companies must register with the DeKalb County Health Department, Division of Environmental Health; have their trucks inspected by that agency; and be issued a permit to Operate. 
(2)  Discharge fees shall be payable by coupons, obtained at the DeKalb County Division of Revenue and License Administration, and presented to the operator at the disposal site. Fees shall be as established by action of the board of commissioners. 
(3)  A manifest form must be completed on every septic tank pumped. Copies of the manifests for the septage to be discharged must be presented to the operator at the disposal site. The operator shall have the authority to deny approval for discharge to any load(s) not accompanied by manifests, due to discrepancies with the manifests, or other apparent problems with truck contents. 
(4)  Domestic septage shall be defined as the contents from septic tanks located at single-family residences, DeKalb County school facilities, or the contents of portable toilets. 
(5)  Repeat and/or major violations of these regulations may result in the hauling company being barred from the treatment facility and denied access to disposal in the county's system, in addition to the other fines and penalties cited in this section. 
(Ord. No. 92-30, 10-13-92; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-264. - Emergency suspensions. 
The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The director may also immediately suspend the user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the order, sewer connection, and/or termination of water supply, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the director, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-265. - Title. 
Section 25-265 through section 25-265.22 shall be known as the Fats, Oils and Greases (FOG) Regulations of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 18-09 , Pt. I, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 25-265.1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this section, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Where words are not herein defined, but are defined in section 1-2, those words shall have the meaning as defined therein. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to water quality shall be as defined in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. Unless otherwise defined herein, words related to construction shall be as defined in this Code and in the latest adopted applicable editions of the Georgia codes applicable to building construction adopted pursuant to state law. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Architectural or historical restrictions means a building or structure in DeKalb County that is one hundred (100) years or older and has special historical or esthetic interest or value. 
Backflow means a reversal of normal flow in a system caused by a negative pressure (vacuum or partial vacuum) in the supply piping or other condition that reverses the normal direction of flow. 
Baffle means a retention wall three-quarters (¾) the length of the chamber nearer to the outlet. 
Best management practices means a schedule of activities, a prohibition of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of fats, oils, and greases into the sewer system. These practices may vary by site, but produce the same reductions in fats, oils, and greases in the sewer system. 
Change in operations means any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures of a food service establishment. 
Compliance inspector means a person authorized by DeKalb County to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater generation, conveyance, processing, and/or disposal facilities. 
Director means the director or designee of the DeKalb County Department of Watershed Management. 
Dwelling unit means one (1) or more rooms, designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and bathroom facilities comprising an independent, self-contained residential unit. 
Extreme economic hardship means a cost to comply with the requirements of these regulations that exceeds fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). 
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG) means any substance such as a vegetable or animal product that is used in, or is a byproduct of, the food preparation process, that turns or may turn viscous or solidifies or may solidify with a change in temperature or other conditions. 
Fixtures means a pot sink, pre-rinse sink, vegetable sink, meat sink, mop sink, soup kettles, work stations, floor drains, automatic hood wash units, garbage disposals, trash compactors, dishwashers, and any other similarly functioning plumbing fixtures. 
Flow means volume of wastewater moving in a certain direction. 
Flow control device means a mechanism installed to control flow of hydraulic levels of FOG into an interceptor. 
FOG means fats, oils, and greases. 
FOG control program means to reduce and/or control the discharge of fats, oils, and grease into the sewer system by educating and regulating food service establishments located in DeKalb County or establishments located outside DeKalb County but which discharge FOG. 
FOG control program manager means the individual designated by DeKalb County to administer the FOG control program. 
FOG interceptor means a multicompartment device that is constructed in different sizes and is generally required to be located underground between a food service establishment and the connection to the sewer system. These devices primarily use gravity to separate FOG from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. These devices must be cleaned, maintained, and have the FOG removed and disposed of in a proper manner on regular intervals to be effective. 
FOG manifest means a document that the state-permitted transporter must provide to the FOG generator as proof of services rendered. 
FOG wastewater discharge permit means a permit issued by DeKalb County authorizing the food service establishment or generator to discharge wastewater into DeKalb County's facilities or into the sewer system. 
Food service establishment (FSE) means any entity or person who prepares and/or packages food or beverage for sale or consumption, on or off site, with the exception of private residences so long as the private residence is not used to prepare or package food or beverage for sale. FSEs include, but are not limited to, food courts; food manufacturers; food packagers; restaurants; catering services; bars/taverns; cafeterias; soda fountains; institutions, both public and private; mobile food vehicles (coach); wing trailers; diners; grocery stores; bakeries; coffee shops; ice cream shops; lounges; hospitals; hotels; nursing homes; churches; schools; daycare centers; businesses with a dishwasher (with the exception of a business with non-commercial dishwasher(s) solely installed in areas designated as a break room or equivalent), and all other FSEs not listed above, either fixed or mobile, as are or may hereafter be recognized by the health department and/or the state department of agriculture. 
Fresh air system/fixtures means a system that provides free circulation of air, which will prevent contamination from back flow or back siphonage, e.g. compartment sinks, dishwashers, floor drains, meat sinks, vegetable sinks, work stations, and mop sinks. 
Generator means any person including those outside the jurisdictional limits of DeKalb County who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into sewers within DeKalb County's boundaries. 
Georgia state permitted transporter means a transporter as that term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Grease trap means an inside mechanism no less than one hundred (100) pounds and no more than three hundred (300) pounds in size, with baffle and flow control installed before the master trap. 
Hot flushing means a situation prohibited in DeKalb County that occurs when the FOG interceptor is too close to a hot-water-using device so the water does not cool sufficiently in the interceptor to allow the FOG to coagulate and float to the top and FOG is instead carried out to the sewer system. 
Limited food preparation establishment means an establishment that is engaged only in reheating or serving of ready-to-eat food products on all disposable ware and disposable utensils. Facilities that engage in preparation of fruit baskets, juicing or preparation of beverages that do not contain milk products, and, as a result, discharge wastewater containing less than one hundred (100) mg/L of FOG per operating business day shall be included in this definition. A limited food preparation establishment does not include any operation that changes the form, flavor, or consistency of food. 
Multi-family dwelling unit means seventy-five (75) or more dwelling units in a unified development and includes attached apartment, townhomes and condominium developments, but does not include detached single family residences. 
New construction means any structure, planned or under construction, where a sewer connection permit is required by law or regulation but has not been issued by the county. 
Nonhazardous manifest means a receipt that is retained by the generator of wastes for disposing of FOG, liquids, or other wastes as required by DeKalb County. 
Plumbing Drainage Institute rating means interceptors that are tested, rated, and certified in conformance with Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute— G101 by the Plumbing and Drainage Institute. 
Regulatory agencies means those agencies having regulatory jurisdiction over the operations of DeKalb County including, but not limited to: the United States Environmental Protection Agency, region IV, Georgia and Washington, D.C. (EPA); the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR); the Georgia Division of Public Health; the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD); the county; or any regulatory agency or body as may be established by federal, state, or local law. 
Remodeling or remodeled means a physical change or operational change in a structure that requires an issuance of or revision to a business license or a building permit. 
Septic tank means a hollow chambered tank without a baffle, T's, and flow control to restrict FOG from entering the county's sewer system. 
Sewer system means as defined in section 25-146 and as may hereinafter be amended. 
Shovel inspection means a FOG compliance inspector who uses a shovel to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Sludge means any solid, semisolid or liquid decant, subnate or supernate from a manufacturing process, utility service, or pretreatment facility. 
Sludge judge inspection means a test in which the FOG compliance inspector uses an instrument, usually a clear hollow plastic tube, to pull and measure a core sample from the FOG interceptor to determine its condition. 
Standard Plumbing Drainage Institute—G101 means a comprehensive engineering and testing program developed to establish flow rates and FOG holding capacity for uniform rating of FOG interceptors. 
Total solids means the sum of suspended and dissolved solids within a sample. 
Twenty (20) percent rule means the requirement for FOG interceptors to be maintained such that the combined FOG solids accumulation does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the design hydraulic capacity of the FOG interceptor. 
Visual inspection means an in-person observation by a FOG compliance inspector to determine if a shovel inspection and/or a sludge judge inspection is necessary to determine the condition of the FOG interceptor. 
Waste means sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, or gaseous, associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature intended for disposal. 
Wastewater constituents and characteristics means the individual chemical, physical, and bacteriological parameters, including volume and flow rate, and such other parameters that serve to define, classify, or measure the quality and quantity of wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 18-09 , Pt. I, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 25-265.2. - Purpose, scope, and policy. 
(a)  These regulations are designed to facilitate the maximum beneficial public use of DeKalb County's sewer system while preventing blockages and overflows of sewer system resulting from discharges of FOG into the DeKalb County sewer system and to specify appropriate FOG discharge requirements for all facilities emitting FOG. 
(b)  By enactment of these regulations, DeKalb County intends to exercise its authority over sizing, location, maintenance, and material of grease traps and/or interceptors within unincorporated DeKalb County. 
(c)  The provisions of these regulations shall apply to the direct or indirect discharge of all wastewater or waste containing FOG discharged into the DeKalb County sewer system. 
(d)  These regulations establish quantity and quality standards on all wastewater and/or waste discharges containing FOG; which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer system causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows and blockages. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.3. - Transporters of nonhazardous commercial waste. 
O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. sets forth a permitting scheme for transporters of commercial waste and provides a regulatory method for the clean and sanitary removal of commercial waste. O.C.G.A. § 12-15-23 specifically authorizes counties to enforce compliance with the provisions of the state law described in this section. O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. as currently enacted and as may hereinafter be amended, is therefore adopted by reference as if set out fully in this section. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.4. - Best management practices. 
(a)  All persons disposing of FOG shall be required to properly dispose of FOG using all of the following best management practices: 
(1)  Dispose of FOG in covered collection containers; 
(2)  Place food scraps from dishes into trashcans and garbage bags and dispose of properly; 
(3)  Avoid disposing of food scraps in garbage disposers to help maintain interceptor volume; 
(4)  Allow FOG to cool first before it is skimmed, scraped, or wiped off of all preparation and servicing surfaces; 
(5)  Prewash dishes and pans with cold water before putting them in the dishwasher; 
(6)  Cover the kitchen sink drain with screening and empty debris into the garbage as needed; 
(7)  Cover the floor drain with a fine screen and empty into the garbage can as needed; and 
(8)  Recycle used fryer oil. 
(b)  All persons disposing of FOG shall not use any of the following practices when disposing of FOG: 
(1)  Pouring FOG down the drain; 
(2)  Putting food scraps down the drain; or 
(3)  Running hot water over dishes, pans, fryers, woks, and griddles to rinse FOG down the drain (also known as hot flush). 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.5. - Requirements for interceptor and specific plumbing connections. 
(a)  All food service establishments shall only introduce pretreated wastewater acceptable to DeKalb County, under the requirements and standards established herein before discharging, directly or indirectly, into any DeKalb County sewer system. 
(b)  No more than one hundred (100) mg/L of FOG shall be discharged per operating business day. The FOG generator shall bear all of the expense of proving compliance with the one-hundred-mg/L threshold. 
(c)  Any food service establishment required to provide FOG pretreatment shall install, operate, and maintain an appropriately designed and adequately sized FOG interceptor that has been approved by the chief executive officer or designee. 
(d)  The testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in 40 CFR 136 (Code of Federal Regulations). 
(e)  FOG interceptors shall be connected to the food service establishment's lateral sewer line after all fixtures which may introduce FOG have been connected and shall have fresh air connected, as defined in these regulations. Fresh-air fixtures include, but are not limited to, sinks, dishwashers, garbage disposals, automatic hood wash units, floor drains in food preparation and storage areas, and any other fixtures which have a potential to introduce FOG. Wastewater from sanitary sewer fixtures and other similar fixtures shall not be introduced into the FOG interceptor. 
(f)  FOG interceptors shall not be connected to septic tanks. 
(g)  All food service establishments that have dumpster pad/trash compactor drains on site and are connected to the sewer system shall have a separate interceptor (no less than one thousand (1,000) gallons in size) installed and functioning at all times. The sloping area to the outside drain and the drain shall be covered either by the dumpster/compactor or a canopy to prevent inflow and infiltration of rainwater. 
(h)  Any drains that lead to the sewer system including, but not limited to, trench drains, enclosed dock drains, carwash drains, elevator drains, and other similar types of drains shall have an oil-water debris interceptor of no less than one thousand (1,000) gallons and no more than three thousand (3,000) gallons in capacity. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.6. - FOG interceptor physical specifications/requirements. 
(a)  All interior FOG interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of one hundred (100) pounds in capacity as defined by the Plumbing Drainage Institute; 
(2)  Be made of corrosion-resistant coated metal; 
(3)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(4)  Contain properly installed and functioning baffle walls and other flow control devices necessary to achieve the appropriate retention time; 
(5)  Have at least a thirty-minute interior retention time before gray water is discharged into the sewer system; 
(6)  Tie all of the fresh air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(7)  Have fifteen-foot distance between the FOG interceptor and the last fresh air fixture and have a proper flow control device; 
(8)  Have a temperature of discharge entering the interior FOG interceptor that does not exceed one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit; and 
(9)  Be Plumbing Drainage Institute rated, be accessible for inspection, and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications by a licensed plumber and not a representative and/or an apprentice of the licensed plumber. 
(b)  All exterior FOG Interceptors shall: 
(1)  Be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) gallons in capacity; 
(2)  Be properly sized based on the results of an inspection and FOG evaluation; 
(3)  Be constructed of re-enforced materials suitable for load bearing and water tight to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(4)  Be precast with a minimum of three thousand (3,000) psi concrete per applicable American Society for Testing and Materials standards with four (4) to seven (7) percent air entrapment; 
(5)  Have an invert elevation of the inlet between three (3) inches to six (6) inches above the invert elevation of the outlet; 
(6)  Contain a properly installed and functioning baffle wall and other flow control devices necessary to achieve an adequate time for FOG to properly separate but not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours; 
(7)  Contain inlet and outlet T's made of schedule 40 PVC piping and at a ninety-degree angle with a minimum diameter of the inlet and outlet piping to be six (6) inches; 
(8)  Include the outlet T six (6) inches from the manhole cover; 
(9)  Include T piping of the inlet and outlet that is within eighteen (18) inches of the bottom and at least five (5) inches above the static liquid level of the tank; 
(10)  Have the FOG interceptor set level on a consolidated, stable base so that no settling or tipping of the FOG interceptor can occur; 
(11)  Connect all of the fresh-air fixtures to the FOG interceptor; 
(12)  Have the outlet discharge line from the FOG interceptor directly connected to a sewer line tapped into the collection main; 
(13)  Have solid manhole covers to prevent inflow and infiltration; 
(14)  Have two (2) or more manholes for entry to each chamber of hydraulic liquid mass; 
(15)  Be accessible for inspections and have no permanent or temporary structure or container placed directly over the FOG interceptor or installed in areas subject to traffic; and 
(16)  Be installed by a licensed plumber. 
(c)  The contents of any fryer-oil containers shall not be mixed with any other FOG interceptor waste or any other no-toxic or toxic substances. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.7. - Maintenance requirements for new and existing FSE's 
(a)  [Depth of FOG.] The depth of FOG (floating and settled) in the FOG interceptor shall not be equal to or greater than twenty (20) percent of the total operating depth of the interceptor. 
(b)  General requirements for FOG interceptors. In order to maintain FOG interceptors, all food service establishments shall remove the sludge, floating materials, solids, and wastewater, and shall scrape all excessive solids from the walls, floor, baffles, and all pipe work and shall pump interior and exterior FOG interceptors dry as set forth in these regulations and as required by the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(1)  FOG interceptors shall be kept free from any inflow/infiltration such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., as such inflow reduces the effectiveness of the FOG interceptor; thereby increasing the need for more frequent cleaning. 
(2)  To insure that the FOG interceptor can be maintained properly, the FOG interceptor needs to be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance, function, and inspection of the interceptor. 
(3)  A Georgia State Permitted Transporter shall perform all maintenance of FOG interceptors. All Georgia State Permitted Transporters working in unincorporated DeKalb County shall have an active Georgia Waste Transporter's Permit and a DeKalb County Transporters Permit in the manner and form set forth by O.C.G.A. § 12-15-20 et seq. Transporters working in DeKalb County are required to leave a copy of a nonhazardous waste manifest with the food service establishment. Maintenance schedules may vary based on individual circumstances to protect the sewer system. 
(4)  The FOG compliance inspector has the authority to change the FOG interceptors cleaning cycles for any FOG generator at any time. 
(5)  The discharge or introduction of any additives to the sewer system is unlawful and prohibited. The direct introduction of additives into the FOG interceptor is prohibited. Additives include but are not limited to biological agents such as enzymes, bacteria, and/or degreasing agents. 
(6)  The FOG generator shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the FOG interceptor waste by a Georgia State Permitted Waste Transporter and maintenance of records of disposal as specified in this section. All waste removed from each FOG interceptor must be disposed of at an appropriate disposal facility designed to receive such waste. 
(7)  No FOG interceptor pumpage shall be discharged to the sewer system as otherwise prohibited in these regulations. 
(8)  Every FOG interceptor shall be required to have a Georgia Nonhazardous Waste Manifest. The Georgia Nonhazardous Waste Manifest must be complete with all information required by these regulations and state law. 
(9)  Mechanical FOG interceptors are prohibited in DeKalb County. 
(c)  Exterior FOG interceptors. Maintenance of exterior FOG interceptors shall be performed at least once every ninety (90) days. Skimming, decanting, and/or any reintroduction of water into exterior FOG interceptors shall not be allowed under any conditions. 
(d)  Interior FOG interceptors. Interior FOG interceptors maintenance shall be performed once every thirty (30) days, and all of the fresh air and/or safe-way plumbing fixtures shall be connected. In-house cleaning of interior FOG interceptors is prohibited. To insure proper FOG interceptor maintenance, interior FOG interceptors shall be free from any obstruction that would hinder the maintenance of the interceptor. Interior FOG interceptors shall be easily accessible with a minimum clearance of thirty-six (36) inches. 
(e)  Interior and exterior FOG interceptor records. All food service establishments shall maintain records of the date and time of all cleaning and maintenance. Every FOG interceptor manifest shall be placed in a logbook, folder, or three-ring notebook. This book shall be made available on demand by the FOG compliance inspector during inspection. All records of at least three (3) years shall be kept on site and available. These records shall include: 
(1)  A logbook of FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device cleaning and maintenance; 
(2)  A record of best management practices being implemented, including employee training; 
(3)  Copies of records and manifests of waste transporting interceptor contents; 
(4)  Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the lateral sewer line; and 
(5)  Records of sampling data and sludge height monitoring for FOG and solids accumulation in the FOG interceptors. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.8. - Notification of spills by the food service establishment. 
(a)  In the event that any food service establishment is unable to comply with any permit condition due to a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the food service establishment has reasonable opportunity to know that his/her/its discharge shall exceed the discharge provisions of the FOG wastewater discharge permit or these regulations, the food service establishments shall immediately notify the FOG control program manager or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit. If the material discharged to the sewer has the potential to cause or result in sewer blockages or sanitary sewer overflows, the food service establishment shall immediately notify the FOG control program manager or designee by telephone at the number specified in the permit and the Director of the DeKalb County Health Department or designee orally or by telephone at the published numbers for such departments. 
(b)  All food service establishments shall provide written notification of this oral or telephonic notification to the FOG control program manager at the address specified in the permit no later than five (5) working days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the incident, the reasons for the discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are being taken to prevent the problem from recurring. 
(c)  Such notification shall not relieve a food service establishment of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to DeKalb County or any other damage or loss to person or property; nor will such notification relieve a food service establishment from payment of any fees or imposition of any other liability which may be authorized by these regulations or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.9. - FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(a)  Food service establishments proposing to discharge or currently discharging wastewater that contains FOG into the DeKalb County sewer system shall obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit annually or cease ongoing operation until such permit is obtained. In addition to any other penalties authorized by law, failure to obtain such a permit shall subject the food service establishment to the potential of the disconnection of water service, until such permit is obtained. 
(b)  FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be subject to all provisions of these regulations and all other regulations, charges for use, and fees established by DeKalb County. DeKalb County in accordance with these regulations and applicable law shall have the authority to enforce the conditions of FOG wastewater discharge permits. 
(c)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit shall be issued upon: 
(1)  Receipt of a complete application, 
(2)  Compliance with these regulations, 
(3)  Compliance with the applicable provisions of this Code, and 
(4)  The proper installation and maintenance of a FOG interceptor that complies with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
In the event that the food service establishment complies with the applicable provisions of these regulations, a permit will be issued or denied within thirty (30) days of compliance with this section. If the permit is not issued or denied within the time frame specified herein, the permit shall be deemed issued and approved. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.10 - FOG wastewater discharge permit application. 
(a)  All food service establishments are required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit and shall complete and file with DeKalb County prior to commencing or continuing discharges, an application for a wastewater discharge permit in a form prescribed by DeKalb County along with any applicable fees. The applicant shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number, assessor's parcel number(s), description of the food service establishment, operation, cuisine, service activities, and, as applicable, clients using the applicant's services; 
(2)  Whichever is applicable, the name and address of any and all principals/owners/major shareholders of the food service establishment, articles of incorporation, most recent report of the secretary of state, and a copy of the owner's business license; 
(3)  Name and address of property owner or lessee and the property manager for the property where the food service establishment is located; and 
(4)  Any other information specified in the application form. 
(b)  Applicants may be required to submit site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, FOG control devices, FOG interceptors, or other pretreatment equipment and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation for evaluation. 
(c)  Other information related to the applicant's business operations and potential discharge may be requested to properly evaluate the permit application. 
(d)  After evaluation of the data furnished, DeKalb County may issue a FOG wastewater discharge permit, subject to the terms and conditions set forth in these regulations and as otherwise determined by the FOG control program manager to be appropriate to protect DeKalb County's sewer system. 
(e)  The FOG wastewater discharge permit and application fee shall be paid by the applicant in an amount adopted by action of the governing authority. Payment of the application permit fee must be received by DeKalb County at the time of filing the application for the permit. A food service establishment shall also pay any delinquent invoices in full prior to any permit renewal. 
(f)  An application shall not be considered complete until all the information required by this section is provided to the FOG control program manager or designee. The FOG control program manager shall have fifteen (15) business days from receipt of such information to advise a food service establishment that an application is not complete. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.11. - FOG wastewater discharge permit conditions. 
The issuance of a FOG wastewater discharge permit may contain any of the following conditions or limits: 
(a)  Limits on discharge of FOG (one hundred (100) mg/L), which may cause or contribute to sanitary sewer overflows and/or sewer blockages; 
(b)  Requirements for proper operation and maintenance of FOG interceptors and other FOG control devices; 
(c)  FOG interceptor maintenance frequency and schedule; 
(d)  Requirements for implementation of best management practices and installation of adequate FOG interceptor and/or FOG control device; 
(e)  Requirements for maintaining and reporting status of best management practices; 
(f)  Requirements for maintaining and submitting logs and records, including waste hauling records and waste manifests; 
(g)  Requirements to self-monitor the discharge to the sewer system and periodically assess and report on the condition of the sewer lateral; 
(h)  Requirements for the food service establishment to construct operate and maintain, at its own expense, a FOG control device(s) and sampling facilities; 
(i)  Additional requirements as otherwise determined to be reasonably appropriate by the FOG control program manager to protect DeKalb County's sewer system or as specified by other regulatory agencies; and 
(j)  Other terms and conditions which may be reasonably applicable to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.12. - FOG wastewater discharge permit modification of terms and conditions. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of an issued permit may be modified by the FOG control program manager if there is a change in: 
(1)  The generator's current or anticipated operating data; 
(2)  DeKalb County's current or anticipated operating data; 
(3)  The requirements of regulatory agencies which affect DeKalb County; or 
(4)  A determination by the FOG control program manager and his or her designee that such modification is required to comply with the provisions of these regulations. 
(b)  The generator may request a modification to the terms and conditions of an issued permit. The request shall be in writing stating the requested change and the reasons for the change. The FOG control program manager shall review the written request, make a determination on the request, and respond in writing within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request. The director shall develop standard operating procedures governing requests for variances from the sizing requirements of the Georgia amendments to the International Plumbing Code for Generators. Those standard operating procedures shall be available for inspection by the public at the department of watershed management's (DWM) headquarters and on-line at DeKalb County's website. 
(c)  The generator shall be informed of any change in the permit limits, conditions, or requirements at least forty-five (45) days prior to the effective date of the change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07; Ord. No. 18-09 , Pt. I, 12-11-18) 
Sec. 25-265.13. - Permits for new and existing facilities, grandfathering, and effective date. 
(a)  New facilities. Food service establishments which are newly proposed, constructed, or existing facilities which will be expanded or renovated, shall be required to install a properly sized FOG interceptor according to the requirements set forth in these regulations and such FOG interceptors shall be permitted and installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the food service establishment. 
(b)  Existing facilities. DeKalb County requires all existing food service establishments to install, operate, and maintain a FOG interceptor that complies with the requirements set forth in these regulations. All food service establishments shall repair or replace any noncomplaint [noncompliant] plumbing or the existing FOG interceptor within ninety (90) days of written notification by DeKalb County if any one or more of the following conditions exist or occur: 
(1)  The facility is found to produce any product that creates FOG as a byproduct; 
(2)  The facility does not have a FOG interceptor; 
(3)  The facility has an undersized, irreparable, improperly configured, or defective FOG interceptor; 
(4)  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing system is performed which requires a plumbing permit to be issued by DeKalb County; 
(5)  The existing facility is sold or undergoes a change of ownership or expansion; 
(6)  The existing facility does not have plumbing connection to a FOG interceptor in compliance with the requirements of DeKalb County; or 
(7)  If a food service establishment changes its business name. 
(c)  Grandfathering. If an existing food service establishment is housed in a structure that because of its architectural or historical restrictions the owner will suffer extreme economic hardship in order to upgrade the existing FOG interceptor, then the establishment may keep the current FOG interceptor in place provided that all fresh-air fixtures must be tied into the current FOG interceptor, and the FOG interceptor must be at least fifteen (15) feet from the last fresh-air fixture. Additionally, the FOG interceptor must be cleaned every ten (10) days by a Georgia State Permitted Transporter. In the event that any remodeling of such a food service establishment is undertaken or if the food service establishment changes ownership, then a FOG interceptor that complies with all applicable requirements of this code shall be installed. 
(d)  Notification of planned changes. All food service establishments shall notify the FOG compliance manager at least ninety (90) days in writing in advance prior to any change of ownership, facility expansion/remodeling, or process modifications that may result in new or substantially increased FOG discharges or a change in the nature of the discharge. All food service establishments shall submit any information requested by DeKalb County for evaluation of the effect of such expansion on the Food service establishment's FOG discharge to the sewer system. 
(e)  Effective date. These regulations shall not become fully effective until eighteen (18) months after their adoption by the board of commissioners and approval by the chief executive officer. During this eighteen-month period, the chief executive officer or designee shall promulgate a written policy to ensure that all existing food service establishments in DeKalb County come into compliance with and obtain the necessary permits required by these regulations. The delayed effective date of these regulations is designed to allow a staggered schedule of inspections and permitting such that all existing food service establishments in DeKalb County are in compliance with and have obtained the required permits on or before the expiration of the eighteen (18) months described in this section. During this eighteen-month period, food service establishments shall comply with the inspection and permitting staggered schedule promulgated by the chief executive officer and if in compliance with such staggered schedule, such food service establishments shall not be subject to citation for failure to be in compliance with these regulations or for failure to have obtained the required permit(s) delineated in these regulations. After the expiration of this eighteen-month period, all existing and newly constructed or remodeled food service establishments shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.14. - FOG wastewater discharge permit duration and renewal. 
FOG wastewater discharge permits shall be issued annually. At least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the permit, the user shall apply for renewal of the permit in accordance with the provisions of chapter 25 article 3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.15. - Exemption from FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
A limited food preparation establishment is not considered a food service establishment and is exempt from obtaining a FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25.265.16. - Nontransferability of permits and fees. 
(a)  FOG wastewater discharge permits issued under these regulations are for a specific food service establishment, for a specific operation, and create no vested rights. 
(b)  No permit holder shall assign, transfer, or sell any FOG wastewater discharge permit issued under these regulations nor use any such permit for or on any premises or for facilities or operations or discharges not expressly encompassed within the underlying permit. 
(c)  A permitting fee that covers the administrative costs of DeKalb County for administering the FOG program shall be established by action of the governing authority and assessed to each facility subject to these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.17. - Payment of charges. 
All fees established by these regulations are due and payable upon receipt of notice thereof. Accounts shall become delinquent if not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of mailing, or if personally delivered, the date of delivery. Any invoice outstanding and unpaid after ninety (90) days shall be cause for immediate initiation of permit revocation proceedings or immediate suspension of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.18. - Inspections and authority to enforce regulations. 
(a)  Authority to inspect. The compliance inspectors shall inspect food service establishments on both an unscheduled and unannounced basis or on a scheduled basis. All food service establishments may be inspected up to four (4) times per year. Inspection of a FOG interceptor shall be performed at frequencies necessary to protect the capacity of the sewer system against the accumulation of FOG in an amount that would exceed the twenty (20) percent rule. Inspection shall include all fixtures, equipment, food processing, and storage areas, and shall include a review of the processes that produce wastewater discharged from a facility through the FOG interceptor. Any deficiencies shall be noted, including but not to be limited to: 
(1)  Failure to report changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(2)  Failure to properly maintain the FOG interceptor; 
(3)  Failure to maintain logs, files, records, or access for inspection or monitoring activities; 
(4)  Failure to obtain or renew the FOG discharge permits in a timely manner; or 
(5)  Any other violations of these regulations or state law that requires correction by the food service establishment. 
(b)  Right of entry. Where it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of these regulations or where the FOG control program manager or designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in a building or structure or upon a premises a condition which is contrary to or in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code, the FOG control program manager or designee is authorized to enter the building, structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform any of the duties imposed by the applicable provisions of this Code. If such building, structure, or premises is occupied, the inspector shall present credentials to the occupant and shall request entry. If such building, structure, or premises is unoccupied, the inspector shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of the building, structure, or premises and request entry. If entry is refused, the inspector shall have recourse to the remedies provided by law for entry. In the event of an emergency involving actual or imminent sanitary sewer overflow, the inspector may access adjoining businesses or properties that share a sewer system with a food service establishment in order to prevent or remediate an actual or imminent sewer overflow. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.19. - Noncompliance fees, letters, and schedules. 
(a)  Reinspection fee. Any food service establishment in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or with any provision of these regulations shall pay a noncompliance fee. The purpose of the noncompliance fee is to compensate DeKalb County for costs of additional inspections, followups, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment, disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance, and shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to these regulations. Noncompliance fees shall be in the amount adopted by action of the governing authority. 
(c)  Noncompliance Letters. Immediately following every inspection and/or FOG evaluation, the food service establishment inspected shall receive a letter indicating the results of the inspection. A certified letter of noncompliance means the food service establishment is in violation of the applicable provisions of this Code. Letters of noncompliance shall include a description of the code being violated and the immediate course of action the food service establishment shall be required to take to come into compliance. Failure to comply with a letter of non-compliance is also a violation of these regulations. 
(d)  Compliance schedule. Upon determination that a food service establishment is noncompliant with the terms and conditions specified in its permit or any provision of these regulations or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a FOG interceptor, the FOG control program manager may also issue and require the food service establishment to abide by a compliance schedule. The issuance of a compliance schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to, requirements for installation of a FOG interceptor and facilities, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of waste hauling records, best management and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other provisions to ensure compliance with these regulations. 
(e)  Fees. The FOG control program manager shall not issue a compliance schedule until such time as all amounts owed by the food service establishment to DeKalb County, due are paid in full. If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule, the FOG control program manager may issue an order suspending or revoking the FOG wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.20. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Permit suspension and revocation. The FOG control program manager may suspend or revoke any permit when it is determined that a food service establishment: 
(1)  Fails to comply with the terms and conditions of a noncompliance letter or compliance schedule order; 
(2)  Destroys, removes, conceals, or knowingly provides a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to DeKalb County; 
(3)  Refuses to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by DeKalb County to determine permit terms or conditions, discharge compliance, or compliance with these regulations; 
(4)  Falsifies, tampers with, destroys, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or sample collection method; 
(5)  Does not make timely payment of all amounts owed to DeKalb County for user charges, permit fees, or any other fees imposed pursuant to these regulations; 
(6)  Causes interference, a sewer blockage, or a sanitary sewer overflow in the sewer system, violates FOG interceptor maintenance requirements, violates any condition or limit of its FOG wastewater discharge permit, or violates any provision of these regulations; or 
(7)  Refuses to accept a notice by personal service or certified mail. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  When the FOG control program manager has reason to believe that grounds exist for permit suspension or revocation, he/she shall give written notice thereof by certified mail to the food service establishment setting forth a statement of the facts and grounds deemed to exist, together with the time and place where the charges shall be heard by the director. The hearing date shall be not less than fifteen (15) calendar days or more than forty-five (45) calendar days after the mailing of such notice. 
(2)  At the suspension or revocation hearing, the food service establishment shall have an opportunity to respond to the allegations set forth in the notice by presenting written or oral evidence. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the director. The director shall conduct the hearing and shall render a decision in writing within thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(3)  The written decision and order of the director shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at the food service establishment's business address. Upon an order of suspension or revocation by the FOG control program manager becoming final, the food service establishment shall immediately cease and desist its discharge and shall have no right to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly into DeKalb County's sewer system for the duration of the suspension. All costs for physically terminating and reinstating service shall be paid by the food service establishment. Any owner or responsible management employee of the food service establishment shall be bound by the order of suspension or revocation. Upon an order of revocation by the FOG control program manager becoming final, the food service establishment shall permanently lose all rights to discharge any wastewater containing FOG directly or indirectly to DeKalb County's sewer system. All costs for physical termination shall be paid by the food service establishment. 
(4)  An order of permit suspension or revocation issued by the FOG control program manager shall be final in all respects on the sixteenth day after it is mailed to the food service establishment. 
(c)  Damage to facilities or interruption of normal operations of the sewer system. Any person who discharges any waste which causes or contributes to any sewer blockage, sanitary sewer overflows, obstruction, interference, damage, or any other impairment to DeKalb County's sewer system and/or equipment, or to the operation of those facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for all costs required to clean and/or repair the facilities and/or equipment, together with expenses incurred by DeKalb County to resume normal operations. A service charge of twenty-five (25) percent of DeKalb County's costs shall be added to the costs and charges to reimburse DeKalb County for miscellaneous overhead, including administrative personnel and recordkeeping. The total amount shall be payable within forty five (45) days of invoicing by DeKalb County. Any person who discharges a waste which causes or contributes to DeKalb County violating its discharge requirements established by any Regulatory Agency incurring additional expenses or suffering losses or damage to the facilities and/or equipment shall be liable for any costs or expenses incurred by DeKalb County, including regulatory fines, penalties, and assessments made by other agencies or a court. 
(d)  Termination of water service to the food service establishment. DeKalb County, by order of the FOG control program manager, may physically terminate water service to any property as follows: 
(1)  If so ordered in any order of suspension or revocation of a permit; or 
(2)  Upon the failure of a person not holding a valid FOG Wastewater discharge permit to immediately cease the discharge, whether direct or indirect, to DeKalb County's sewer system after the issuance of a final order or suspension or revocation. 
(3)  All costs for physical termination of the water service shall be paid by the owner or operator of the food service establishment as well as all costs for reinstating service. 
(e)  Emergency suspension order. DeKalb County may, by order of the FOG control program manager or designee, suspend water service when the FOG control program manager or designee determines that such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or impending discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health and welfare of persons, or to the environment, or may cause sanitary sewer overflows, sewer blockages, interference to DeKalb County's sewer facilities, or may cause DeKalb County to violate any state or federal law or regulation. Any discharger notified of and subject to an emergency suspension order shall immediately cease and desist the discharge of all wastewater containing FOG to the sewer system. 
(f)  Emergency suspension hearing. As soon as reasonably practicable following the issuance of an emergency suspension order, but in no event more than five (5) business days following the issuance of such order, the director shall hold a hearing to provide a food service establishment the opportunity to present information in opposition to the issuance of the emergency suspension order. Such a hearing shall not stay the effect of the emergency suspension order. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with written procedures established by the director. The director shall issue a written decision and order within two (2) business days following the hearing, which decision shall be sent by certified mail to the food service establishment at that food service establishment's business address. This decision shall either lift the emergency suspension order or suspend or revoke the permit subject to the suspension and revocation appeal process set forth in these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.21. - Criminal penalties. 
(a)  Any person that does anything prohibited or fails to do anything required by these regulations, upon citation and conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be subject to the penalties in accordance with section 1-10. Where any offense or violation continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  Upon a second and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period, measured from the date of the first conviction, of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon a third and subsequent conviction within a twelve-month period measured from the date of the first conviction of any violation of these regulations, the court shall impose a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(d)  The penalties provided in this section are not cumulative and shall not prohibit DeKalb County from pursuing any other civil or criminal remedies authorized by this Code, state, or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 07-03, Pt. I, 3-27-07) 
Sec. 25-265.22. - FOG requirements for existing multi-family dwelling units. 
(a)  Existing multi-family dwelling units shall not be required to comply with the FOG permitting requirements provided for in this division until one (1) of the following triggering events occurs: 
(1)  FOG discharge is in concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/l maximum instantaneous reading in a discharge; or 
(2)  A sanitary sewer overflow from the private sewer line occurs; or 
(3)  An inspection performed by DWM or a county contractor which documents the multi-family dwelling unit is contributing to a buildup in the DeKalb County Sanitary Sewer below the property discharge point in excess of ten (10) percent greater than above the property discharge point, with such measurements including a measurement of ten (10) percent or greater buildup in the actual property discharge point, or as close to the actual property discharge point as practicable. 
(b)  After a triggering event occurs, the following tiered compliance shall be implemented for existing multi-family dwelling units: 
(1)  Tier I: If a triggering event occurs, the generator will be required to obtain a FOG wastewater discharge permit in accordance with the requirements of this division as if it were a food service establishment, implement a comprehensive education program as provided for in section 25-265.22(c), and within sixty (60) days of the triggering event or seven (7) days from receipt of a Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) Right-of-Way (ROW) required permit (if required), whichever is later, must assess and clean all private sewer line(s), six (6) inches or greater in diameter connected to the DeKalb County Sanitary Sewer System as follows: 
a.  The affected private sewer lines must be properly cleaned. 
b.  All debris and grease solids must be captured by screening and/or vacuuming from the receiving manhole and properly disposed. Generator must apply for the GDOT permit (if necessary to perform work in the right-of-way), if required for access. Volume must be recorded as estimated volume of the captured solids. 
c.  Provide CCTV inspection verifying that all FOG has been removed from the line(s) for lines six (6) inches or greater and a certification statement from the cleaning contractor and owner for lines that do not support CCTV inspection. 
d.  Submit a report to the FOG control program manager within fifteen (15) business days of completion of the work documenting the work and providing the required records. 
(2)  Tier II: If a second triggering event occurs within three (3) years of attaining Tier I status, the generator must clean the private sewer line(s) connected to the DeKalb County Sanitary Sewer System in accordance with the requirements contained in section 25-265.22(b)(1) and its FOG permit will be modified to require assessment and cleaning of the lines on an annual basis in accordance with the requirements contained in with the requirements contained in section 25-265.22 b)(1). 
(3)  Tier III: If a third triggering event occurs within three (3) years of attaining Tier II status, the generator must clean the private sewer line(s) connected to the DeKalb County Sanitary Sewer in accordance with the requirements contained in section 25-265.22(b)(1) and its FOG permit will be modified to require a FOG engineering remediation plan, certified by a Georgia Licensed Professional Engineer, within ninety (90) days of the applicable triggering event inclusive of an implementation schedule. The plan shall be designed and implemented to prevent triggering events listed in section 25-265.22(a). Unless the FOG control program manager takes exception to the submitted plan, the plan and its implementation schedule is incorporated into the permit thirty (30) days after submission to the FOG control program manager. 
(4)  Tier IV: If a fourth triggering event occurs within three (3) years of implementation of a remediation plan as described in Tier III, the generator must install properly sized FOG interceptor(s) within ninety (90) days of triggering event. 
(5)  If no additional triggering events occur three (3) years from the last triggering event and the facility is not in Tier IV, the FOG permit will not be required to be renewed. 
(c)  The following comprehensive education program, to include residents, owners, managers, and staff, shall be implemented within sixty (60) days after the occurrence of a triggering event in accordance with section 25-265.22(b)(1): 
(1)  Resident education. 
a.  Informational brochures, handouts, or other written guidelines for correct residential FOG management must be: 
1.  Distributed to each residential unit in a language(s) spoken by 50 percent or more of the residents (or be pictorial in nature). Documentation of distribution must be submitted to DWM and include signatures of receipt from individuals and/or a certified statement from management attesting to the delivery of the materials to each unit. 
2.  Posted at common areas where other resident notifications are posted, such as central posting areas and/or mailbox areas in language(s) spoken by 50 percent or more of the residents (or be pictorial in nature). 
3.  Shared verbally in resident workshops, with appropriate demonstrations as necessary, in a language(s) spoken by residents. Such workshop must occur within sixty (60) days of the triggering event and at least one (1) additional meeting or workshop must be held within twelve (12) months of the triggering event. Documentation showing compliance must be submitted to DWM and include agendas of workshops and number of residents attending as well as a sign-in sheet or photographs of the event. 
b.  Informational brochures, handouts, or other written guidelines and workshops from any government agency, FOG alliance or educational programs, Metropolitan North Georgia Water Planning District, or other source pre-approved by the FOG control program manager shall be acceptable. Approval of alternative educational materials may be requested through submittal of such alternative materials to the FOG control program manager for review. Any such submission to the FOG control program manager that is not responded to within fifteen (15) business days shall be deemed approved. 
(2)  Owner, manager and staff education. 
a.  The owner or property manager of an existing multi-family dwelling unit, as well as all maintenance staff, shall attend one (1) or more of the following within six (6) months of a triggering event: 
1.  Government provided targeted FOG educational program or workshop, in person or online. 
2.  Regional or national seminar, workshop, or conference specific to FOG. 
3.  Plumbing workshop, course, or educational event that specifically includes residential/commercial (dependent on type of property) maintenance of lines with a FOG component that is provided or approved by the plumbing and drainage institute, in person or online. 
b.  Documentation of attendance must be submitted to DWM and include attendance certification or proof of issuance of professional development hours or continuing educational points from the providing organization. 
(3)  A report detailing the above activities, with the required documentation, shall be submitted to the FOG control program manager within fifteen (15) days following the end of each calendar quarter. Submittals for quarters with no activity shall state that no activities were required during that quarter. 
( Ord. No. 18-09 , Pt. I, 12-11-18) 
Secs. 25-266—25-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 25-276. - Levied. 
A service charge is levied and assessed for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system. This charge is based on the amount of potable water consumed per month by each contributor to the sewer system. The rate at which this charge is levied shall be as established by action of the board of commissioners, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the board of commissioners. The charges imposed by this article may be periodically revised at the discretion of the board of commissioners. A readiness-to-serve charge is imposed for the operation of the sewer system based on the size of the customer's water meter. A surcharge for overstrength waste, i.e., wastes consisting of total suspended solids and/or five-day biochemical oxygen demand materials in concentrations exceeding 250 mg/l, ammonia in concentrations exceeding 30 mg/l, and total phosphorus exceeding 10 mg/l, is levied at a rate approved and adopted by the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2011; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 3-11-97) 
Sec. 25-277. - Billing. 
The finance department shall prepare for each contributor to the sewerage system a monthly or bimonthly notice of the amount due. This notice shall be addressed and mailed to the address as designated by the owner or occupant of the property. Payment is due in full ten (10) days from date notice is mailed, and shall be in default if not paid on or before the twentieth day after the date of the notice. Failure to receive the notice in no way relieves the occupant of liability for the amount due. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2012) 
Sec. 25-278. - Collection. 
The finance department shall be responsible for the collection of all sewer service charges. It shall have deposited to the account of the water and sewer fund of the county all sums collected for water and sewer services as soon as received. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2013) 
Sec. 25-279. - Disconnection of service for failure to pay. 
If payment has not been received twenty (20) calendar days after the date of the notice of amount due for sewer services, a default notice shall be sent to the occupant of the property. If payment is not received within ten (10) days after the date of the default notice, then the finance department shall initiate action to terminate water service until such time as all sums due for sewer service, including penalties, are paid in full. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2014) 
Sec. 25-280. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, adopted May 23, 1995, repealed § 25-280, which pertained to liability of owner for failure of occupant to pay. See the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 25-281. - Right of county to tax for benefit of sewer system. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting the right of the board of commissioners to exercise its right as authorized by law to create, operate and maintain the sewerage system through the imposition of ad valorem taxation. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2016) 
Sec. 25-282. - Discharges to sewer system by persons or governments residing outside county. 
No persons or governments residing or operating outside the limits of the county shall discharge or cause to be discharged any material into the sanitary sewer system of the county without the prior approval of the board of commissioners. 
(Code 1976, § 6-2017) 
Secs. 25-283—25-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - PHOSPHORUS CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 89-21, adopted May 23, 1989, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of § 1 as Art. IV, Div. 7, §§ 25-301—25-306, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 25-301. - Declaration of policy. 
O.C.G.A. section 12-5-27.1 provides that whenever a local government entity is required by the environmental protection division to reduce phosphorus in its wastewater being discharged into the waters of the state, such local government entity shall pass an ordinance mandating the retail sale of low phosphorus household laundry detergent as part of its phosphorus reduction process. It is hereby declared to be the public policy of the county to encourage the use of clean phosphate-free household laundry detergents and to prohibit the sale of household laundry detergents which contain more than five-tenths (0.5) percent phosphorus by weight. The county finds that such use and sale will be a cost-effective way to reduce the amount of phosphorus in wastewater discharge so as to protect Georgia's rivers and lakes downstream; promote health, safety, and welfare; and prevent injury to human health, plant and animal life, and property. It is vital to the health, well-being, and welfare of present and future inhabitants of the county that these sources be protected against contamination and pollution. 
(Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 5-23-89) 
Sec. 25-302. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretations and enforcement of this division: 
Household laundry detergent. A laundering cleaning compound in liquid, bar, spray, tablet, flake, powder, or other form used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. The term "household laundry detergent" shall not mean: 
(1)  A dishwashing compound, household cleaner, metal cleaner, degreasing compound, commercial cleaner, industrial cleaner, or other substance that is intended to be used for nonlaundry cleaning purposes; 
(2)  A detergent used in dairy, beverage, or food processing cleaning equipment; 
(3)  A phosphorus acid product, including a sanitizer, brightener, acid cleaner, or metal conditioner; 
(4)  A detergent used in hospitals, veterinary hospitals or clinics, or health care facilities or in agricultural production; 
(5)  A detergent used by industry for metal cleaning or conditioning; 
(6)  A detergent manufactured, stored, or distributed for use or sale outside of the state; 
(7)  A detergent used in any laboratory, including a biological laboratory, research facility, chemical laboratory, and engineering laboratory; or 
(8)  A detergent used in a commercial laundry that provides laundry services for hospitals, health care facilities, or veterinary hospitals. 
Person. The term "person" shall mean any person, firm, partnership or corporation. 
Phosphorus. The term "phosphorus" shall mean elemental phosphorus. 
(Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 5-23-89) 
Sec. 25-303. - Sales prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at the retail level a household laundry detergent which contains greater than five-tenths (0.5) percent phosphorus by weight and is intended to be used for domestic clothes-cleaning purposes. 
(Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 5-23-89) 
Sec. 25-304. - Penalties for violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum fine allowed under this Code. Each sales transaction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 5-23-89) 
Sec. 25-305. - Civil action. 
In addition to the penalty provided in section 25-304 above, the county may maintain an action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 5-23-89) 
Sec. 25-306. - Individual right to damages. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to abridge, limit or otherwise impair the right of any person to damages or other relief on account of injuries to persons or property arising out of a violation of this division and to maintain any action or other appropriate proceeding thereof. 
(Ord. No. 89-21, § 1, 5-23-89) 
Secs. 25-307—25-359. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 25-360. - Findings. 
The board of commissioners of DeKalb County, Georgia makes the following findings: 
(a)  The federal Clean Water Act, as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and rules promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act emphasizes the role of local governments in developing, implementing, conducting and funding stormwater programs which address water quality impacts of storm water runoff. 
(b)  Stormwater management services and facilities will assist the county in meeting the regulatory obligations imposed by its national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit by reducing pollution and increasing water quality within the county. 
(c)  DeKalb County presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the county, and of additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the county to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities in DeKalb County in concert with the management of other water resources in the county. In order to do so, the county must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program's operating needs and capital. 
(d)  Stormwater management services and facilities are needed throughout the unincorporated areas of DeKalb County because most of those areas are developed. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management service area encompassing all lands and water bodies within the unincorporated area of DeKalb County is consistent with the present and future needs of the community. 
(e)  The provision of stormwater management services and facilities in DeKalb County promotes an essential regulatory purpose by controlling where stormwater runoff flows and how it is disposed, and thereby reducing flooding, erosion and water pollution caused by stormwater runoff. 
(f)  Stormwater management services and facilities will provide a specific service to property owners by assisting in the property owner's legal obligation to control stormwater runoff from their property and ensure that runoff does not flow upon their neighbors in greater quantities than it would if the property were in an undeveloped state. By mitigating the impact of stormwater runoff from developed property, the stormwater management system helps prevent damage that would subject a property owner to civil liability. 
(g)  The board of commissioners is responsible for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare of the community, and finds that it is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the county and the community at large to proceed with the development, implementation, and operation of a utility for stormwater management accounted for in the county budget as a separate enterprise fund dedicated solely to stormwater management and to institute funding methods associated therewith. 
(h)  The county has undertaken a comprehensive review by staff and professional consultants of the need for, management of, and funding for, a stormwater utility. The county staff reports and the professional engineering and financing feasibility analysis submitted to the county properly assess and define the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the county. 
(i)  As a result, the county's governing authority finds that a stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering storm water management services and facilities, and the county's governing authority finds that a utility fee provides the most practical and appropriate means of funding stormwater management services in DeKalb County. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-361. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this article. Any word or phrase not defined below but otherwise defined in the Code of Ordinances shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 
Channel protection shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
Credit shall mean a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service charge to an individual property based upon the terms and conditions of this article. 
Customer shall mean all persons, properties, and entities served by the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public storm water management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
Developed land shall mean all property not deemed as undeveloped land. 
Direct lien shall mean a lien enforced against an individual or property prior to obtaining a judgment against the individual or property, such as liens established by operation of law for unpaid taxes. 
Equivalent residential unit (ERU) shall mean the unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by one parcel with that generated by another. An ERU shall be the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single detached dwelling lots in DeKalb County, which has been determined to be three thousand (3,000) square feet of impervious area. 
Impervious surfaces shall mean those areas, which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings. 
Multiple dwelling lot shall mean a developed lot where on more than one (1) attached or detached residential dwelling units are located. Multiple dwelling lots include, but are not limited to, apartments, condominiums, duplexes and triplexes. 
Other developed land shall mean, but shall not be limited to, commercial and office buildings, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, and agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces. 
Overbank flood protection shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
Service fees shall mean the stormwater management service fees applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be used only for the purpose of funding the DeKalb County stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and facilities. 
Single dwelling lot shall mean a developed lot containing one (1) dwelling structure with its principal use being a residential dwelling. Single dwelling lots include, but are not limited to, single family homes and town homes characterized by fee simple ownership of both land and improved structures. 
Stormwater management system means any one (1) or more of the various devices used in the collection, treatment, or disposition of storm, flood or surface drainage waters, including all manmade structures or natural watercourse for the conveyance or transportation of runoff, such as: detention areas, berms, swales, improved watercourses, open channels, bridges, gulches, streams, gullies, flumes, culverts, gutters, pumping stations, pipes, ditches, siphons, catch basins and street facilities; all inlets; collection, drainage or disposal lines; intercepting sewers; disposal plants; outfall sewers; all pumping, power, and other equipment and appurtenances; all extension, improvements, remodeling, additions, and alterations thereof; and any and all rights or interests in such stormwater facilities. Stormwater facilities expressly excludes any of the foregoing which exist for, or are used exclusively for the purpose of collection, treating, measuring, supplying, or distributing potable water within or as part of the county water supply and treatment system, or any of the foregoing which exist for or are used exclusively for the purpose of collecting, treating, or measuring effluent within or as part of the county sanitary sewer system. 
Undeveloped land shall mean a lot in its unaltered natural state and which has no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
Water quality shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Manual, Volume 2, as amended hereafter. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-362. - Establishment of a utility. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility within the public works department which shall be responsible for stormwater management throughout the county's jurisdictional limits, and shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater systems and facilities. 
(b)  The governing authority of DeKalb County hereby transfers to the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and heretofore operated by the county and other related assets, including but not limited to properties upon which such facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 25-363. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater utility. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance, inspection, construction, and use of all stormwater systems in the county. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for the design and construction of public stormwater facilities owned by the county and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed herein. The stormwater utility shall be responsible for plan approval and construction inspection of both private stormwater facilities and public stormwater facilities not owned by the county. Additionally, the stormwater utility may accept the responsibility for the operation and maintenance of private stormwater facilities only when such services have been agreed to, contracted for, and approved by the governing authority of the county. 
(b)  The stormwater utility shall provide for inspection of private facilities to ascertain that the stormwater facilities are functioning as designed and approved. The stormwater utility shall provide for remedial maintenance of facilities based upon the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare, and in cases where such remedial maintenance is required the county may bill the owner of the private facility for the costs of such maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-364. - Establishment of enterprise fund. 
(a)  The chief executive officer shall establish a stormwater enterprise fund in the county budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees, and licenses as may be established by the board of commissioners. 
(b)  Except as provided pursuant to section 24-364(c), any revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues, receipts, and resources not in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the board of commissioners, upon recommendation of the chief executive officer. 
(c)  The county may pledge all or any portion of all income and revenue of any nature derived from the operation of the stormwater management systems and facilities owned by the county, including periodic stormwater service charges and other charges for stormwater service, to the payment of principal of premium, if any, and interest on any revenue bonds or other obligations lawfully issued or otherwise contracted for by the county as may be provided in any resolution authorizing such bonds or obligations or in any trust instrument relating to such bonds or obligations. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 25-365. - Stormwater service fees established. 
(a)  In order to recover the cost of providing stormwater services and facilities while fairly and reasonably apportioning the costs among developed properties throughout the unincorporated portion of the county based on the use of stormwater services and facilities, the following stormwater rates shall apply. 
(b)  The stormwater service charge per equivalent residential unit shall be four dollars ($4.00) per month or as amended by official action of the governing authority. 
(c)  All single detached dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one (1) equivalent residential unit. 
(d)  All multiple dwelling lots shall be charged the rate applicable to one (1) equivalent residential unit times the number of dwelling units located on the multiple dwelling unit property times an adjustment factor that adjust the ERU to equal the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of a single dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling lot in DeKalb County, which has been determined to be 0.5. 
(e)  All other developed lands shall be billed for one (1) equivalent residential unit for each three thousand (3000) square feet of impervious surface or increment thereof on the property, rounded to the next highest tenth of an equivalent residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-366. - Effective date of stormwater service charges and termination of pond fees and other stormwater related fees in force prior to effective date. 
The stormwater service fee shall accrue beginning January 1, 2004, and shall be billed annually thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 10-03, Pt. I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 25-367. - Elimination of pond maintenance fees. 
Beginning January 1, 2004, all fees collected for pond maintenance are hereby eliminated. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 10-03, Pt. I, 5-27-03) 
Sec. 25-368. - Exemptions. 
The following properties are exempt from stormwater utility fees: 
(1)  Undeveloped land; 
(2)  All public rights-of-way; and 
(3)  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service charges. 
(4)  Any property whereby one hundred (100) percent of the stormwater runoff is contained on the premises and no runoff enters into the stormwater management system. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 25-369. - Credits. 
(a)  Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater service charge credit for on-site systems or facilities. Stormwater service charge credits shall be determined based on the technical requirements design and performance standards contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. Stormwater service charge credits may total up to forty (40) percent of the service charge applicable to a property, and shall be granted upon a showing of any of the following: 
(1)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet water quality standards in accordance with the DeKalb County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(2)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities properly sized and functioning to meet the channel protection standards in accordance with the DeKalb County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(3)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the overbank flood protection standards in accordance with the DeKalb County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(4)  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the extreme flood protection standards in accordance with the DeKalb County Code and the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time. 
(b)  Property owners seeking service charge credits must apply for stormwater service charge credits through completion and submittal to the County of a stormwater service charge credit application prior to January 1st of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed by the county (except for 2004, in which applications must be received by March 1, 2004). Credits will only be granted through applications approved by the county for the remainder of the year in which stormwater service charges are to be billed by the county. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a timely filed completed application, the chief executive officer or his designee shall review the application and make a determination as to whether the applicable criteria for a credit has been met. All decisions regarding the approval or disapproval of a stormwater credit shall be made within forty-five (45) days of the date the completed application was submitted to the county. 
(d)  Any credit allowed against the service charge is conditioned on (1) continuing compliance with the county's design and performance standards as stated in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual as may be updated or amended from time to time; and (2) upon continuing provision of the systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner or owners upon which the credit is based. The county may revoke any credit at any time for non-compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-370. - Inspection of private facilities. 
Continuing compliance with the county's design and performance standards may be verified by county inspection of the systems or facilities upon which the credit is based. No credit shall be given under this article unless the property owner agrees in writing in its application that the county shall have the right for its designated officers, representatives, agents, and employees to enter upon private and public property, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering testing on such property in order to assure compliance with the county's design and performance standards. On-site systems or facilities determined to no longer comply with the county's design and performance standards shall subject the property owner to revocation of all, or a portion of, stormwater service charge credits based on the county inspections' estimate of capacity reduction for a period of not less than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-371. - Stormwater service charge, billing, delinquencies and collections. 
(a)  The stormwater utility service charge may be billed separately, or on a customer statement and collected along with other fees for services, at the county's sole discretion, provided that in no instance shall the service charge constitute a direct lien against the property. Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby. 
(b)  A stormwater utility service charge bill may be sent through the United States mail or by alternative means notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fee. If a customer is underbilled or if no bill is sent for developed land, the county may backbill for a period of up to one year, but shall not assess penalties for any delinquency due to the failure to send a bill or an under billing. A one (1) percent per month late charge shall be assessed against the owner for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service charge that becomes delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-372. - Stormwater utility service inspections and enforcement. 
Every owner of real property located in the unincorporated area of the county, and every person who serves as a contractor or developer for the purpose of developing real property located in the unincorporated area of DeKalb County shall provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a safe manner consistent with all DeKalb County ordinances and development regulations, and the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance and be subject to an abatement action filed by any damaged party or DeKalb County in any court of competent jurisdiction. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the owner fails to properly abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the court, the county may enter upon the property and cause such work as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance with the actual cost thereof assessed against the owner or developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. From the date of the filing of such action, the county shall have lien rights, which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lien on the General Execution Docket of the Superior Court of DeKalb County. DeKalb County shall have the right, pursuant to the authority of this article, for its designated officers and employees to enter upon private and public property owned by entities other than the county, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to assure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 32-03, Pt. I, 12-23-03) 
Sec. 25-373. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the chief executive officer or designee within thirty (30) days of the decision that is appealed. In the case of service charge appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions which influence the hydrologic response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  The chief executive officer or his designee shall conduct a technical review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within thirty (30) days. 
(3)  In response to an appeal the chief executive officer or his designee may adjust the stormwater service charge applicable to a property in conformance with the general purpose and intent of this article. 
(4)  All decisions by the chief executive officer shall be final. 
(b)  The appeal process contained in this section shall be a condition precedent to an aggrieved customer seeking judicial relief. Any decision of the chief executive officer may be appealed by application for writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of DeKalb County, filed within thirty (30) days of the date of service of the decision of the chief executive officer. 
(Ord. No. 40-02, Pt. I, 12-10-02) 
Sec. 25-374. - Effective date. 
Article V of Chapter 25 of this Code shall become effective on January 1, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, Pt. I, 5-27-03) 
Chapter 26 - WRECKERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 15; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference— General constitutional grant of home rule powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ II. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Department means the police department or such other department as may hereafter be designated to enforce this chapter. 
Director means the chief of police or the designee thereof. When a department other than the police department is designated to enforce this chapter, the term means the director of such department or the designee thereof. 
Wrecker means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles. "Wrecker" includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or vehicles. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20001; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, §§ 1, 4, 11-27-01) 
Cross reference— Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Compliance. 
It shall be unlawful for any person either as principal, agent or employee to use or operate upon any of the streets of the unincorporated area of the county any wrecker or towing car without complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20002) 
Sec. 26-3. - Issuance of citation for violation. 
The director may issue citations for violations of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20015) 
Sec. 26-4. - Reserved. 
Sec. 26-5. - Business license required; nontransferable. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated, any wrecker within the unincorporated boundaries of the county without first having obtained a business license from the county. The business license shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1976, §§ 8-20003, 8-20004) 
State Law reference— Exemption from license, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.1. 
Sec. 26-6. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The department shall petition the finance department to revoke the business license of any wrecker owner or operator when such person has been found in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or upon any of the following grounds; 
(1)  If the registration was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact as to ownership, use, possession or operation. 
(2)  If the owner or licensee is found at the scene of an accident in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  If the licensee uses a police radio to obtain information as to location of the scene of the accident. 
(4)  If the licensee shall pay, in the form of a gratuity, any person not involved in the accident for information as to the location of the accident. 
(b)  This revocation shall terminate all authority and permission granted by the registration to the wrecker owner. Any person whose registration has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a license for a period of one (1) year from the date of the issuance of the original license. 
(c)  Any person whose license has been revoked by the finance department may file an appeal therefrom to the board of commissioners within twenty (20) days from the date of this revocation. The board shall give the licensee at least ten (10) days' notice in advance of the date of a public hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not the business license to operate a wrecker shall be revoked. Upon hearing the facts the board of commissioners may affirm, reverse, vacate or modify the order of revocation. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20013) 
Secs. 26-7, 26-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-04, Pt. I, adopted July 13, 2004, repealed former §§ 26-7, 26-8 of the Code, which pertained to registration decals and derived from the 1976 Code, §§ 8-20005, 8-20006. 
Sec. 26-9. - Information printed on side of wrecker. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate or cause to be operated within the unincorporated area of the county any wrecker unless such vehicle shall have lettered in permanent paint on each side in plain view the following information: the name of the person owning and causing the wrecker to operate on the streets of the unincorporated areas of the county, the address from which the wrecker is operating and the telephone number. This lettering shall be on a contrasting color to the color of the wrecker and shall be at least two and one-half (2½) inches in height. Temporary or removable magnetic signs shall not be permitted. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20007) 
Sec. 26-10. - Weekly reports. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any business providing wrecker service to or storage facilities for the residents of the unincorporated areas of the county shall furnish to the department, on forms of a type approved by the department, a typed, weekly report listing all motor-driven vehicles towed from or stored within the unincorporated limits of the county and remaining within the possession of the business on the Friday following the towing or storage. The vehicle shall be listed in each subsequent weekly report so long as it remains in the possession of the business. 
(b)  Any person in the business of auto salvage or otherwise in the business of selling used parts off vehicles within the seller's possession and any person in the business of crushing, cutting up or otherwise permanently destroying vehicles for scrap metal shall furnish to the department, on forms of a type approved by the department, a typed, weekly report listing all vehicles obtained for salvage, used parts or scrap metal during the weekly reporting period. The weekly reporting period shall begin at 12:01 a.m. each Saturday. 
(c)  The weekly reports required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due each Tuesday and shall contain the name of the person reporting; the authority under which the vehicle was towed, stored or salvaged for parts or scrap metal; a description of the vehicle; the location of its present storage site, if applicable; its tag number, if any; its year and make; its color; and its vehicle identification number. 
(d)  If any of the information required by subsection (c) of this section cannot be obtained for the weekly report required by subsection (a) of this section without damaging the vehicle, the fact shall be conveyed by the owner or operator of the wrecker service or storage facility to the department by telephonic communication and shall also be set forth in the weekly report. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20008) 
Sec. 26-11. - Response to accident scene upon proper requests only. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, or the agent, representative or employee of same, to go to any place where an accident has occurred unless called by the driver or the owner of the disabled vehicle or by the owner's authorized representative, or by the department dispatcher. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, or the agent, representative or employee of same, to go to the place of a wreck by reason of information received by police radio. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20009) 
Sec. 26-12. - Responsibility for cleaning accident debris from street and right-of-way. 
All wrecker operators, after having been called to the scene of an accident for the purpose of removing a damaged vehicle, shall clean all the debris caused by the accident from the street and right-of-way before they leave. If two (2) or more wreckers are called to the same accident scene, they shall be equally responsible for cleaning. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20010) 
Sec. 26-13. - Solicitation for business by county employee. 
It shall be unlawful for any county employee to solicit business for any wrecker owner or operator. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20011) 
Sec. 26-14. - Cruising or parking for purpose of soliciting towing work. 
It shall be unlawful to cruise or park on any street or bridge in a wrecker and solicit towing work. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20012) 
Sec. 26-15. - Notification of police department upon removal of vehicles at request of any person other than officer. 
The operator of any wrecker removing a private motor vehicle from another person then having possession of such motor vehicle at the request of any person other than a county officer on duty for the department shall report this action to the department along with the following information: the location of its present storage place, a description of the vehicle, the tag number and the vehicle identification number. This report shall be made by the wrecker operator by telephonic communication to the county within one (1) hour of the deposit of the vehicle at its storage point. 
(Code 1976, § 8-20014; Ord. No. 11-02, Pt. I, § 1, 11-27-01) 
Secs. 26-16—26-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOOTING OF VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 26-40. - Title and purpose. 
This article shall be known as the Booting of Vehicles on Private Property Ordinance. This article shall specifically apply to businesses operating booting or vehicle immobilization services on private property and immobilization device operators, as defined herein. It shall be unlawful for any person, business, principal, agent, employee or independent contractor to use, operate, charge for, or retain services for the use of any booting services or vehicle immobilization services on private property located within the unincorporated areas of DeKalb County without complying with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-41. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "county" is used in this article, it shall be construed to mean the unincorporated area of DeKalb County, Georgia. 
(b)  Words or phrases not defined in this chapter, but defined in applicable state law or the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988 (hereinafter, the "Code"), shall be given that meaning. All other words or phrases shall be given their common ordinary meaning unless the context requires otherwise. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them below except where the text clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Business license, as used in this article, means a business occupation tax certificate issued pursuant to applicable law. The terms "business license" and/or "business occupation tax certificate" are interchangeable and are defined pursuant to chapter 15 of the Code of DeKalb County. 
(2)  Boot, booting, mechanical locking device , or vehicle immobilization device, as used in this article, are interchangeable and mean any mechanical device or boot that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked motor vehicle so as to prohibit the motor vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(3)  Occupant means any person, entity, business, tenant, or individual(s) that is occupying the premises or property where vehicle is parked or located, whether or not that occupant has a formal lease. 
(4)  Operator means any person, employee, sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity, operating booting or vehicle immobilization devices for a vehicle immobilization service. 
(5)  Parking lot, premises, property and area mean the location and real property at which the vehicle is located, with or without permission of the property owner, and continue to retain their ordinary meaning. 
(6)  Permit, as used in this article, means a permit issued by the police department for the use, service or operation of a booting or vehicle immobilization device. 
(7)  Private property owner means any person, entity, business, or individual(s) that is the record owner of the real property on which a vehicle is located. 
(8)  Towing and wrecker services as ordinarily defined are not interchangeable with booting and shall be governed separately by article I of chapter 26 of the county Code, as amended. 
(9)  Vehicles as used herein shall mean all cars, trucks, passenger vehicles, and tractor-trailer trucks of all classes and axles. 
(10)  Vehicle immobilization service means a business, person, including a sole proprietor, independent contractor, partnership or similar business entity offering booting or other services anywhere in the unincorporated portions of the county whereby vehicles are immobilized by the attachment or use of a chain, booting or vehicle immobilization device. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-42. - Business occupation tax certificate. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any immobilization device or vehicle immobilization service within the unincorporated boundaries of the county without first having obtained a business occupation tax certificate in compliance with chapter 15 of this Code, where applicable. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-43. - Permit to operate a vehicle immobilization service. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service or operator to operate within the territorial limits of unincorporated DeKalb County without having obtained a permit issued by the police department or their designee, as provided in this article. 
(b)  The owner or officer of a vehicle immobilization service desiring to obtain a permit required by this article shall file an application with the DeKalb County police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the police department. Applicants for the permit or renewal of a permit shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting, and such other background investigation as may be required by the police department. 
(c)  The permit application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Where the business is located; 
(3)  Nature and character of the business to be carried on; 
(4)  Valid addresses of all property for which the permit is requested; 
(5)  A copy of a current and valid business license or business occupation tax certificate; 
(6)  If a sole proprietor, the name of the owner; 
(7)  If a partnership, the names of the partners; 
(8)  If a corporation, the names of the officers; 
(9)  The charges to be imposed for various services; 
(10)  Type of body camera(s) to be used; 
(11)  Amounts and types of insurance held; 
(12)  Such other information as may be required by the police department; and 
(13)  Shall be sworn by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(d)  No permit under this article shall be issued to an applicant unless the applicant has a valid and current business occupation tax certificate to do business in the State of Georgia. 
(e)  No permit under this article shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted in this state or any other state within three (3) years immediately prior to the application for a permit or license a crime involving distribution or possession of illegal narcotics, sex offenses, financial crimes, or any other crime involving moral turpitude. Any person operating a vehicle immobilization device without a permit may be cited or charged with criminal trespass or violation of any other applicable law. 
(f)  Should any vehicle immobilization service with a permit obtained pursuant to this article be charged with committing any crime as described in subsection (e) above, then such charge shall constitute the basis for adverse action, including suspension or revocation of the license or permit by the chief of police. 
(g)  A permit will be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the date issued and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. 
(h)  Fees under this article shall be recommended by the police department for approval by the board of commissioners. 
(i)  The county, department or their designee may revoke the permit of any vehicle immobilization service or operator when such business or person has been issued a citation and found to be in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or in violation of any other applicable law, per the policies and procedures as established by the police department. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-44. - Permit for operators of a vehicle immobilization device. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an individual, independent contractor or employee to operate or use a vehicle immobilization device unless he/she has obtained a permit under this section. 
(b)  Every individual desiring to obtain a permit shall file an application with the police department on forms to be prepared and approved by the police department, subject to the policies and permit requirements as established by the department. Persons applying for the permit or renewal shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting, and such other background checks or investigation as may be required by the police department. 
(c)  The permit application shall state: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant/operator; 
(2)  The telephone number of the applicant/operator; 
(3)  The applicant's driver's license number or state issued identification number; 
(4)  Such other information as may be required by the police department; and 
(5)  Shall be sworn by the applicant. 
(d)  Once issued, operators shall carry with them their permit or a copy of their permit at all times when they are in the process of installing or removing a vehicle immobilization device. 
(e)  No permit under this article shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted in this state or any other state within three (3) years immediately prior to the application for a license or permit of a crime involving distribution or possession of illegal narcotics, sex offenses, financial crimes, or any other crime involving moral turpitude. Any person operating a vehicle immobilization device without a permit may be cited or charged with criminal trespass or violation of any other applicable law. 
(f)  Should any individual with a permit obtained pursuant to this article be charged with committing any crime as described in subsection (e) above, then such charge shall constitute the basis for adverse action, including the immediate suspension or revocation of the permit by the chief of police. 
(g)  A permit will be valid for a period of twelve (12) months and shall be renewed on or before its expiration. 
(h)  Fees under this article shall be recommended by the police department for approval by the board of commissioners. 
(i)  The department or their designee may petition to revoke the permit of any vehicle immobilization service or operator when such business or person has been issued a citation and found to be in violation of any of the terms of this chapter or in violation of any other applicable law, and subject to policies and procedures as established by the police department. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-45. - Revocation of business license. 
(a)  The department or their designee may petition the county to revoke the business license of any vehicle immobilization service or operator when such service or operator has been convicted or found to be in violation of any of the terms of this article or in violation of any other applicable law, ordinance or regulation. 
(b)  A business license revocation shall immediately terminate all permits, authority and permission granted to the vehicle immobilization service and operator. Any person whose business license has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of revocation. 
(c)  Any person whose business license has been revoked may file an appeal pursuant to chapter 15 of the Code, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-46. - Vehicle immobilization device operations, generally. 
(a)  Vehicle immobilization and booting fees shall be limited as provided herein. Any vehicle immobilization service shall not charge the owner or operator of any immobilized vehicle or personal property for the removal of the vehicle immobilization device in excess of the below fees within a twenty-four-hour time period: 
Semi-trucks including those without a trailer ..... $150.00 
All vehicles other than semi-trucks ..... 85.00 
(b)  The operator must provide and shall have the means to accept and receive payment by cash, check, credit card, or debit card at no additional charge. The operator shall provide and have the means to issue a receipt upon payment. 
(c)  This article shall not prohibit the towing of vehicles left or abandoned on property for more than twenty-four (24) hours, pursuant to chapter 26 of the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988, and subject to all other applicable laws. 
(d)  A vehicle immobilization service must maintain a twenty-four-hour per day, three hundred sixty-five (365) days per year phone number that is staffed by a live operator to communicate immediately with the owner or driver of a vehicle that has been immobilized by the vehicle immobilization service. 
(e)  Vehicle immobilization devices shall be removed within one (1) hour of the initial request and payment of the permissible fee. The operator shall have immediate access to equipment to remove and/or release the vehicle immobilization device. The removal fee shall be forfeited and the vehicle immobilization device released at no charge if the operator does not remove the vehicle immobilization device within one (1) hour after being contacted by the owner or operator of the immobilized vehicle. 
(f)  Property owners or occupants that assess a charge for parking may use vehicle immobilization devices only when a paper or electronic receipt for each paid parking charge is provided at the time of payment. Equipment used to collect payment for permitted parking must be on-site and be capable of producing a receipt. The receipt shall include the address of the lot and the time and date of payment, and if applicable, any time limitations to which the parking charge applies. Properties, parking lots or areas that assess a charge for parking and allow the operation of a vehicle immobilization device must provide parking payment options that include both cash, debit, and credit card options. No fee shall be assessed for the removal of a vehicle immobilization device when the owner or operator of the vehicle can immediately show a receipt and proof of parking fees for permitted parking within the time their vehicle is located on the premises. 
(g)  The operator must wear an identification badge issued by the vehicle immobilize service listing the name and address of the vehicle immobilize service employing the operator, all applicable booting permit numbers issued by DeKalb County, the operator's first name, and a passport sized photo of the operator. 
(h)  The operator shall at all times carry their county-issued permit. 
(i)  The operator shall wear a uniform issued by the vehicle immobilization service with the name of the vehicle immobilization service employing the operator. 
(j)  During hours of operation, the operator shall wear a body camera, the type and design which shall be approved by the police department as part of the permit process. Body camera recordings shall be maintained by the operator for a period not less than thirty (30) days. Recordings shall be provided to the county or police department upon verbal or written request. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate within the territorial limits of the unincorporated county any vehicle to assist in the operation of a vehicle immobilization service unless the vehicle shall have displayed on each side in plain view the name of the vehicle immobilization service, the address from which the vehicle immobilization service is operating and the telephone number of the vehicle immobilization service. 
(l)  It shall be unlawful for an operator to immobilize vehicles on any private property unless contacted by an occupant of the property requesting the immobilization of an unauthorized vehicle or without having entered into a valid written contract for vehicle immobilization services with the private property owner, lawful lessee, managing agent, or other person or occupant in control of the property. 
(m)  It shall be unlawful for either a vehicle immobilization service or an operator to make any payment to an owner, occupant, or agent of a parking lot in excess of the reasonable and customary fee ordinarily charged by the owner, occupant, or agent of the parking lot for parking thereon, and any such excess payment shall be considered a kickback. 
(n)  Emergency vehicles used in police, fire or medical emergencies shall not be immobilized for any reason. Upon proof that an unmarked vehicle is used for emergency purposes, the vehicle immobilization device shall be removed immediately at no charge. 
(o)  The police department or their designee shall have the authority to request the immediate removal of a vehicle immobilization device for any emergency or public safety purpose. 
(p)  It shall be unlawful to immobilize any occupied vehicle. The person occupying the unauthorized vehicle shall either pay the appropriate fee for the privilege of parking at the location or immediately remove the vehicle from the lot. 
(q)  It shall be unlawful for an operator to immobilize any vehicle parked for less than twenty (20) minutes. Just cause for immobilizing a vehicle parked for over twenty (20) minutes shall be established by no less than two (2) time-stamped photographs which clearly depict the parking space, the parked vehicle, and license plate of the parked vehicle. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
_____
Sec. 26-47. - Notice signs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, except for law enforcement personnel, to affix a vehicle immobilization device to any automobile parked on private property within the unincorporated areas of the county, regardless of whether a charge for parking is assessed, unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  At every parking facility, lot or area where vehicle immobilization may occur signs (Sample Sign #1) stating parking prohibitions are in effect and booting may occur shall be posted at every point of ingress and egress to or from the premises. Parking areas with no designated ingress or egress must place signs every fifty (50) feet across the property frontage. The sign shall be at a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty (30) inches in size and lettering on the sign shall be a minimum of one (1) inch in height. The sign shall be positioned so that the bottom edge is at least seven (7) feet from the ground. The wording on such signs shall consist of the following information and be consistent with Sample Sign #1: 
a.  A booting symbol; 
b.  The statement "Warning Unauthorized Vehicles Booted." 
Sample Sign #1: 

(2)  Signs shall also be erected within the lot, so that a sign can be clearly visible from each row of parking. The sign (Sample Sign #2) shall be at a minimum of twenty-four (24) inches by thirty (30) inches in size and lettering on the sign shall be a minimum of one (1) inch in height. The sign shall be positioned so that the bottom edge is at least seven (7) feet from the ground. Signs larger than the measurements herein shall not be subject to the requirements of the sign ordinance. The wording on such signs shall consist of the following information and be consistent with Sample Sign #2: 
a.  The statement "Warning Booting Enforced;" 
b.  The hours of booting enforcement; 
c.  The name of the business served by the parking lot or the name of the shopping center if more than one (1) business occupant; 
d.  The maximum fees for removal of the device; 
e.  The name of the vehicle immobilization service and current phone number to contact for removal of the immobilization device; 
f.  The statement "Booting devices shall be removed within one (1) hour of contact with company representative or any fees shall be waived;" 
g.  The statement "Chapter 26 of the Code of DeKalb County, as Revised 1988;" and 
h.  Contain a matrix code or website address provided by the police department linking to the county Code. 
Sample Sign #2: 

(3)  Any property owner or occupant prohibiting parking of semi-trucks on the lot shall posts signs at every point of ingress and egress to or from the premises stating semi-truck parking is prohibited and booting may occur. Parking areas with no designated ingress or egress must place signs every fifty (50) feet across the property frontage. The sign shall be positioned so that the bottom edge is at least seven (7) feet from the ground. The wording on such signs shall consist of the following information and be consistent with Sample Sign #3: 
Sample Sign # 3: 

(4)  All signs must be legible, not faded, and unobscured by vegetation. 
(5)  Lettering on all signs shall be black on white. If vehicle immobilization devices are to be utilized before 7:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m., the signs shall have a reflective grade background, and be illuminated if out of headlight range. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
_____
Sec. 26-48. - Vehicle immobilization on residential property. 
In addition to the requirements in this chapter, no operator or any partner, member, officer, employee, or contractor of such operator shall immobilize any motor vehicle in a driveway, parking lot, or parking area that is designated for residential parking or residential use unless the owner or driver of the motor vehicle has been provided with posted or written notice of the use of vehicle immobilization devices on said property. Any device applied to any such motor vehicle in violation of this section shall be removed without the payment of any fee. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-49. - Violations. 
(a)  The provisions of this article may be enforced by authorized or designated county employees, including police officers and code enforcement officers. 
(b)  Any person, operator, or vehicle immobilization service who does any anything prohibited by or fails to do anything required by this article, upon citation by an authorized county employee, including, but not limited to a police officer or a code enforcement officer, and upon conviction of the violation in a court of competent jurisdiction, which includes the Magistrate or State Courts of DeKalb County, and shall be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment with the following minimum penalties: 
(1)  Upon a first conviction of any violation if this article, the court shall impose a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(2)  Upon a second conviction of violation of this article, within one (1) year measured from the date of any previous conviction of a violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(3)  Upon a third conviction of a violation of this article, within one (1) year measured from the date of any previous conviction of a violation of this article, the court shall impose a fine of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court. 
(c)  Upon three (3) convictions under this article, the police department may request and the county shall have the discretion to review and revoke a business license subject to the notice and hearing requirements found under chapter 15 of the Code. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-50. - Insurance. 
(a)  All vehicle immobilization services under this article shall procure, or cause to be procured, and keep continuously in full force and effect during the duration of operations, and shall keep on file with the police department, a policy of comprehensive general liability insurance and business auto liability insurance on a certificate of insurance, issued by a casualty insurance company authorized to do business in this state and in the standard form approved by the insurance commissioner of the state. 
(b)  The comprehensive general liability insurance must be on a broad form and provide limits of liability for bodily injury and property damage in an amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence with a one-million-dollar aggregate. 
(c)  Certificates of insurance for companies doing business in the county, covering: 
(1)  Statutory workers compensation insurance, or proof that the vehicle immobilization service is not required to provide such coverage under state law; 
(2)  Professional liability insurance with a limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); and 
(3)  Commercial general liability insurance covering all operations with a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
(d)  Each insurance policy must state that it may not be canceled, materially modified or non-renewed unless the insurance company gives the police department thirty (30) days' advance written notice. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 
Sec. 26-51. - Enforcement of this article. 
This article shall be effective upon adoption by the board of commissioners and approval by the chief executive officer (the "effective date"). Except for the fee and time restrictions and requirements in section 26-46 of this article, which section shall be enforceable on the effective date, vehicle immobilization services and operators that are subject to this article shall have ninety (90) days from the effective date to comply with all other sections in this article. 
( Ord. No. 18-08 , Pt. I, 12-4-18) 